                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8906
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                            Project ID:    P127978
                            Project Name:     Second Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Sanitation Project (P127978)
                            Task Team         Sudipto Sarkar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         10-Sep-2014                        Estimated   04-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWADR                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (50%), Wastewater Collection and
                                              Transportation (25%), General water, sanitation and flood protect ion sector
                                              (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (50%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                              and Service Delivery (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     495.00           Total Bank Financing:                450.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      45.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  250.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            200.00
                              Total                                                                                  495.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve wastewater services in a sustainable manner in


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         selected areas of Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) and increase awareness on sanitation.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will have the following 5 components. The costs mentioned below are base costs,
                         without price and physical contingencies and Value Added Tax.

                         Component 1: Interceptor (Base Cost: $ 63 million). This will be a large diameter pipe (about 3.2
                         meters in diameter; length of about 8 kilometers) that will convey the wastewater that is currently
                         being discharged on the east side of the Saigon River without treatment to the wastewater treatment
                         plant that will be constructed under the project. The construction of the interceptor will prevent the
                         discharge of untreated wastewater to the Saigon River.

                         Component 2: Wastewater Treatment Plant (Base Cost: $ 220 million). This WWTP will treat the
                         wastewater collected in the NLTN basin and in the D2 area. The plant is being designed for a
                         capacity of 480,000 m3/day. The plant will be constructed through a Design Build and Operate
                         contract where the same private company will carry out these three stages. The WWTP will be
                         located near the confluence of the Saigon and Dong Nai rivers and the treated wastewater will be
                         discharged to the Dong Nai River. The site is prone to flooding and as a result flood protection
                         measures are included in the cost estimate.

                         Component 3: Sewerage in District 2 area (Base Cost: 45 million). Sewers (combined and separated)
                         would be installed in three areas of District 2. The areas that have been selected are priority areas
                         within the district where there is an existing population that needs better sewerage services. These
                         areas are Thao Dien, Binh An, and Bing Trung (East and West; this includes the Cat Lai and the
                         Thanh My Loi wards). In addition, to address the situation that low elevation project areas often
                         become inundated during periods of high tides - when river water flows back to the streets through
                         the combined drains/sewers, non-return valves (flap valves) would be provided on drainage outlets
                         in the project areas to prevent flooding.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Project Implementation (Base Cost US$ 29 million). This will have the following two
                         components:

                         4a: Construction Supervision. The funds would be used to hire consultants that will supervise the
                         construction during the project implementation period; and
                         4b: Improving Sanitation Management and Project Implementation. This will include: (a) support to
                         the Implementation Management Agency (IMA) for project implementation; (b) capacity building in
                         HCMC on sanitation management including support to the IMA and the Steering Committee of
                         Flood Control (SCFC), update of the sewerage Master Plan, Information Education Campaign on
                         better sanitation practices, and technical support to the Environmental Learning Center; c)
                         independent safeguard monitoring (social and environmental) and completion of financial audits; and
                         d) equipment to monitor water quality in strategic locations in the Dong Nai and Saigon rivers and in
                         the wastewater treatment plant and the pumping station; and to purchase office equipment for the
                         IMA.

                         Component 5: Land Acquisition and Operating Cost of IMA (Base Cost: $ 41 million). This will
                         have the following two components:

                         5a: Resettlement and Land Acquisition. This will include costs to compensate people that currently
                         own the land where the WWTP will be constructed. This cost will be solely borne by HCMC; and


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         5b: Operating cost of the IMA. This is the operating cost of the IMA during the project
                         implementation period, including salaries, fees, and other costs for eight years. The cost will be
                         borne by HCMC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is a continuation of the previous Bank project HCMC Environmental Sanitation Project
                         (HCMC ES 1) and is necessary to treat the wastewaters collected from the Nhieu Loc - Thi Nghe
                         (NLTN) basin and District 2 (Saigon East Area). The infrastructure that will be installed in the
                         project will entirely be in the District 2 area of the city. The three specific areas of impact are: a) the
                         location where the interceptor (8 km) would be laid; b) location where the wastewater treatment plant
                         (WWTP) will be constructed; and c) location where sewerage lines will be installed in 3 sections of
                         the D2 area.

                         The WWTP site is located in a flood prone area at the confluence of the national Dong Nai River and
                         the international Saigon River; approximately 35 km downstream of the Hoa An water supply intake
                         that is the raw water source for 65% of the water supply to HCMC. The treated wastewater will be
                         discharged in the Dong Nai River, which is a national river that originates in Vietnam and flows to
                         the South China Sea. The WWTP will be designed as a plant that will satisfy Class A effluent
                         standards, in accordance with Vietnamese Standard QCVN 14-2008. The Class A effluent standard is
                         chosen and endorsed by national regulations to improve the environmental conditions of the city,
                         maintain NLTN river basin water quality, and also protect the Can Gio mangrove national reserve
                         which is located about 30 km downstream south of HCMC.

                         The Dong Nai river Basin consists of five sub-basins that include the Dong Nai, Be, La Nga and
                         Vam Co Dong. The Dong Nai River is larger than Saigon river; thus the Saigon River is a component
                         of the Dong Nai River once they meet in HCMC at the location where the WWTP will be
                         constructed. Further, after the confluence of the Dong Nai and the Saigon rivers, the river is named
                         the Nha Be River which flows to the East Sea (downstream of the treatment plant, the Nha Be river
Public Disclosure Copy




                         splits into the Soai Rap River and Tau Bay River before the discharge to East Sea).

                         The area assigned for the WWTP construction requires 38.47 hectares used in the past (more than 5
                         years ago) primarily for agricultural purposes. Currently, this area is covered by vegetation (e.g.,
                         shrubs, small bushes, nipa, without any mangrove species or protected forest) and located near three
                         creeks. A total of 63 households and 2 companies will be affected by the land acquisition related to
                         the WWTP. The 63 households comprise, 59 land owners and 4 households that have structures in
                         the site (thatch hut, restaurant, and six graves). The WWTP area is not a natural habitat for migratory
                         birds or any protected species.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Roxanne Hakim (GSURR)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
                         Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The Project is proposed as category A as it will
                          BP 4.01                                              affect the environment given the construction of


                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                                                                         sewers and a large wastewater treatment plant.
                                                                         The main negative impacts of the project would
                                                                         arise from the permanent land conversion/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         reclamation of the land for the WWTP. Impacts
                                                                         include permanent conversion into other uses,
                                                                         change in landscape, and loss of land for the
                                                                         project affected people. During construction
                                                                         there will be impacts on water quality and
                                                                         vegetation due to noise, dust pollution, and traffic
                                                                         management. At the operational stage, the
                                                                         environmental concerns are related to the odor
                                                                         that may be generated from the plant and
                                                                         operations and maintenance activities, including
                                                                         the handling of the sludge generated by plant.
                                                                         The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for
                                                                         the project has identified the environmental issues
                                                                         and relevant mitigation actions have been
                                                                         proposed. The EIA also reports on a water
                                                                         quality modeling that was done for the project
                                                                         which indicates that the quality of the water in the
                                                                         Saigon river will improve due to project
                                                                         interventions.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The policy is being triggered as the project would
                                                                         have both positive and negative impacts on
                                                                         natural habitats such as rivers. Additionally, the
                                                                         construction of the WWTP would be permanently
                                                                         convert land into other uses, for which regular
                                                                         vegetation would be cut and one creek diverted to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         another location. Further, a national natural
                                                                         reserve (Can Gio mangrove area) is located about
                                                                         30 km downstream of the WWTP site. During
                                                                         the preparation of the EIA, no endangered species
                                                                         were located.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            There are no forest areas that would be affected
                                                                         by the project interventions. The project is located
                                                                         in a highly urbanized area and it will not affect
                                                                         any forests. The site that will be permanently
                                                                         converted as part of the WWTP construction does
                                                                         not have mangrove stands/forests. The Can Gio
                                                                         forest park is located about 30 km downstream
                                                                         but is not affected by the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project activities are not expected to use
                                                                         pesticides, or to lead to increased usage of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The construction of the WWTP will require the
                         BP 4.11                                         relocation of six graves of local peoples. Chance



                                                                 Page 4 of 13
                                                                                find provisions are reflected in the EMP and will
                                                                                be included in the construction contracts, which
                                                                                will outline the process to be carried out to protect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                other physical cultural resources in case they are
                                                                                located or affected during construction.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The Social Assessment and screening carried out
                                                                                during the early phase of project design
                                                                                confirmed that there are no groups that qualify as
                                                                                Ethnic Minorities (as per OP 4.10) are present in
                                                                                the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             The project will involve land acquisition and
                            4.12                                                resettlement of people due to construction
                                                                                activities. A Resettlement Policy Framework has
                                                                                been prepared for activities where the
                                                                                infrastructure footprint is not yet confirmed
                                                                                through approved designs for the construction
                                                                                (Components 1 and 3) and a Resettlement Action
                                                                                Plan has been prepared for Component 2 as the
                                                                                boundary of the WWTP has been defined. A Due
                                                                                Diligence has also been completed for areas that
                                                                                will be needed for the project and where land
                                                                                acquisition had been done prior to project
                                                                                identification.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The Project will not finance any activities related
                                                                                to the construction of dams nor affect operations
                                                                                of existing dams or affiliated reservoirs.
                            Projects on International           Yes             The policy is triggered due to the location of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                project site. However, exceptions to the
                                                                                requirement to notify riparian states also apply, as
                                                                                explained below in Section II A.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social Aspects

                             The Social Assessment carried out during project preparation confirms that the overall social
                             impact of the project is positive as polluted wastewater will be treated; and adverse impacts are
                             primarily in the area of land acquisition. There are no impacts on ethnic minority or socially
                             discriminated sub-groups in the project area.

                             Due to the project interventions, there are three areas where there will be land acquisition: (a)
                             Component 1 - the linear area where the interceptor (about 8 km of pipe) will be installed; (b)


                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                         Component 2 - the area where the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) will be built; (c)
                         Component 3 - the catchment area of District 2 that will be impacted by the sewage system
                         connected to the interceptor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         For the WWTP investment, there will be permanent acquisition of land totaling 38.47 ha. In total
                         there are 63 affected households and 2 Companies who would be compensated as per Bank
                         policies. Of this total, 59 households and 2 Companies own agricultural land but this is not
                         currently being used for any production. In addition, 4 households (who do not own land) have
                         structures (huts and graves) that will be affected. However, the livelihood of these households will
                         not be affected due to the loss of the structures. There are no vulnerable households affected.
                         Furthermore, there are 14 households (out of 59 landowners, 2 companies, and 2 households that
                         have structures in the proposed WWTP area) which could not be reached, despite several public
                         announcements requesting land owners to attend the consultations. Records indicate that all these
                         14 households own land in the area demarcated for the WWTP. However, this land is not being
                         used for any productive purposes. The authorities are still in the process of trying to get updated
                         addresses and contact details of these households as many are not currently in the HCMC area. In
                         the event that these households are not contactable, and the civil works have to commence, the
                         estimated compensation amount for each household will be held in an escrow account, with
                         interest as indicated in the RAP. This will ensure that such households are not denied their due
                         entitlements and these would be provided once they are located.

                         For the project activities in components 1 and 3, the exact footprint of the civil works and impacts
                         are not yet known. These will be detailed during project implementation as these activities are
                         further designed. The provisions of the Resettlement Policy Framework will apply for land
                         acquisition and resettlement for these areas.

                         For two areas of the project, land acquisition took place prior to project preparation: (a) the Da
                         Phuoc landfill site that will accept the sludge from the WWTP (the project started in 2004 and land
                         acquisition started in 2005); and (b) two sections of the WWTP area, which were previously
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquired by two companies (3.2 ha. owned by Saigon Industrial Zone Development Company
                         where the company paid compensation in 2002; and 1.88 ha. owned by Thanh My Loi Company
                         where compensation was paid between 2007 and 2013). The due diligence undertaken as part of
                         project preparation indicates that the land acquisition process that was carried out in these project
                         areas is in compliance with relevant regulations in Vietnam and meets the overall objectives of OP
                         4.12.

                         For the area under which the interceptor would be laid, land acquisition is onging for a limited
                         portion (for 4 shafts out of 22) for a housing development project by Thanh My Loi Company, not
                         connected to the Bank project. This process of land acquisition which affects 13 households is not
                         completed, although it started in 2007. Within the area to be acquired by the Thanh My Loi
                         Company, land will be required temporarily (during construction) and permanently (for manholes)
                         for 4 shafts of the interceptor as part of the project. The Thanh My Loi Company plans to acquire
                         the land following applicable regulations and IMA would subsequently acquire the area needed for
                         the four shafts. However, by December 2015, if the company has not acquired the land where the
                         four shafts would be constructed, the IMA would acquire the land directly from the current
                         landowners. Compensation to either party would be paid as per the RPF and in both cases the land
                         acquisition for this portion would be monitored through the RAP. Monitoring of ongoing
                         resettlement of these 13 households will be done under the WWTP RAP.



                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                         In summary, of the above points, there are two issues related to social impacts that would need
                         attention from the IMA during project implementation:
                         (a)      Locating and compensating 14 households that have not been consulted in the WWTP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         area. These households need to be located and compensated as per the RAP. In the event that
                         these households cannot be reached and the civil works must commence, the estimated
                         compensation amount will be held in an escrow; and

                         (b)     Monitoring resettlement and compensation for 13 households in the area of the
                         interceptor. As mentioned above, for the project, land will be acquired either from the current land
                         owners or the Thanh My Loi Company. Compensation to either party would be paid as per the
                         RPF and in both cases the land acquisition for this portion would be monitored through the RAP.

                         Environment Aspects

                         Overall, the project will improve the environmental conditions in HCMC as the discharge of
                         untreated wastewater will cease. Water quality modeling has indicated that the quality of water in
                         the Saigon River will improve. The project will also help to increase the sewerage and drainage
                         coverage in the D2 area of HCMC which will enhance the urban development of the area in a
                         sustainable matter.

                         The construction related impacts are likely to be localized and can b e prevented or reduced to
                         acceptable levels by applying proper construction standards and practices. Such potential impacts
                         are related to: (i) air pollution/dust, noise, vibration due to heavy machinery, and increased traffic
                         in the construction area; (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii) temporary
                         pollution of soil and surface waters due to accidental spillage of fuel and oil from construction
                         activities; (v) safety hazards including worker safety; (vi) damage to existing vegetation and
                         diversion of one creek at the location of the wastewater treatment plant; and (vii) impacts to
                         physical cultural resources (i.e., six graves). These impacts can be properly managed during the
                         construction phase by the contractor and closely supervised by the IMA, the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation Team and the supervision engineer in line with the site-specific EMP provisions.

                         Due to the construction activities, local vegetation and landscape will be affected. Specifically,
                         the vegetation (which includes shrubs and Nipa bushes with no affiliation to mangroves) at the
                         WWTP site will be removed and also a creek that is located in the site will be diverted to another
                         location/creek within the site. The relocation of the creek will be carried out by the contractor that
                         will construct the wastewater treatment plant; the final design for diverting the creek would be
                         based on hydrological and environmental conditions along with flood protection measures that
                         would be needed for the site; the creek diversion activity may create erosion and sedimentation
                         along the receiving creek due to additional flows, yet the detail design will assess the level of this
                         impact accordingly. At the WWTP site, the main impact would be from: the permanent loss of
                         agricultural land (about 74% of the land is agricultural), movement of six graves, and removal of
                         the temporary shelters. The relocation of the creek (flow of about 150 m within the site) will be
                         done in line with the overall flood control measures that are being considered in the site and as a
                         result the hydrology of the area is not expected to be altered significantly.

                         During the implementation phase, the two issues that need to be addressed are linked primarily to
                         the plant operation and maintenance: odor from the plant should not affect the population and the
                         transfer of sludge from the WWTP to the Da Phuoc landfill should be completed in a proper way.
                         In addition, it would be important to address flood risks as the WWTP is located in a flood prone

                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                          area.

                          Cumulative impacts - The interventions that are being carried out by HCMC under the project are
Public Disclosure Copy




                          long term in nature and in line with the overall Master Plan of the city to improve wastewater
                          management. The water quality in the Saigon River will improve and also the installation of the
                          sewers in District 2 will support the economic development of the area. In the longer term,
                          environmental concerns could arise during the transfer of the sludge to the landfill and operations
                          of the treatment plant (meeting effluent standards, meeting odor requirements etc.) and these
                          processes would be managed through the regulatory mechanisms that are already in place today.
                          Furthermore, cumulative impacts (water, air and soil quality) will arise as several other
                          infrastructure investments are being carried out by the city (these are not part of the project and
                          they are financed by the city). The impacts of these activities will be analyzed separately as the
                          projects are prepared and it is expected that the HCMC authorities will ensure that the quality of
                          the Saigon river will not be affected.

                          The Bank’s policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) is triggered as six graves will be
                          moved at the WTTP site. Adequate consultation took place and compensation will be provided to
                          the affected persons as per Bank policies before commencement of works. The work contracts
                          will include chance find procedures in case such instances come up during the construction period.

                          OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the project is located on the Saigon River
                          which is an international river. Water quality modeling carried out for the project illustrates that
                          there will be an improvement in the water quality of the Saigon river as the discharge of untreated
                          wastewater collected in the NLTN basin will be eliminated. In addition, the sewerage investments
                          in the District 2 area will prevent the discharge of wastewater to the Saigon River which will also
                          contribute to the clean-up of the river (a portion of this wastewater currently is eventually
                          discharged to the Saigon River through the various combined sewerage systems). Thus, the
                          exception in paragraph 7 (a) of the policy applies as the water quality in the Saigon River will not
                          be adversely affected. In addition, considering that (i) the Dong Nai River is a tributary that runs
Public Disclosure Copy




                          exclusively within Vietnam; (ii) Vietnam is the lowest downstream riparian of the Saigon River
                          and the Nha Be River which forms at the confluence of the Dong Nai and the Saigon; and (iii) the
                          project does not cause appreciable harm to other states, the exception to the riparian notification
                          under paragraph 7(c) of OP 7.50 also applies. The exception to the notification requirement has
                          been cleared by the Bank's legal department and confirmed by Bank management through a memo
                          dated September 9, 2014.

                           OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered. This policy is being triggered as the project will have
                           positive and negative impacts on natural habitats such as rivers; additionally, the WWTP site is
                           near a natural national reserve area in Can Gio (30 km downstream). Site survey conducted during
                           the preparation of the EIA did not indicate that there are any endangered species in the location of
                           the treatment plant, which will be permanently converted for the construction. One creek located at
                           the site will be diverted towards another one during the construction of the wastewater treatment
                           plant, taking into account the hydrological and environmental considerations that will be provided
                           during the detailed de sign. Appropriate mitigation measures for the movement of the creek,
                           including prevention of erosion and sedimentation as well as flood mitigation will be reflected in
                           the site specific EMP (revised once the design is finalized).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:


                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                           Once the project is completed, the environmental conditions will improve. It is also expected that
                           with the sewerage investments in the D2 area, the value of the property in the project locations
                           will increase. This was the experience from the first phase of the project (HCMC ES1) where the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           value of property in the NLTN area increased significantly due to the drains that were installed
                           under the project. Impacts may occur in the event of accidental discharge of untreated wastewater
                           due to the malfunction of the plant or during flood events.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives that were considered included: a) alternative sites for WWTP. There were
                           three locations considered: Thu Thiem (location 1), Cat Lai (location 2), and Nha Be (location 3).
                           Factors such as urban development and proximity to the current wastewater discharge were
                           considered to select Location 2 for the WWTP site; b) three alternative routes were also
                           considered for the interceptor and the route that was chosen was based on minimizing disruption in
                           the city.

                           Also, 4 technologies were reviewed for the wastewater treatment plant: a) Conventional Activated
                           Sludge (CAS); b) Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR); c) Bio-filtration (BF); and d) Trickling Filter.
                           All four processes are considered fully suitable to meet the effluent standards. Bidders will have
                           the option to bid on any of these four technologies or an alternative technology to meet the effluent
                           standards. The bidder that will have the lowest life cycle cost (capital cost plus discounted
                           operating cost) will be selected as the Design-Build-Operate (DBO) contractor which will have a
                           contract with HCMC for at least years. The DBO contractor is expected to design and build the
                           plant in 5 years and will operate the plant for at least another 5 years.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will be implemented by the Implementation Management Agency (IMA) which has
                           developed capacity on safeguard issues during the preparation phase of the project. In addition, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           IMA has worked with the Bank before under the first phase of the project HCMC ES1 and is
                           familiar with the Bank’s safeguard policies. The IMA will receive specific training and capacity
                           building on environmental and social safeguards relevant to EMP and RAP implementation and
                           will be also supported by consultants to ensure that the Bank’s policies are being followed and that
                           the aim of the project is met. In addition, within the IMA experienced staff will be assigned to
                           work on social and environmental issues. Furthermore, the environmental and safeguard activities
                           of the project will be audited on a semi-annual basis. Capacity building and training will also
                           focus on worker health and safety. The training programs for workers will be conducted
                           according to construction contracts between the IMA and contractors. Public information program
                           and community relation will be developed during the preconstruction, construction and operation
                           phases, as part of the Information Education and Communication activities on sanitation. The
                           project also supports the creation and operation of an Environmental Learning Center that will
                           promote awareness on sanitation which in turn will contribute to improving the environment and
                           reducing health risks.

                           IMA has taken the lead in the following measures to address the above safeguard risks:
                           For the social impacts, 3 instruments have been prepared through consultation with affected
                           households: (i) a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared that outlines the measures
                           that would be taken to compensate the affected population due to the construction of the
                           wastewater treatment plant. The RAP outlines the compensation measures, legal structure,


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                           grievance procedures and implementation and monitoring arrangements. A cut-off date of 14 July,
                           2014 was applied to determine eligibility for compensation under the RAP;
                           (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared that lays out the plan on how the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           affected population for the construction of the interceptor and the sewage in the D2 area would be
                           compensated in case there is need for resettlement and land acquisition; and
                           (iii) a Due Diligence (DD) prepared jointly by the Bank and client, which has confirmed that there
                           are no legacy or pending issues requiring action in this project. The DD involved several rounds of
                           consultation with affected households and verification of documents such as compensation
                           payment records of the private Companies. There is some ongoing resettlement, involving 13
                           households, in the interceptor area for a housing project carried out by the Thanh My Loi
                           Company and not connected to the Bank project. The resettlement of these households will be
                           monitored through the RAP of the project.

                           Additionally, a Social Assessment (SA) was carried out during project preparation between 2011
                           and 2014. The SA consulted with the potential beneficiary population to inform project design,
                           resulting in gender informed activities like the IEC campaign targeting households. Overall, the
                           HCMC authorities carried out extensive consultation with the project affected people (a total of 6
                           consultations took place) to reach out to the public.

                           For the environmental impacts, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been prepared
                           which includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EIA identifies the environmental
                           issues related to the treatment plant and has outlines the mitigation measures. Also, the EIA
                           includes a brief due diligence at the Da Phuoc landfill, at which sludge from the treatment plant is
                           expected to be transported, treated and disposed. The landfill is located in Da Phuoc commune
                           (Binh Chanh District) and construction started in April 2014 (planned for 2 phases during
                           2014-2016, respectively 2017-2020).

                           Based on HCMC People Committee’s decision, this landfill will be developed by the GREEN
                           SAIGON company as part of the Da Phuoc Sludge Treatment Plant over an area of 47ha, located
Public Disclosure Copy




                           at the Da Phuoc Waste Treatment Complex and Cemetery. This company will treat only non-
                           hazardous sludge; therefore, sludge will be tested before being considered for treatment by this
                           company at this location. A Memorandum of Agreement (Document 32/BB-VSMTTP) was
                           signed by IMA and GREEN SAIGON Company on July 24, 2014 based on which sludge
                           generated by the HCMC ESP2 WWTP will be received and treated at Da Phuc landfill.

                           Finally, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for the
                           D2 sewerage investments which provides guidance on how cross cutting environmental and social
                           issues will be handled during implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders were identified during the preparation of the Social Assessment (SA) and the
                           EIA. There are two types of stakeholders: those living close to the project locations; and the larger
                           population of HCMC.

                           A robust consultation process took place for the preparation of the project. A total of seven
                           consultations took place in preparation for the project (4 for social and 3 for environment) to seek
                           the opinion of the public that live in the project area. There is broad support for the project and the
                           citizens are looking forward to the environmental sanitation improvement that will materialize due


                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                           to interventions support by the project.

                           The project will benefit HCMC as the water quality in the Saigon river – which flows through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           city – will improve. The project will also support the creation of an Environmental Learning
                           Center (ELC) and promote behavior change in sanitation through Information Education and
                           Communication campaigns. These efforts will reduce health risks due inadequate sanitation
                           practices and benefit the entire population of the city.

                           The safeguard documents have also been disclosed as per Bank’s policy. The draft EIA and the
                           ESMF were disclosed on July 15, 2014 to the Bank’s Infoshop. In addition, the Executive
                           Summary of the EIA was disclosed to the Bank’s Board on July 18, 2014. The draft social
                           safeguard documents were disclosed on July 10, 2014 to the Bank’s Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Jul-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      18-Jul-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          29-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Vietnam                                                          14-Jul-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats




                                                                      Page 11 of 13
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Sudipto Sarkar


                                                                       Page 12 of 13
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)     Date: 24-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Advisor:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)    Date: 26-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 13 of 13
