                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR6807
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                                        Project ID:           P087224
                            Project Name:      Han River Urban Environment Improvement Project (P087224)
                            Task Team          Shunong Hu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          31-Oct-2007                                  Estimated   29-Apr-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Solid waste management (37%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation
                                               (30%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (29%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (4%)
                            Theme:             Pollution management and environmental health (50%), Municipal governance
                                               and institution building (25%), City-wide Infrastructure a nd Service Delivery
                                               (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       159.62           Total Bank Financing:                                       84.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             75.62
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                84.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                         0.00
                              Total                                                                                               159.62
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The Project Development Objective is to reduce the pollution caused by wastewater and solid waste
                         in selected secondary cities, primarily located in the Han Riv                             er
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Basin areas in Hubei Province. This will be achieved by undertaking high prio
                         rity investments in wastewater collection and treatment system and solid waste m
                         anagement system as well as institutional development and capacity development i
                         n the areas of project implementation management, utility management and water p
                         ollution control.

                          Key performance indicators would include quantified targets for improved services such as the
                         collection and treatment of domestic wastewater, collection and sa                                   fe
                         disposal of domestic and commercial solid waste, the financial sustainability
                         of these utilities, reduction of industrial pollution discharge and eventually
                         the water quality of the Han River in the project area.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective is to reduce the pollution caused by wastewater and solid waste
                         in selected secondary cities, primarily located in the Han Riv                             er
                         Basin areas in Hubei Province. This will be achieved by undertaking high prio
                         rity investments in wastewater collection and treatment system and solid waste m
                         anagement system as well as institutional development and capacity development i
                         n the areas of project implementation management, utility management and water p
                         ollution control.

                          Key performance indicators would include quantified targets for improved services such as the
                         collection and treatment of domestic wastewater, collection and sa                                   fe
                         disposal of domestic and commercial solid waste, the financial sustainability
                         of these utilities, reduction of industrial pollution discharge and eventually
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the water quality of the Han River in the project area.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project, after restructuring, includes a total of 10 sub-projects in seven cities with a total
                         estimated cost of RMB967.3 million (US$159.62 million) of which the Bank financing would
                         amount to approximately US$84 million. The project activities are grouped into the following four
                         components:

                         Component 1: investment in wastewater collection and treatment facilities; This includes the
                         financing of nine wastewater treatment plants with a capacity ranging from 30,000m3/day to
                         50,000m3/day, and the expansion of two wastewater collection networks. Different treatment
                         processes have been proposed and assessed.

                         Component 2: investment in solid waste management facilities; including five sanitary landfills that
                         will receive between 160 tons to 500 tons a day.

                         Component 3: Industrial Pollution Control, funded by the Government, including installation of
                         adequate wastewater treatment facilities and on-line monitoring in identified major industrial
                         polluters in project cities.



                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                           Component 4: institutional development and capacity building for project management and
                           supervision, water quality monitoring, industrial pollution control, and utilities management.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           A total of 10 sub-projects in seven cities in Hubei Province, China

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Xin Ren (EASCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental Issues: As mentioned, the project will have long-term positive impacts on the
                              environment by improving collection and treatment of waste water and the collection and proper
                              disposal of solid waste.

                             The environmental performance was rated recently Moderately Satisfactory due to the delay of
                             environmental monitoring in some sanitary landfills during the pre-commissioning. However, the
                             external monitor hired by the Provincial PMO has carried out supervision satisfactory and reported
                             in the semi-annual progress report to the Bank timely. The Bank team has also conducted
                             environmental supervision twice a year.


                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         The major change for project restructuring involves the solid waste management component:
                         financing of a new on-site leachate treatment technology. Instead of transporting and treating the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         leachate off-site as originally designed, an on-site treatment by osmosis membrane technology
                         combined with bio-reactor is proposed at the sanitary landfill sites in order to comply with new
                         stricter national standard on landfill discharge. The potential risks and impacts related to the
                         transportation of leachate will be avoided and specific measures have been agreed to minimize on-
                         site impacts and ensure discharge will meet required standards.

                         The changes propose for project restructuring basically reduce the coverage than the original
                         project by dropping project sub-components and cities from both wastewater and solid waste
                         components. Therefore, the original environmental management plans (EMPs) still apply.
                         However, the update of Project EMP is needed for the new project activity of constructing on-site
                         leachate treatment facilities within the boundary of four sanitary landfills, in Dawu, Hanchuan,
                         Shayang, and Xiaochang, originally in the project.

                         According to domestic regulation, a supplementary environmental assessment (EA) is required
                         since the leachate treatment technology is changed from transferring and being treated by local
                         WWTP to on-site treatment. No additional safeguards requirements are triggered due to the
                         proposed restructuring because no additional scope is introduced. The EAs and EMP were
                         amended to include mitigation measures for the new leachate treatment facilities which now need
                         to be built within the boundaries of sanitary landfill sites to comply with new government
                         standards. These EAs and update EMP were prepared per the requirements for the original EA/
                         EMP and approved locally. Public consultations were conducted after the EAs/EMP disclosure.
                         The Chinese version of supplementary EAs and the EMP for newly added leachate treatment
                         facilities were disclosed locally January 20, 2014. The English translation of the updated EMP was
                         disclosed in the InfoShop on February 27, 2014.

                         Social Issues: The project will have great benefits to surrounding communities and citizens in each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the nine project cities, however, some people were affected by resettlement and land acquisition
                         at each of the sites. All the resettlement activities for the current project have been successfully
                         completed and external resettlement monitoring report and field visits have shown that the
                         implementation of these activities were done satisfactory.

                         According to the original scope of the project and RAP, 2,025 mu of land had to be acquired in 13
                         rural villages, and another 1,700 mu would be temporarily used during the construction phase. A
                         total of 206 rural households had to be relocated. A total of 5,600 people would be affected by
                         land acquisition and/or relocation. The RAP was updated in 2010 to take into account changes in
                         design to minimize resettlement, as a result, 1,382 mu of collective land and 686 families with
                         2,332 populations would be affected by land acquisition, and a total of 99 rural households would
                         be relocated.

                         With Danjiangkou and Yunmeng solid waste sub-components and Tianmen and Xiaochang
                         wastewater management sub-components being dropped from the project, the resettlement impacts
                         caused by the project were significantly reduced, especially those two solid waste sub-components
                         as the landfills requires larger lands. As a result, a total of 1,108 mu of collective land were
                         acquired and 434 families with 1,476 affected by the project, and 81 rural households were
                         relocated. No additional land acquisition for newly proposed leachate treatment facilities and four
                         newly proposed leachate treatment facilities be built within the boundary of the existing sanitary

                                                                   Page 4 of 8
                           landfill sites.

                           Although the project cities were not familiar with Bank policies and procedures the public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations with affected communities in Honghu, Yunmeng, and Shayang were considered as
                           good practices. The resettlement costs increased as a result of inflation and land compensation
                           rates were updated by Hubei Provincial Land Bureau to comply with the latest national
                           requirements. The updated rates were always disclosed to the public in newspapers and provincial
                           governments’ websites. The monitoring reports shown the satisfaction of affected people with the
                           resettlement process and compensation rates.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The operation of osmosis membrane technology for on-site leachate treatment is expensive and
                           more complicated than conventional method, especially for small county-level cities where
                           resources and capacity are low. There is the risk of it not operating continuously or properly,
                           which might lead to non-compliance in discharge and contamination of the environment. The
                           same operation issue applies, but in a lesser extent, to all waste and wastewater facilities and need
                           to be closely monitored.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Several alternatives were considered in the feasibility studies to identify most appropriate
                           location and technologies to minimize costs and reduce impacts on environment and resettlement.
                           The analysis included the evaluation of different wastewater treatment technologies, sites for
                           wastewater treatment plants and waste transfer and disposal facilities, evaluation of sludge and
                           leachate treatment technologies.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environmental Issues:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The implementation of the original project's EMP has been moderately satisfactory. The external
                           environmental monitoring consultant contracted by the Provincial PMO has been competent and
                           carried out supervision well. Technical training and advice have been provided to the owner and
                           operators of the subprojects. For the construction and operation of the new on-site leachate
                           treatment facilities at the four sanitary landfills, a new environmental management plan (EMP)
                           was prepared based on the requirements of the original EMP.

                           Social Issues:
                           A Project Social Assessment (SA) was conducted at each of the affected villages and surrounding
                           townships. Surveys were conducted with all the relocated households. Each household was visited
                           to identify impacts and request feedback. Over 20 percent of the population in affected areas was
                           intensively interviewed and consulted as part of the project's information and resettlement
                           communication campaign. Adverse impacts and social risks related to involuntary resettlement,
                           house demolition and land acquisition, as well as the environmental impacts and risks related to
                           living around wastewater treatment and landfill sites were presented and extensively discussed. No
                           ethnic minorities were identified among the affected villages around subproject areas.

                           Measures to avoiding and mitigate the adverse impacts and opportunities for livelihood
                           rehabilitation and economic development were discussed and set forth as part of each subproject.
                           A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared for each of the subprojects with resettlement


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                          measure that we the result of consultation with the affected population. The RAPs and their
                          preparation processes were reviewed by the Bank social safeguard specialists to ensure their
                          compliance with Bank policies and procedures. The Project Management Offices (PMOs) in each
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of the nine project cities/counties will be responsible for the implementation of the RAPs.

                           The main measures taken to address the resettlement issues include:
                           1)       Farmland compensation is assessed on the basis of synthetic annual output values per mu
                           as mandated by Hubei Province and approved by the state in 2007, which are 30% higher than the
                           previous rates assessed at 16 times the average annual output value (as set in the land law).
                           According to the national land law and the provincial land policy, this compensation rate for
                           farmlands were mandated by Hubei land bureau and satisfied to the displaced farmers.
                           2)       The public consultations were undertaken through the entire resettlement process. The
                           resettlement activities in Shayang and Honghu counties showed the successes in dealing with the
                           resettlement relocation. The public consultation will be continued.
                           All the resettlement costs are charged to the related subprojects budgets as a whole.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental Safeguards:
                           Two rounds of public consultations were carried as part of the EA process at each project site. The
                           first round of consultations was carried out right after subproject identification to gather
                           information from the public about the project. The second round was conducted after the
                           preparation of the draft EA report to communicate key EIA findings and discuss proposed
                           mitigation measures and confirm public acceptance and satisfaction.

                          In addition, a number of consultations were conducted with government agencies, local
                          governments and other stakeholders to discuss location of sites, subproject scope, environmental
                          and socio-economic concerns, and environmental management and mitigation plans. The EA
                          Report and Environment Management Plan for each subproject, have been disclosed in each city/
Public Disclosure Copy




                          county, as well as at the Provincial level by the PMO.

                          For the restructuring, the newly prepared EMP for leachate treatment was disclosed locally at
                          villages close to the landfills concerned and at official website of Provincial Environmental
                          Protection Bureau 10-20 January 2014. Several project cities held consultation meeting with local
                          people during this period. No objection was raised against the proposed activities. Both the
                          Chinese and English version of the restructuring EMP was disclosed at Infoshop too.

                          Social Safeguards:
                          The project social assessment (SA) was carried out by a team of sociologists and economists from
                          Hohai University with extensive experience on involuntary resettlement and Bank policies and
                          procedures. The SA was designed to incorporate key findings into the design and preparation of
                          each subproject. The SA team conducted surveys and group meetings in urban and rural areas of
                          each project city and collected views from different stakeholders on project benefits and potential
                          impacts. Based on a better understanding of the needs from most of local residents, the SA helped
                          ensure that the design of the different subprojects was adapted to reduce negative impacts and
                          maximize social and environmental benefits. Based on the SA, the sites for wastewater facilities
                          and landfills were changed to reduce resettlement impacts and minimize potential social risks,
                          including the wastewater plants in Tianmen City, Shayang County and Yunmeng County, and the
                          landfill in Tianmen City. To improve convenience for local residents the design and location of


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           waste transfer stations were also adjusted in some cases. The information gathered from surveys
                           and public consultations helped improve the quality and sustainability of wastewater and waste
                           services by analyzing the technical requirements and affordability of tariffs among different social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           groups, especially lower income households.

                           Since resettlement is the key negative impact caused by construction of project financed
                           wastewater and water facilities, extensive public consultations were conducted with affected
                           population in each city. The consultation process was conducted as part of the SA process and
                           included extensive collection of socio-economic information through surveys and census data. All
                           affected households were visited and consulted, and their assets were quantified, valued and
                           compensation rates were agreed. The new housing arrangements and location were discussed and
                           confirmed through several rounds of consultation. More than 20 percent of the farmers who’s
                           collectively will be acquired, were interviewed during the SA process and livelihood rehabilitation
                           measures and compensation rates were discussed and agree on. Nine Resettlement Action Plans
                           (RAP) were prepared for each site, and these Plans address the identified adverse impacts related
                           to resettlement, and measures to minimize and manage these impacts on local communities,
                           compensation rates and livelihood rehabilitation activities. Each RAP has been disclosed locally
                           and at the Provincial level.

                           The public consultations will be continued to achieve the success of the resettlement
                           implementation. The information disclosure is also the important measures to ensure that all of the
                           displaced families could receive the resettlement information properly and the ways that the
                           displaced families could raise their concerns based on the information and procedures provided by
                           the RAP.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   14-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                17-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive   06-Sep-2007
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                         20-Jan-2014
                           Comments: First draft of updated Restructuring EMP was disclosed locally on Jan 10, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Shunong Hu
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 20-Mar-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                              Date: 20-Mar-2014




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
