                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC8536

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Tanzania                        Project ID:      P150496
                            Project Name:     Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Project (P150496)
                            Task Team         Richard Martin Humphreys
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         02-Oct-2015                     Estimated        17-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTIDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Ports, waterways and shipping (80%), Railways (10%), Rural and Inter-Urban
                                              Roads and Highways (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (80%), Regional integration (10%), State-
                                              owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    465.00                   Total Bank Financing:        350.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    15.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      350.00
                              UK British Department for International Development
                                                                                                         100.00
                              (DFID)
                              Total                                                                      465.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           (a)    The Program Objective and Indicators

                           The Program Objective. The program objective of the Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Program
                         (DESMGP) is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam and the
                         access and egress of port traffic, for the benefit of all public and private stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Program Objective will be realized through a sequential improvement in spatial and operating
                         efficiency, institutional capacity and reform, and infrastructure enhancements both in the port of Dar
                         es Salaam, and its immediate hinterland. The proposed program will double the capacity of the port
                         to 28 million ton by 2020 in the first phase and triple it to 34 million tons by 2025 in the second
                         phase. The total cost of the proposed program (Phase 1 and 2) is envisaged to be US$750 million,
                         excluding the complementary private investment in the port.

                         The Program Level Indicators. Progress towards the attainment of the program objective will be
                         assessed through the following program indicators:
                          (i). Enhanced spatial and operational efficiency;
                            (ii). Increased capacity in the port;
                            (iii). Greater private sector participation in service provision; and
                            (iv). Increased capacity in key access infrastructure.

                         The partners in the program. The proposed program is a partnership between the Government of
                         Tanzania, the Tanzania Ports Authority, other public and private stakeholders, and a coalition of
                         development partners including the Trademark East Africa (TMEA), the United Kingdom
                         Department for International Development (DFID) and the World Bank (WB).

                         (b)     The Project Development Objective (PDO)

                         The Project Development Objective for Phase 1 of the Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Program
                         (DESMGP) is to to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam through
                         defined interventions to reduce the wait time for vessels accessing the port, facilitate the berthing of
                         larger capacity vessels, support greater private sector participation, and improve the management of
                         the port, for the benefit of all public and private stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the first phase, this PDO will realized by the following three components, which directly reflect
                         the identified priorities for the port sector in the BRN: (i) Component 1: Improving the Physical
                         Infrastructure (Estimated cost US$ 400 million). Component 2: Improving the Operational and
                         Spatial Efficiency (Estimated cost US$35 million). Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and
                         Implementation Assistance (Estimated cost US$30 million).
                         C. Project Description
                         The Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Program (DESMGP) has been developed as a two-phase,
                         multi-donor, program to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam, for
                         the benefit of port users, thereby facilitating the economic development of Tanzania and the
                         landlocked countries of the East Africa region. The program involves two phases in the proposed
                         series of operations, consistent with the objectives of the Government of Tanzania's BRN initiative,
                         to address spatial, operational, and physical constraints in the port of Dar es Salaam, and its
                         immediate hinterland. The proposed two phase approach reflects four main factors: (i) the different
                         state of readiness of the priority investments, with many of the spatial and operational efficiency
                         improvements, which are seen as a prerequisite to significant capacity enhancement, either under
                         implementation now, or ready to be tendered (the strengthening of Berths 1-7, the dredging of the
                         entrance channel and turning basin), whilst others either require the business case to be proved -
                         Berths 13/14, Kisarawe - or the preparatory/feasibility/detailed design to be undertaken - (the Urban
                         Transport Masterplan, currently being prepared under the SATTFP-APL1 (P120370), and the key
                         access infrastructure in the immediate hinterland). (ii) The proposed program, whilst consistent with
                         the BRN, also seeks to facilitate the greater involvement of the private sector in service provision in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the port. The public investment in the sub-structure on Berths 1-7 will be undertaken, conditional on
                         the tendering of the improved Berths 5/7 to a new container terminal operator, and capacity building
                         to improve the operational effectiveness of TPA as a service provider on the remaining berths. Phase
                         2 will follow a similar model, providing public investment for Berths 13/14, the new SPM and
                         improved storage, and Kisarawe, consistent with concessioning to private sector operators. In this
                         way, over a 10 year period, the proportion of the services within the port being provided by the
                         private sector are expected to increase markedly, to a politically palatable timetable and more
                         acceptable to stakeholders in the port. (iii) Thirdly, phasing in this manner, allows the provision of a
                         financing package in each phase to be considered concessional (a proportion of 35% in each Phase
                         will be grant). And finally (IV), the proposed Series of Projects allows the time and flexibility to
                         meet the needs of the sub-sector, whilst supporting the introduction of a combination of necessary
                         investments and institutional reform. Proceeding with a single unilateral operation at this time,
                         would negate many of the benefits outlined above.

                         The proposed Development Objective for Phase 1 of the DESMGP is to improve the effectiveness
                         and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam, for the benefit of port users, thereby facilitating the
                         economic development of Tanzania and the landlocked countries of the East Africa region. In the
                         first phase, this will realized by the following list of components, which directly reflect the priorities
                         for the port sector in the BRN:

                         Component 1: Improving the Physical Infrastructure (Estimated cost US$ 400 million). The first
                         component comprises the essential civil works in the port, and preparations for the second phase:
                         (i)     The Improvement of the port infrastructure
                         a.      Construction of a new berth for a new Ro-Ro terminal at Gerezani (tbc for Phase 1);
                         b.      Increasing the capacity of the grain silo and installation of a conveyor system;
                         c.      Undertaking entrance channel and port basin deepening and widening;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         d.      Strengthening of Berths 1-7;
                         e.      Updating the business case for Berth 13-14 (for implementation in Phase 2); and
                         f.      Preparing the business case for a second SPM and pipeline, together with increased storage
                         (for implementation in Phase 2).

                         (ii)     The Improvement of the Immediate Access Infrastructure
                         a.       The Nyerere Road – upgrading the existing road (15.1km) to dual 3–lane standard (the EU
                         has interest in contributing to this project);
                         b.       The Mandela (Port Access) Road – Upgrading to dual 3-lane standard (the EU has expressed
                         interest in contributing to this project);
                         c.       The Kilwa Road (10 km) – upgrading to dual 3-lane standard between the junctions with the
                         Mandela road; and
                         d.       Other key access roads as necessary.

                         Component 2: Improving the Operational and Spatial Efficiency (Estimated cost US$ 35 million).
                         The second component in the program comprises two sub-components to improve the spatial and
                         operational efficiency of the port:
                         (i)     Improving Operational Efficiency:
                         a.      Review and strengthen new Standard Operating Procedures;
                         b.      Review and strengthen Key Performance Indicators and Tariffs;
                         c.     Institute, in consultation with stakeholders, 24*7 operations, together with incentives to
                         encourage night-time use; and
                         d.     Introduction of a Port Community System agreed with stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)   Improving Spatial Efficiency:
                         a.     Removal and reallocation of unused facilities (sheds 5-7, Sheds 2-3, Midport shed, Central
                         workshop, TICTS office building );
                         b.     Improving traffic flow by introducing one-way traffic and improvements to access gates; and
                         c.     Improvements in rail linkages and platform (this is to be funded under the TIRP Project -
                         however additional provision will be included here to fund anticipated increased costs).

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Assistance (Estimated cost US$30
                         million). The final component comprises three sub-components involving civil works on the
                         corridor:
                         (i)     The Institutional Strengthening of TPA
                         a.      Capacity building/training for TPA staff; and
                         b.      Institutional strengthening to move towards the landlord model.
                         (ii)    Implementation Assistance
                         a.      Technical Assistance, as required, to TPA Implementation Team to implement the program;
                         b.      Technical Assistance to develop and support a PPP program in the port; and
                         c.      Sup port to hire transaction advisors to assist in preparing and completing the concessions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Dar es Salaam City is the major commercial city in Tanzania. It is located on the western coast of
                         Indian Ocean, East Africa. Administratively, the port is located in Temeke District, Dar es Salaam
                         Region. The port is located in the gulf separating the metropolitan area and Kigamboni wards on the
                         east. The port is surrounded by the city centre on the north, consisting of business areas and offices
                         and Tanzania Railway; on the west are residential areas (Keko and Kilwa Road areas) and small
                         factory areas (especially garages and BP bulky oil storage areas). The south consists of Kurasini,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mtoni and Mbagala residential areas, public institutions, Bulky Oils Storage Tanks and the Mtoni
                         Dumpsite (now closed). On the east there is Kigamboni residential area, defunct TIPER refinery
                         plant, and very limited undeveloped plots. The city centre has a central sewer system that discharges
                         sewage in the harbour mouth through the Sea Outfall. Many of the areas surrounding the harbour are
                         unsewered and sewage handling is largely by septic tank system. Considering the sand nature of the
                         soils the diffuse septic tanks and soak away systems discharges a stream of sewage into the harbour
                         through the groundwater flow. Generally, the marine ecosystem in the Dar es Salaam harbour is
                         highly exposed to many sources of pollution. The major pollution sources include port operations,
                         harbour activities (maritime), urban drainage (streams. Rivers and pen channels), uncontrolled solid
                         waste and liquid waste disposal in the city centre and urban periphery areas (directed in the storm
                         water channels), the Kivukoni fish market, the Band beach swimming club, Kigamboni ferry
                         operations, the Seaoutfall sewage pipe, leachate from Mtoni dumpsite, drainage from Kurasini bulk
                         oil handling areas, underground seepage of liquid wastes from septic tanks etc. Conceptually the Dar
                         es Salaam harbour is big pot receiving pollutants from within and without the port environment. The
                         major concerns are drainage channels and natural water courses that bring in the harbour a variety of
                         pollutants including sediments.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Tanzania Ports Authority (TPA) has sufficient capacity to manage the potential environmental
                         and social impacts of the proposed project. This implementing agency has previously managed
                           investment projects financed by IDA and other development partners. As a Category A project, a
                           comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the proposed investments
                           will identify any additional capacity building needs that might be required. TPA is also establishing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           an Environmental Management System in all its ports to achieve international accreditation
                           (ISO14001:2004) by the end of 2015. TPA is also establishing ship waste facilities by end of 2016,
                           to meet the requirements of the MARPOL Convention.

                           A Scoping Study was prepared for the deepening and strengthening of Berths 1-7, the construction of
                           the new RoRo berth at Gerezani Creek, and the deepening of the entrance channel and turning basin.
                           The Report highlighted the following concerns: (i) the proposed location of the new RoRo terminal
                           would require the infilling of a highly fragile ecosystem at Gerezani Creek, which naturally filters the
                           polluted water. This requires careful assessment by an experience marine biologist during the ESIA;
                           (ii) the need for careful consideration of the final disposal of dredged material, as reported, Dar es
                           Salaam habor is polluted with toxic metals and organic compounds (A detailed water and sediment
                           quality study will be undertaken during the ESIA). (iii) Potential of increased sedimentation after
                           capital dredging; (iv) Potential damage to marine biotopes at the harbor entrance will need careful
                           study; (v) handling of ship wrecks; and (vi) Capacity of TPA to implement contingency planning in
                           event of emergency.

                           The main social impacts were identified as (i) potential impact on TPA work force if there is any
                           retrenchment; (ii) Potential HIV/AIDS infections may increase in the project area given the influx of
                           people during construction; and (iii) there maybe a need for modest levels of expropriation along the
                           Kilwa road, but all widening will be on the existing alignment and within the existing right of way
                           which has not been encroached by settlers/businesses. The MoID has prepared Road Sector
                           Compensation and Resettlement Guidelines of February 2009, which were vetted by the Bank and
                           found to be in line with the requirements of OP4.12. This guidelines in addition to the findings of
                           the ESIA will inform the preparation of future RAPs (for phase I and II) when land is required or
                           assets or livelihood. As part of their contract, construction companies will establish HIV/AIDS
                           education and sensitization plan and implement it in collaboration with the district health officers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESIA study will be prepared in parallel to the feasibility study for the dredging and the detailed
                           design of the investments, and will include analysis of alternatives, in order to select the best option
                           from the technical, economical, environmental and social point of view.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GURDR)
                           Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              According with the type and magnitude of
                           BP 4.01                                                work, and the potential environment negative
                                                                                  impacts, the Project was classified by the Bank
                                                                                  as Category A. An Environmental Scoping
                                                                                  Study (ESS) was prepared for the deepening and
                                                                                  strengthening of Berths 1-7, the construction of
                                                                                  the new RoRo berth at Gerezani Creek, and the
                                                                 deepening of the entrance channel and turning
                                                                 basin. The Report highlighted the following
                                                                 concerns: (i) the proposed location of the new
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 RoRo terminal would require the infilling of a
                                                                 highly fragile ecosystem at Gerezani Creek,
                                                                 which naturally filters the polluted water; (ii)
                                                                 the need for careful consideration of the
                                                                 disposal of dredged material, as reported, Dar es
                                                                 Salaam harbor is polluted with toxic metals and
                                                                 organic compounds. (iii) Potential of increased
                                                                 sedimentation after capital dredging; (iv)
                                                                 Potential damage to marine biotopes at the
                                                                 harbor entrance will need careful study; (v)
                                                                 handling of wreckages; and (vi) Capacity of
                                                                 TPA to implement contingency planning in
                                                                 event of emergency. The ToR for the ESIA was
                                                                 prepared with and reviewed by the
                                                                 Environmental Specialist on the Bank Team.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   This policy is triggered because, as mention
                                                                 before, the ESR highlighted some potential
                                                                 affectation of fragile ecosystem (Gerezani
                                                                 Creek), and marine biotopes (harbor entrance).
                                                                 The ESIA will address the impacts on natural
                                                                 habitats and include mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There are no forests in the project area.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not involve pest management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered because the deepening
                         BP 4.11                                 of the entrance channel and turning basin, and
                                                                 the improvement to the access transport links,
                                                                 may potentially affect cultural or physical
                                                                 resources. The ESIA/ESMP for the project will
                                                                 include "chance finds" procedures and
                                                                 mitigation measures, drawing from the ESMF
                                                                 of the SATTFP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The execution of works potentially will affect
                         4.12                                    some land or people located in the project
                                                                 influence area. In addition, the strengthening of
                                                                 berths 1-7 may lead to the loss of income
                                                                 earning opportunities for the day workers
                                                                 employed as stevedores in the port currently.
                                                                 This policy is triggered in order to assure the
                                                                 compliance of the national law and the Bank’s
                                                                 Safeguard Policy in both cases. The ESIA will
                                                                                                                                 inform the project about the socio economic
                                                                                                                                 impact as well as the extent of the land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition for the access roads and other works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 that may require land. Accordingly, a RAP will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared for this phase of the project by the
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. In addition to the Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Guidelines will also be used for the preparation
                                                                                                                                 of the RAP under phase one and II.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not taking place in or on
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is expected to be launched by
                                      August 2014, and completed by the end of 2014. A RAP may also be prepared before appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Richard Martin Humphreys

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 12-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                                            Date: 12-Sep-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
