                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC12583

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                      Project ID:      P153932
                            Project Name:      Technical Assistance for the Afghanistan Land Authority - Arazi (P153932)
                            Task Team          Asta Olesen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        17-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Public administration-
                                               Agriculture, fishing and forestry (80%)
                            Theme(s):          Land administration and management (70%), Judicial and other dispute
                                               resolution mechanisms (10%), Other social development (10%), Ot her
                                               accountability/anti-corruption (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     18.50                     Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                        18.50
                              Total                                                                        18.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           21.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Afghan Government to develop
                           the policy and regulatory framework and build capacity to deliver transparent, pro-poor land services.

                           22.     The project aims to support:
                         a.     the establishment of an affordable and accessible land registration system;
                         b.     raising public awareness, knowledge and understanding about laws and regulations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governing the land sector;
                         c.     developing processes and service standards for Arazi’s core functions;
                         d.     improving the implementation capacity of the Afghan Government to deliver its services;
                         e.     the effective and efficient use of state land for equitable socio-economic development.
                         C. Project Description
                         24.      The project is designed as primarily a technical assistance (TA) project that will prepare and
                         strengthen the newly independent Arazi for its tasks as a transparent and responsive service provider
                         in the land sector. Development of policies, regulations and implementation procedures and
                         respective staff capacity will be driven by a gender-sensitive and pro-poor approach, which will
                         facilitate the role of the land sector in equitable economic growth and employment generation. The
                         project will build on the assistance and earlier achievements of land sector support interventions.
                         This particularly includes the assistance to Arazi provided under ARCP. The LGAF, currently being
                         conducted will provide further guidance for the detailed project design.

                         1. Description

                         25.      The proposed project is envisaged as a the first phase of a longer engagement in the Afghan
                         land sector, initially focusing on institutional strengthening, capacity building and policy
                         development of Arazi in support of land sector reform. The project will build upon the lessons and
                         experiences of the Land Reform in Afghanistan (LARA) project and its predecessor, the Land
                         Tenure and Economic Restructuring Activity (LTERA) Project (2004-09). Support under this project
                         will be aligned with the assistance provided under the ARCP. It will also support the implementation
                         of Arazi’s operational strategy to become a modern public land services institution. Under ARCP,
                         support will be provided to Arazi, to begin the process of “clearing” titles to land along the key
                         resource corridor segments. “Clearance” refers to the surveying of land, cataloguing the claims to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         parcels of it, and resolving such claims to establish clear titles. ARCP is planning to fund the
                         equipment and staff needed to initiate this task, which is an urgent priority for the development of the
                         resource corridor, since land acquisition will be on the critical path of many investments, and title
                         clearance is a pre-requisite for socially responsible acquisition. The support for the Land Clearance
                         process under this project, as well as all other support, will be guided by the urgent need for more
                         transparency and stronger community involvement to protect the rights and livelihood of people
                         affected by land acquisition. This will involve the design of country-specific processes that are also
                         in line with Bank safeguard policies.

                         26.     Specifically, the proposed project will consist of four components focused on institutional
                         strengthening and capacity building of Arazi through the development of an administrative system of
                         land registration, policy and land access, which are further described below.

                         Project Components:

                         Component 1: Development of a Modern Land Registration System (US$ 8million)
                         27.     This component will support the development of an administrative land registration system
                         that draws upon relevant international good practice and modern technology and delivers affordable
                         accessible services to individuals, the community and business in accordance with accountable,
                         transparent services standards. The Cadastral Department under Arazi reports that by around 1970, it
                         had surveyed around 34 percent of the country. There is a need to review and update these old plans
                         and computerized records. Further, the current capacity of Arazi to cover the country, both rural and
                         urban, using conventional field surveying, especially given security issues, will preclude the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completion of a national mapping coverage of land parcels from being achieved in the short-medium
                         term. New technology involving imagery acquisition from high resolution and aerial means will be
                         tested and Arazi needs to adopt appropriate fit-for-purpose Information Communications
                         Technologies (ICT) as a key element of its service delivery, including a national LIS, records
                         management system, work-flow and communications.

                         28.      Three subcomponents will deal with (i) the Land Registration System Development, and (ii)
                         Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Arazi at national and subnational level; and
                         (iii) Public Awareness Raising, including the development of Information, Education and
                         Communications (IEC) material and training of facilitators.


                         Subcomponent 1.1: Land Registration System Development
                         29.      This subcomponent will finance technical advice to develop an administrative land
                         registration system and train Arazi personnel in the areas of surveying, mapping, adjudication, land
                         registration, service delivery and land records management. It will review and revise the procedures
                         for surveying and land clearance (Tasfiya, i.e. the collection and validation of evidence of land
                         ownership and rights) and establish a more efficient and effective process through participatory
                         community involvement. The subcomponent will build upon developments from the LARA and
                         other projects and will harmonize with investments under the Afghanistan Resource Corridor Project
                         (ARCP).

                         30.      The subcomponent will also finance the further development of the national LIS and secure
                         land records management system based on open-systems technology and train Arazi in the operation
                         and maintenance of the system. The LIS will be land parcel based, and will be developed in
                         accordance with defined standards for accuracy and conform to national standards for coordinate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systems. The LIS would also support any future land use planning and monitoring of land investment
                         requirements of GoIRA. The subcomponent will develop effective and efficient service delivery
                         procedures, including manuals and also service delivery standards and tools for monitoring
                         compliance with these standards. This subcomponent will also support procurement of the necessary
                         communications systems and setup at both central and selected local offices. Also under this
                         component old survey plans will be computerized and brought into the LIS. Further, some small
                         pilots over several selected areas using satellite and/or aerial imagery will be undertaken to test
                         alternative approaches to field surveying. As reported under the LARA project, this may utilize
                         existing high-resolution (0.5 meters) imagery from the International Security Assistance Force
                         (ISAF), subject to availability, or alternative.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                         31.      This subcomponent will finance the establishment of a Land Administration and
                         Management Training Center under Arazi, taking over the current small training center established
                         under the Ministry of Education that provides vocational training for surveyors. The training center
                         currently provides technician-level training for cadastral surveying over two years (4 semesters) with
                         the teaching provided by the Institute (three semesters) and a final semester of practical experience
                         working under Arazi provincial offices. However, the current syllabus is outdated and requires a
                         major review to reflect Arazi’s new priorities, including development of an administrative land
                         registration system. Under this sub-component, technical advice will be provided to develop training
                         courses, syllabi and training materials, which will be independently evaluated. The training center,
                         placed under Arazi, will be provided with the necessary office equipment, and adequate equipment,
                         including IT and software for surveying and geographic information systems. Opportunities to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen the center with linkages to leading international technical training university will also be
                         explored. In addition, opportunities for South-South cooperation and training would be supported
                         with possibilities to be explored in particular in the South Asia region. Support to build Arazi
                         capacity could be provided through the centers in South Asia established with World Bank support
                         under the Management of Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (MLARR) Program.
                         Specific cooperation possibilities could also exist with the Turkish Cadaster Agency. Support could
                         also be provided by the FAO’s Land Tenure Service to strengthen overall Arazi capacity drawing on
                         relevant international experience. In addition training would be supported to develop Arazi’s
                         capacity to perform its functions as an independent state agency including human resources,
                         procurement and financial management.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Public Awareness Raising
                         32.      This subcomponent will finance technical assistance to develop procedures and IEC
                         materials for public awareness raising and will provide training to Arazi staff. In addition, the
                         subcomponent would train local community facilitators to support the outreach of knowledge of
                         Arazi’s services, including land survey using satellite imageries, Tasfyia and dispute resolution
                         processes. It will particularly include public awareness raising about people’s right in land issues,
                         including the awareness about grievance mechanisms to be developed by Arazi in line with
                         international good practice and Bank standards, and which are to be applied specifically in Tasfiya
                         and land dispute resolution processes.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Land Policy and Regulatory Framework (US$ 3million)
                         33.      There are numerous policies and laws, enacted or under preparation in different Ministries,
                         that impact on the land sector, including the Forestry Law, Rangeland Law, Minerals Law,
                         Environment Law and others. This component would support the review and where applicable the
                         revision of the land policies and laws, including laws and implementing regulations to enable Arazi
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to implement its mandate under the Law on Managing Land Affairs and other laws, including the
                         Land Expropriation Law, in a consistent framework and in accordance with pro-poor land policies
                         and good land governance. Afghanistan’s current Land Policy was approved by Cabinet on 3rd
                         September 2007. This policy document is still relevant and provides the guidance for the institutions
                         acting in the land sector. However, it is in need of update, and reflecting Arazi’s new role and plans
                         in the land sector. The project’s policy program will draw upon priorities agreed under LGAF and
                         associated policy dialogue with GoIRA funded under the ARCP. Assistance in operationalizing the
                         2007 Land Policy (and Forest Law) and the recommendations of the LGAF results are expected to
                         provide the basis for improved process and outcomes of community-based natural resource
                         management, including climate change adaptions and climate smart (agriculture) resource
                         management techniques. .

                         34.      Two subcomponents will address: (i) Land Policy Development, including support of
                         drafting laws and regulations and support for the establishment of the envisaged High Council for
                         Land and Water; and (ii) Land Dispute Resolution, including an assessment of experiences over the
                         past ten years including the recent Arazi/United States’ Institute of Peace (USIP) pilots, and the
                         regularization of processes of local customs and traditions.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Land Policy Development
                         35.   This subcomponent would support the policy development, with policy priorities identified
                         as: (i) administrative system of land registration; (ii) administrative dispute resolution; (iii) fair and
                         just compensation for compulsory land acquisition; (iv) private sector land surveying; (v) land use
                         planning and land classification. Policy formulation will be complemented by support to the legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         process of drafting of laws, regulation and implementation procedures. Policy development priorities
                         would be confirmed during the LGAF policy dialogue process, which is supported under ARCP.
                         Given the inter-ministerial engagement in the land sector, especially concerning land allocation for
                         investment development, the establishment and functioning of a High Council for Land and Water,
                         as envisaged in Arazi’s Operational Strategy, will be supported, with a secretariat established under
                         Arazi. This subcomponent funds technical advisors, and a comprehensive, participatory consultation
                         and public awareness raising process as well as training of the policy secretariat staff and incidental
                         costs for meetings of the council.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Land Dispute Resolution
                         36.      Land continues to be a major source of conflict, and for the main population access to
                         judicial resolution of land disputes is neither affordable nor timely. The greater majority of the
                         population, and indeed civil society, view the courts as corrupt and favoring the powerful. In
                         accordance with international good practice, this component would develop administrative dispute
                         resolution procedures. The sub-component will assess the multitude of dispute resolution pilots of
                         the last 10 years in Afghanistan, including the recent Arazi/USIP pilots in Khost and Kunduz, and the
                         procedures prepared under LARA, develop procedures that will build on good practices and the
                         consideration of local customs and traditions and train local facilitators and Arazi officials. In
                         addition, this subcomponent would develop IEC materials to promote public awareness of dispute
                         resolution and also support regular reporting of the outcomes of dispute resolution to foster
                         transparency and public confidence.

                         Component 3: Land Access (US$ 1.5 million)
                         37.      This component will support the formulation of a policy and the establishment of transparent
                         and accountable procedures for the allocation of state land for (a) landless individuals and families to
                         provide for secure tenure in support of housing and livelihoods in rural and urban areas; and (b) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         allocation of land to support private sector investment in agriculture, natural resources, infrastructure
                         and industry through land distribution, land leasing and establishment of industrial parks. This
                         subcomponent will focus on the development of a land allocation policy and strategy with potential
                         piloting of agreed approaches.

                         38.      Two subcomponents are envisaged to address the need for (i) Land Allocation to Landless
                         Poor, including the development of procedures for land identification, eligibility criteria and
                         supporting services; and (ii) development of more transparent procedures for Land Access for Private
                         Sector Investment, including improvements in accountability, compliance and reporting. Land
                         allocation and land access procedures will focus on using undisputed public land for distribution and
                         will include a strong public consultation process around intended uses of such land. Even though
                         absolutely no involuntary resettlement should be envisaged, processes will include mechanisms for
                         fair and just compensation should any land acquisition possibility be include in policies and
                         procedures. All proposed law amendments, regulations and procedures will be subject to an
                         Environment and Social Assessment (ESA), to assess potential downstream impacts.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Land Allocation to Landless Poor This subcomponent would evaluate past and
                         current experiences in Afghanistan with land allocation approaches, in particular but not exclusively
                         the experiences with returnees and internally displaced persons (IDP). Based on the assessment,
                         support will be provided for the development of: (i) procedures for the identification of available
                         lands for allocation: (ii) the eligibility criteria and processes for the selection of potential recipients
                         of land to be allocated; and (iii) supporting instruments and conditions for land allocation to landless
                         individuals and families. This subcomponent would draw upon relevant international good practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for land allocation to landless and post-disaster/post-conflict resettlement. In addition, this
                         component would train Arazi staff and other relevant stakeholders in land allocation policy and
                         procedures.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Land Access for Private Sector Investment
                         39.      This subcomponent would support the development of more transparent procedures for the
                         allocation of land for private sector investment through state land identification and land leasing. In
                         addition, this subcomponent would support the development and implementation of a monitoring
                         system and procedures to ensure that all land allocated to private sector investment comply with
                         prescribed conditions and covenants. Further, to improve accountability and transparency,
                         procedures and a system for publication of all allocations would be established including annual
                         reporting of compliance and cancellations and variations of any investments. The subcomponent
                         would support the preparation of public information materials and the training of staff.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$ 6million)
                         40.      This component will support overall project management through: (i) providing necessary
                         key contract staff in the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to assist Arazi in managing project
                         implementation including procurement and financial management; and coordination with other
                         projects including the Afghan Resources Corridor Project; (ii) monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of
                         project implementation; and (iii) hiring technical assistance (TA) to support project implementation
                         and capacity building of Arazi. As part of the advisory role on institutional strengthening, Arazi will
                         be assisted in complying with Capacity Building for Results (CBR) principles and integrating into
                         the CBR program.

                         41.      Two subcomponents will address (i) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation,
                         establishing and running a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and an efficiently and effectively
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operating M&E system; and (ii) the need for Technical Assistance, including the financing of
                         technical advisors and critical equipment for implementation.

                         Subcomponent 4.1. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
                         42.      Under the project a PIU would be established with staffing to support project management,
                         planning, financial management, procurement, M&E and specific technical staff. The operation of
                         the PIU would also serve the purpose of strengthening Arazi’s own administrative requirements as a
                         government authority. This subcomponent would finance the hire of key contract staff for the PIU
                         including Project Implementation advisor, a Financial Management Advisor, a Procurement advisor,
                         translator, computing hardware and software and systems development to support the
                         implementation of the project. Training will be provided in project management, reporting,
                         planning, financial management and procurement. Effective implementation of this project will
                         require the early implementation of an M&E system at all levels (central and regional). This
                         subcomponent would also finance training, and systems development for the implementation of the
                         M&E system. M&E will be implemented at national and local levels. This sub-component would
                         also finance incremental operating costs (IOC) to support travel, office consumables, meetings and
                         miscellaneous small expenses. This component would also support any necessary coordination and
                         liaison with other donor support to Arazi and the Afghan land sector.

                         Subcomponent 4.2. Technical Assistance.
                           43.      In order to facilitate capacity building of the Arazi and to strengthen project implementation,
                           the project will finance critical technical assistance including advisors for land policy, surveying,
                           land registration, geodetic control, land clearances, training, public awareness raising, information
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communications technology (ICT) and LIS. The TA should ideally be multi-tasked and be able to
                           advise on the monitoring of implementation of all aspects of the project. This subcomponent would
                           also fund TA to conduct an impact assessment and client satisfactory survey in PY3. The TA will
                           also assist Arazi in preparation of an institutional sustainability plan, by PY3, drawing from earlier
                           work from the USAID-funded LARA project. Further, subject to project performance, including
                           demand and government, TA may also support the design and preparation of a follow-on project with
                           further funding for this preparation made available from ARCP. To enable TA to operate from within
                           Arazi’s central office, this subcomponent would provide the necessary renovated office space, and
                           office equipment. Also, the subcomponent would support translators, drivers and provide a small
                           number of armored vehicles for transport.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is designed as primarily a technical assistance (TA) project that will prepare and
                           strengthen the newly independent Arazi for its tasks as a transparent and responsive service provider
                           in the land sector. Specifically, the proposed project will consist of four components focused on
                           institutional strengthening and capacity building of Arazi through the development of an
                           administrative system of land registration, policy and land access. These interventions will be
                           consistent with the Government’s and World Bank’s safeguards policies and guidelines and
                           consultants’ Terms of References (ToRs) will be drafted accordingly.
                           As the proposed activities under this project will only involve technical and analytical assistance,
                           advisory services, and building capacity of Arazi to deliver its services to support the land
                           administration and management, there will be no civil works or tangible investment with salient
                           physical characteristics to be supported under this project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various environmental and social safeguards
                           instruments would lay with the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority (Arazi). The capacity of
                           Arazi, the newly independent land authority, to implement category B project is limited, but will be
                           reinforced by the recruitment of an environmental and social consultant. The safeguards team will
                           work closely not only with the National Environment Protection Agency (NEPA) and Ministry of
                           Labor, Social Affairs , Martyrs and Disabled (MoLSAMD), but also with civil society and other
                           stakeholders. In addition, under component 1, the TA project will consider sufficient capacity
                           building for NEPA and other relevant stakeholder.
                           Furthermore, the Arazi team members have already attended a number of trainings such as training in
                           Management of Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation organized by BRAC University/
                           World Bank, additional support will be provided during project preparation and implementation.

                           The project will be an Environmental Category B, and the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and
                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will be triggered.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment       Yes        The Environmental Assessment policy is triggered as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                                component 3: Land Access will comprise drafting of
                                                                   eligibility criteria and policies and procedures for
                                                                   land allocation to poor and landless people as well
                                                                   for Private Sector Investment.
                                                                   All legal amendments, regulations and procedures
                                                                   under the project will be subject to an environmental
                                                                   and Social Assessment (ESA) to assess downstream
                                                                   potential impacts.
                                                                   The ToR of the ESA will include environmental and
                                                                   social elements which will be informed by policy
                                                                   requirements of OP 4.01 and other relevant
                                                                   applicable Bank safeguard policies. The relevant
                                                                   ToR will be cleared by the Bank.
                                                                   To ensure holistic safeguard approach, the project
                                                                   will coordinate with NEPA, MoLSAMD and other
                                                                   relevant line ministries.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No         This policy is not triggered, the policy and guidelines
                                                                   developed and laws adopted by Arazi under this TA
                                                                   project will not entail implication to Natural
                                                                   Habitats. The prevailing Environmental Law
                                                                   includes a negative list where all identifies Natural
                                                                   Habitats are listed and are declared as preserved area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No         OP/BP 4.36 (Forests Policy) is not triggered since,
                                                                   policies and procedures that are ultimately adopted
                                                                   by Arazi will have no applicability with the land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   under forest. The country has a Forest Law and clear
                                                                   guidelines and procedures are already applicable and
                                                                   in place, and under the mandate of Ministry of
                                                                   Agriculture and Livestock.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No         OP 4.09 (Pest Management) policy is not triggered
                                                                   because Project activities will not involve purchase,
                                                                   use or storage of pesticides, nor will it support the
                                                                   procurement, or use of, or lead to the increased use
                                                                   of other agricultural chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No         The Arazi Support Project does not finance any civil
                         OP/BP 4.11                                works
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No         The Arazi Support Project does not have any activity
                         4.10                                      in any area of indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes        Although the Project will not involve any relocation
                         BP 4.12                                   or involuntary resettlement per se, the Involuntary
                                                                   Resettlement Policy is triggered due to the potential
                                                                   downstream impacts that could arise from any laws,
                                                                   policies, procedures and guidelines on Involuntary
                                                                                                                        Resettlement that are ultimately adopted by the
                                                                                                                        government.
                                                                                                                        Component 2 (strengthening Land Policy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        Regulatory Framework) would support the review
                                                                                                                        and where applicable the revision of the land policies
                                                                                                                        and laws, including laws and implementing
                                                                                                                        regulations to enable Arazi to implement its mandate
                                                                                                                        under the Law on Land Management Affairs and
                                                                                                                        other laws, including the Land Expropriation Law, in
                                                                                                                        a consistent framework and in accordance with pro-
                                                                                                                        poor land policies and good land governance.
                                                                                                                        All legal amendments, regulations and procedures
                                                                                                                        developed under the Project will be subject to an
                                                                                                                        Environment and Social Assessment to assess
                                                                                                                        potential downstream impacts. The Project will
                                                                                                                        facilitate future Bank and other partner operations by
                                                                                                                        having commonly accepted standards in place. Broad
                                                                                                                        consensus on these issues will be sought through
                                                                                                                        inter-ministerial cooperation, in particular through
                                                                                                                        the High Council of Land.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The Project does not have any activity involving
                                                                                                                        dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The Project does not involve any activity that will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   affect international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The Project does not involve any activity in any
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                know disputed area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The required SEAs described above will be conducted during implementation, as these are related
                                      to draft policies, procedures and guidelines developed under the project and thus the SEAs are an
                                      output rather than a prerequisite of the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Asta Olesen
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                                                                                 Date: 16-Mar-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Jennifer Solotaroff (PMGR)                                                                                             Date: 14-Apr-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
