                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7782

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Belarus                           Project ID:      P147760
                            Project Name:       Forestry Development Project (P147760)
                            Task Team           Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-Jul-2014                       Estimated        30-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSEN                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Other environment and natural resources management (65%), Climate change
                                                (15%), Water resource management (5%), Environmental polici es and
                                                institutions (10%), Biodiversity (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                       Total Bank Financing:          50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          50.00
                              Total                                                                          50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project objective is to enhance the sustainable use of forestry resources in targeted project areas
                           thereby providing additional employment opportunities, while continuing to provide global public
                           goods.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed forestry development project has two main components:

                         •        improving silviculture and the sustainability of forest management: through increasing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         intensity of silvicultural thinning of young stands, increasing the use of logging residues for
                         production of woody biomass (this will be complementary to the newly approved Biomass District
                         Heating Project), and improving the quality of seedling production for afforestation and reforestation.
                         By thinning the stands at an earlier stage, the forest becomes more productive, in that it reduces the
                         competition among the stems resulting in an increase in the volumes removed, whilst improving the
                         value of the growth in the forest post thinning. This improvement in silviculture is both sustainable
                         and economically viable. The increase in thinning intensity in young and middle aged stands, and the
                         utilization of woody biomass that would otherwise be left in the forest will create additional skilled
                         and semi-skilled employment opportunities in rural areas over and above the current situation.
                         Creation of rural jobs will help contribute to the economic development of the presently poorer rural
                         areas of Belarus hence contributing to shared prosperity;

                         •      improving forest fire prevention monitoring, detection and suppression, improving forest
                         management information systems including development of web interfaces; supporting training in
                         modern technologies and further research into the treatment of radioactively contaminated forests.

                         Project implementation will be mainstreamed within a Ministry of Forestry subsidiary enterprise.
                         The UE (Unitary Enterprise) “Bellesexport” of the Ministry of Forestry has been designated as the
                         PIU for the new project. UE “Bellesexport”, founded in 1995, promotes the sale of the domestic
                         timber products in foreign markets as well as procurement of international equipment for the State
                         Forest Enterprises.

                         Component 1: improving silviculture and the sustainability of forest management:

                         Sub-component: increasing the intensity of silviculture
Public Disclosure Copy




                         By 2015, all harvesting operations are to be tendered openly and to include the private sector.
                         However many younger aged thinning operations will not be attractive to the private sector or cost
                         effective for the State Forest Enterprises to tender out. The yield from the thinning of young stands
                         frequently does not cover the cost of actually undertaking the thinning, with the operations being
                         more of a maintenance operation than production. These operations are necessary, and economically
                         justified by the improvement in the quality of the residual stand (through silvicultural selection), and
                         the increase in the residual stand growth and value of later thinnings. Regular and timely thinning
                         also helps maintain stand stability to wind and snow events, and improves the benefits for wildlife by
                         increasing the light hitting the forest floor thereby encouraging an understory which will provide
                         both habitat and food. The machinery required for thinning young stands with smaller size stems is
                         specialized and not currently commonly used in Belarus. 67% of the forested land in the forest fund
                         is currently young or middle aged and requires thinning.
                         Changing demographics and lifestyle choices in Belarus means that there is currently and
                         increasingly a lack of people willing to work in the more labor intensive forestry activities. To
                         undertake the silviculturally necessary early and middle aged thinnings, and to increase the efficiency
                         and productivity, it is proposed to invest in modern thinning machinery for young and middle aged
                         stands in terms of harvesters (a cutting head that can fell, trim and cross cut trees, which is mounted
                         on an articulated boom on a low impact tractor) and forwarders (low impact machines which pick up
                         and carry the felled production to a site where it can be either stacked or loaded onto a truck). To thin
                         younger aged forests smaller, more maneuverable machines are required than the heavy bigger
                         machines required for final thinnings and selection fellings more traditionally used in Belarus. Use of
                         this machinery will increase the productivity and at the same time improve the health and safety of
                         forest workers. At the same time use of machinery will increase the opportunities for the employment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of women in the forestry harvesting operations. The project will provide training for operators for
                         these tasks, and generate worthwhile skilled and semi-skilled employment thereby helping to
                         increase the prosperity of rural communities. The thinning material generated is likely to be used for
                         either increasing the production of woody biomass, firewood, or pulpwood. Much of this production
                         is currently lost as deadwood within the stands. There are therefore carbon benefits from both the
                         production and increased productivity of the stands, while also boosting the rural economies.
                         By supporting the State Forest Enterprises develop the capacity to undertake thinning of the young
                         and middle aged stands, it will also support them shift away from undertaking the more commercial
                         thinning of older stands and selection and final fellings which will be increasingly tendered to the
                         private sector.
                         To create the enabling environment for the introduction of this more intensive forest management,
                         standards will be developed and adopted in one of the regions of Belarus. This will include the
                         development of draft legislative acts for implementation of intensive forest management standards.

                         This approach of actively thinning young and middle aged stands is not currently common practice in
                         Belarus. Through the project, Belarus will develop the guidelines, the enabling environment and the
                         capacity of undertaking these operations as standard practice. These operations will be economically
                         viable in the long run, and will become part of normal operating procedures. These developments are
                         therefore sustainable and will be replicated throughout the sector( depending on the availability of
                         financing) and will continue post project. This more intense silviculture is now common practice in
                         the more developed forest economies in Scandinavia and Western Europe.

                         Sub-component: developing the use of woody biomass from logging residues
                         Currently most of the logging residues (i.e. the tops and branches) from final and selective fellings
                         are simply left in the forest. This creates bot        h a fire hazard and is also wasteful of the calorific
                         value which could be used for energetic purposes. In Scandinavian countries, the logging residue is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         frequently left for a year, so that the nutrient rich needles fall from the branches and the woody parts
                         dry and are then chipped for use in furnaces. In Belarus there is currently increasing demand for
                         woody biomass to supply combined heat and power and heat only district heating systems and in
                         industrial and agricultural enterprises round the country. To meet this increasing demand for woody
                         biomass, Belarus needs to maximize all sources of woody biomass.

                         It is proposed to introduce advanced logging technologies to increase the use of logging residues and
                         to develop the use of modern measuring devices and equipment to enhance productivity and the
                         sustainability of forest management to strengthen their economic and ecological role, and to develop
                         and replicate technologies new to Belarus. This will optimize and rationalize the use of the forest
                         resources and increase the sector’s contribution to the increasing demand for woody biomass. There
                         will be a broader application of selection fellings and in some instances increasing of the final felling
                         age. By utilizing production that is currently wasted, and by investing in new machinery and
                         processes, there are both carbon benefits and an increase in rural economic activity.
                         To create the enabling environment, regulatory, legal and technical standards will be developed
                         based on the best international practices.

                         Sub-component: development of improved forest nurseries
                         In Belarus wherever possible, restocking of selectively felled areas is done through the use of natural
                         regeneration. However in some cases this is not the most appropriate approach as sometimes the
                         areas need to be restocked with different species, there is a need to restock damaged areas (wind
                         falls, snow, fire, drying spruce and ash stands etc.), and in some areas natural regeneration may not
                         be successful. There is therefore continuing need for production of good quality seedlings from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected plus trees of known origin.
                         To improve the survival rates and increase the efficiency of seedling production it is proposed to
                         modernize four forest nurseries, to produce container grown seedlings of improved quality. It is
                         proposed to increase the proportion of container grown seedlings from currently less than less than
                         1% of seedling production to 11% by 2017. Increasing the nursery production will also increase
                         skilled and semi-skilled employment opportunities, for both men and women again in rural poor
                         areas.

                         At the same time the legal and regulatory framework will be updated and an equal opportunity
                         training program will be implemented to ensure technical and nursery staff can operate the new
                         equipment.
                         As part of this component instruments will be introduced which will include considerations of gender
                         and other vulnerable groups, to engage beneficiaries and civil society participation in policy
                         formulation and in monitoring the implementation of the project, thus contributing to enhancing
                         transparency of the MOF and improving responsiveness of forestry enterprises to the needs of
                         beneficiaries.

                         Component 2: improving forest fire prevention, monitoring, detection and suppression, improving
                         forest management information systems

                         Sub-component: improving forest fire prevention and management
                         To reduce the incidence, extent and severity of forest fires three main interventions are proposed:
                         •        Prevention through increasing public awareness and education, improving fire danger and
                         hazard ratings and informing the public through work with mass media, and prevention activities
                         through creation of mineralized strips and clearing logging residue and other fire hazards within
                         compartments and cleaning compartment boundaries and road edges
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Improving fire detection and monitoring through establishment of video surveillance with
                         specialized software, improving communications
                         •        Improving suppression activities through provision of forest fire-fighting equipment and
                         training, and improving the network of water points.
                         The local authorities and CSOs will be involved in the information dissemination and awareness
                         activities as well as in the monitoring of the fire protection measures at the local level. The awareness
                         and information campaigns will also have a specific gender focus.
                         As part of this sub-component the study of the best technologies and methods of detecting and
                         extinguishing forest fires in EU countries will be undertaken. At the same time draft legislation will
                         be developed to support implementation of the new fire-fighting technology and approach in the
                         Republic of Belarus.

                         Sub-component: improvement of the forest management information system
                         Under this sub-component software tools, application of modern metering devices and equipment in
                         the process of forest surveying and inventory operations will developed. This will contribute to
                         improving the accuracy of the data collected and will hence improve information on the availability
                         of timber resources in the country. This component will include the development of a web-based
                         interface to allow for sharing of information at different levels (through password protection where
                         necessary) and will increase transparency and access to data for different stakeholders.
                           Sub-component: development of and training in the use of advanced technologies
                           Training of forestry specialists in the advanced forest management technologies provides a basis for
                           their successful implementation in forest management practice in the Republic of Belarus. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                           component will include development of the training and production facilities at the State Institution
                           for Further Adult Education “ Republican Center of Competence for Forestry Managers and
                           Specialists”. All training undertaken will be equally available to both men and women.

                           Sub-component: developing the rational use of radioactively contaminated forest
                           This component will include the development and maintenance of a decision support system
                           “Radioactive Contamination of Forests. RadFor”, to be performed by the State Institution
                           “Bellesozaschita” in partnership with forestry enterprises, as well as improvement of the system of
                           protective measures and optimization of radiological monitoring activities in the forest fund.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The location of where the project investments will be deployed will be determined during
                           preparation. Most forest in Belarus is located in rolling hillsides and gentle terrain. Ground
                           conditions can be boggy and soils are frequently peaty. To avoid damage to soils and ground
                           conditions it is necessary to use the correct forest machinery for the location and at the correct time
                           of year and ground conditions. This project is all about improving this environmental performance.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           While the borrower has some safeguards capacity as it has previously implemented another WB
                           project, its current capacity will be assessed during the project design and if needed, the project will
                           provide relevant training in this regard.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered. Some of the activities are
                           BP 4.01                                                expected to involve small scale construction (e.
                                                                                  g. at the tree nurseries, forest fire monitoring
                                                                                  and prevention posts, ponds to provide water for
                                                                                  fire-fighting). As it is not expected that the
                                                                                  specific nurseries and/or forest fighting facilities
                                                                                  to be supported will be identified prior to
                                                                                  Appraisal, an Environmental Management
                                                                                  Framework will be prepared which will provide
                                                                                  guidance for the preparation of site/activity-
                                                                                  specific EMPs as needed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               No civil works will be carried out inside
                                                                                  protected or environmentally sensitive areas.
                                                                                  For that purpose all locations for proposed civil
                                                                                  works will be screened during the project
                                                                                  design. The results of the screening will be
                                                                                                                                 submitted to the Ministry of Environment for its
                                                                                                                                 review and approval.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                Yes                           OP 4.36 is triggered because the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 support forest management. Although the
                                                                                                                                 objective of the thinning operations is
                                                                                                                                 silvicultural improvement the production will be
                                                                                                                                 sold wherever possible. Similarly the production
                                                                                                                                 from woody biomass will be sold. All State
                                                                                                                                 Forest Enterprises are currently PEFC certified
                                                                                                                                 and most also have FSC certification.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           Yes                           This is OP is triggered as improving forest
                                                                                                                                 nurseries might stimulate increased use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides, and also because the project could
                                                                                                                                 provide an opportunity to promote Integrated
                                                                                                                                 Pest Management methods in the nurseries.
                                                                                                                                 This will be addressed in the EMF, rather than
                                                                                                                                 in a separate pest management plan.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            N/A
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            N/A

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            All project activities will be implemented within
                                 4.12                                                                                            state own nurseries and/or state own forest Fund
                                                                                                                                 and thus none resettlement issues is anticipated.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The client will design an EMF which will be disclosed and consulted in the country prior
                                      Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Andrew Michael Mitchell

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 24-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Kseniya Lvovsky (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 24-Mar-2014



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
