                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5535
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P133531
                            Project Name:      Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)
                            Task Team          Ximing Peng
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Oct-2013                        Estimated   06-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Oil and gas (60%), Thermal Power Generation (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        272.90              Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   54.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     100.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                        118.30
                              Total                                                                                     272.90
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) would be to increase gas utilization to reduce
                           greenhouse gases emission in selected counties of Shanxi province. The proposed project would be
                           part of the provincial gasification program and the objective would be achieved by the investment in



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         both distributed gas-fired combined heat and power (CHP) and the expansion of the gas distribution
                         network in selected counties.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project has three components: (a) distributed gas-fired CHP; (b) expansion of gas
                         distribution network; and (c) technical assistance. Total six investment sub-projects are included in
                         the project based on their locations – Baode and Xiyang gas-fired CHP sub-project under Component
                         (a), and Xiangyuan, Changzhi, Tunliu and Qingxu gas distribution sub-project under Component (b)
                         – these sub-projects are located in six different counties in Shanxi province.
                         Component 1: Distributed Gas-fired CHPs (indicative cost estimate: US$237.60, of which US$ 79.25
                         from IBRD loan). This component includes two investment sub-projects with the same size: Baode
                         3x42MW and Xiyang 3x42MW gas-fired CHP plants and affiliated facilities. Both sub-projects are
                         green-field power plants and will be built for power generation and heating supply to the adjacent
                         county level cities (Baode and Xiyang County City).
                         The gas source of both sub-projects is the provincial gas network which has been extended to both
                         cities, and the provincial gas network is operated by Shanxi Natural Gas Company (SNGC), who is
                         also the implementing agency of both sub-projects. The annual gas consumption is estimated at 285
                         million cubic meters for both sub-projects. The electricity will be delivered to the provincial power
                         grid, an estimate of about 1,160 GWh annually, to meet the electricity demand in the province; while
                         the heating will be supplied to the two county cities to meet the expanded heating demand of total
                         floor area of about 2.37 million square meters. SNGC plans to start the construction of both
                         investment sub-projects in April 2014 and complete the construction in October 2015.
                         Component 2: Expansion of Gas Distribution Network (indicative cost estimate: US$32.25 million,
                         of which US$18 million from IBRD loan). This component included four investment sub-projects
                         located in four county cities, namely Xiangyuan, Changzhi, Tunliu and Qingxu County. The
                         proposed sub-projects would install pipelines and pressure regulating stations in the four counties to
                         expand the gas distribution network to residential, commercial and industrial consumers, as well as
                         the establishment of SCADA systems to monitor the operation of each gas distribution network.
                         The main gas source is the provincial gas network, operated by SNGC, though the gas for Changzhi
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sub-project is to be supplied by a local CBM developer which is also connected into the provincial
                         gas network. The proposed four sub-projects are expected to meet the incremental gas demand in the
                         four cities by 2030, amounted to total 136,700 households and 21 industrial consumers, with an
                         annual gas supply of about 244.15 million cubic meters. The project implementing agencies plan to
                         start the construction of all four sub-projects in October 2014, and complete the construction in late
                         2019.
                         Component 3: Technical Assistance (indicative cost estimate: US$2.75 million, financed from IBRD
                         loan). Technical assistance component is included to mitigate the risks related to project design and
                         management, covering activities for capacity building and technical support to the implementing
                         agencies, and activities to upgrade the provincial gas network system.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project consists of six subprojects, which include two distributed gas-fired CHP
                         subprojects, and four gas distribution subprojects. The two distributed gas-fired CHP subprojects are
                         located in Baode County, Xinzhou Municipality and Xiyang County, Jinzhong Municipality. The
                         four gas distribution subprojects are located in Xiangyuan, Changzhi, Tunliu, and Qingxu Counties
                         with first three counties located in Changzhi Municipality and the remaining one in Jinzhong
                         Municipality.



                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         Shanxi Province is located on the Loess Plateau with a rolling terrain. Shanxi has a complex
                         landform formed with a variety of mountains, low hills, plateaus, basins and terraces. As the
                         province of Shanxi extends along a narrow area, which slopes from north to south, between the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yellow River and Taihang Mountains, the mountain area accounts for over 70% of the total area of
                         Shanxi Province. The groundwater layers are very deep even in the alluvial areas the drilling exercise
                         shows that the shallow aquifer is more than 30 m. The temperate continental climate dominates in
                         Shanxi province. The annual precipitation averages 400 mm-600 mm with 60% being distributed
                         within the period from June to August.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project involves two distributed gas-fired
                         BP 4.01                                             CHP plants (3x42MW each) for power generation
                                                                             and heating supply to the adjacent county cities,
                                                                             and expansion of gas distribution network in four
                                                                             cities.

                                                                             The proposed project will facilitate the gas
                                                                             utilization in Shanxi Province, which will have
                                                                             significant environmental benefits including
                                                                             replacement of coal consumption and reduction
                                                                             of pollutants discharge. The potential adverse
                                                                             impacts such as dust, wastewater, solid waste,
                                                                             noise, soil erosion and social impacts will occur
                                                                             during construction phase, and NOx emission,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             noise, wastewater from gas-fired CHP plant, and
                                                                             potential risks related to fire and explosion during
                                                                             operation phase. The relevant mitigation
                                                                             measures were incorporated into the EIA/EMP.
                                                                             The project was classified as Category A project
                                                                             due to its potential impacts and risks.

                                                                             An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                                                                             including Environmental Management Plan
                                                                             (EMP) and an EA Summary Report have been
                                                                             prepared by the project implementing agencies.
                                                                             To enhance the environmental benefits of the
                                                                             project, the project has integrated the mitigation
                                                                             measures into the project design, construction
                                                                             phase and operational phase respectively. These
                                                                             environmental and social impacts are thoroughly
                                                                             analyzed in the EIAs, and preventive and
                                                                             mitigation measures have been developed in the
                                                                             EMPs. Bank review has concluded that these
                                                                             adverse environmental and social impacts can be


                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                                                                    adequately avoided, minimized and mitigated
                                                                    with good management practice and mitigation
                                                                    measures, as developed in the EIAs/EMPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Two rounds of public consultations including
                                                                    expert consultations, questionnaires, symposia,
                                                                    and interviews were conducted with the different
                                                                    stakeholders during EA preparation according to
                                                                    the requirements of both Chinese legislations and
                                                                    the World Bank’s OP 4.01. The project
                                                                    information has been disclosed locally throughout
                                                                    the public consultation process. The availability
                                                                    of the EIA reports, and how to access to them,
                                                                    was announced in local major newspaper of each
                                                                    project county in early August 2013, and EIAs/
                                                                    EMPs were also disclosed at Shanxi Economy
                                                                    Daily on August 6, 2013. The EA report was also
                                                                    disclosed on the website of GXED on October 3,
                                                                    2013, and the World Bank’s InfoShop on
                                                                    November 6, 2013.

                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No             Based on the information available and site visit,
                                                                    there are not any natural habitats or critical
                                                                    natural habitats found in the proposed project
                                                                    areas, all the project components locate in the
                                                                    urban or town areas. The rivers to be crossed by
                                                                    the pipelines are considered sensitive receptors
                                                                    for the concern of flood protection safety reason
                                                                    as required by China's EA requirements. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    rivers, as described in the EA, have no flow in
                                                                    most months of a year, and the local authorities
                                                                    confirmed that there are no rare species in the
                                                                    river.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             While the project will affect 90 mu of woods
                                                                    (1,800 poplar trees) land which is scattered along
                                                                    the pipeline in small plots of trees and are
                                                                    artificially planted trees, the area affected is
                                                                    insignificant (very small percentage) and there
                                                                    are no communities dependent on the 90 mu
                                                                    reforestation area.

                                                                    Project activities will not affect forest areas. It
                                                                    will not involve any logging or planting activities
                                                                    in forest areas.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No            The project will not procure pesticides or
                                                                    increase use of pesticides.



                                                            Page 4 of 13
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The whole territory of Baode County - project
                         BP 4.11                                         site of one gas-fired CHP sub-project - has been
                                                                         classified into the Vertebrate Fossil Area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         protected at provincial level, and Baode CHP
                                                                         plant will be located in the protection area of
                                                                         Diaoyutai Rock Cave protected at municipal
                                                                         level.
                                                                         Adequate site survey and consultation with
                                                                         relevant stakeholders was conducted during EA
                                                                         preparation to ensure all the relevant cultural
                                                                         relics are identified, and the potential impacts
                                                                         were carefully addressed through project design,
                                                                         construction technologies, good construction
                                                                         management and other mitigation measures.
                                                                         Chance-find procedures include provisions and
                                                                         procedures stipulated in the Cultural Property
                                                                         Law and will be included in the bidding
                                                                         documents and contracts. The site of Baode CHP
                                                                         plant is 11.3 km from the core area of the
                                                                         Vertebrate Fossil Area and 500 meters from the
                                                                         Diaoyutai Rock Cave; and the water supply
                                                                         pipeline will be constructed along the existing
                                                                         highway G249 with the closest distance to the
                                                                         cave at 20 meters. The EA report concluded that
                                                                         the vibration impact on the Diaoyutai Rock Cave
                                                                         is negligible, and the impact of dust and vibration
                                                                         to the cave is also minor as the water supply
                                                                         pipeline is small which require only small
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         quantity of earth work.
                                                                         In addition, a Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                         Management Plan has been prepared as part of
                                                                         the EIA/EMP, which includes the mitigation
                                                                         measures, institutional strengthening, the
                                                                         procedure of Chance Find that will be applied
                                                                         throughout the construction stage of Baode CHP
                                                                         plant and its associated works, and monitoring
                                                                         plan.

                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             A social assessment has been carried for all
                                                                         project components, which was based on
                                                                         consultations with officials from local minority
                                                                         and religious bureau in each county and relevant
                                                                         town governments in order to obtain information
                                                                         regarding minority population in relevant
                                                                         counties and project areas. Similar consultations
                                                                         were also conducted for the sample villages and
                                                                         residential committee interviews for the four gas



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                        distribution subprojects. According to the
                                                                        findings the social assessment, there are no ethnic
                                                                        minority communities in the project affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        areas. The policy of OP/BP 4.10 will not be
                                                                        triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The construction of the Project will involve
                         4.12                                           certain amount of land acquisition and
                                                                        resettlement, but house demolition will not be
                                                                        involved. The two distributed gas-fired CHP
                                                                        plants will require both permanent and temporary
                                                                        land acquisition for the plant site, access roads
                                                                        and transmission towers, and the four gas
                                                                        distribution sub-projects will require temporary
                                                                        land occupation only. Total land acquisition
                                                                        includes 220 mu permanent rural land for the
                                                                        sites of the two CHP plants, and 3,501 mu
                                                                        temporary lands. Total affected household
                                                                        amounts to 1,245 in the six project cities.
                                                                        To address the impacts, a resettlement action plan
                                                                        (RAP) has been prepared in accordance with
                                                                        relevant Chinese laws, regulations, and World
                                                                        Bank Operational Policy (OP4.12), disclosed
                                                                        locally on Sep. 2, 2013 and in InfoShop
                                                                        (disclosed on Sep. 3, 2013). The proposed
                                                                        compensation standards for both permanent and
                                                                        temporary land acquisition are in line with those
                                                                        policies which have been implemented in those
                                                                        cities/counties and generally acceptable to local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        villagers and residents.
                                                                        Given the changing nature of gas distribution
                                                                        component, a resettlement policy framework
                                                                        (RPF) has also been prepared for activities whose
                                                                        locations and scope might be determined during
                                                                        project implementation. The RPF follows the
                                                                        same compensation policies for relevant cities or
                                                                        counties and defines procedures and steps for
                                                                        RAP preparation and grievance procedures.
                                                                        Public consultations had been conducted during
                                                                        RAP/RPF preparation including both social
                                                                        economic survey and public meetings with
                                                                        project affected people. Information about the
                                                                        project impacts, compensation policies,
                                                                        rehabilitation options and grievance procedures
                                                                        have been provided to the affected people through
                                                                        distribution of resettlement information booklet to
                                                                        affected villages. Group discussions with the
                                                                        affected people were also conducted to collect



                                                                Page 6 of 13
                                                                                their views and preferences regarding
                                                                                resettlement impacts, compensation policies, and
                                                                                rehabilitation measures. These views and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                preferences have been taken into account during
                                                                                RAP preparation process.
                                                                                Implementation of the RAP/RPF and its
                                                                                monitoring were also agreed. The project
                                                                                implementing agencies will lead resettlement
                                                                                operations under the oversight of the resettlement
                                                                                leading groups in project cities and counties. An
                                                                                experienced external monitoring agency will be
                                                                                contracted to conduct independent monitoring
                                                                                and evaluation over the course of the project
                                                                                implementation. The monitoring results will be
                                                                                reported twice a year and, if needed, remedial
                                                                                actions will be designed.

                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               For the distributed gas-fired power plants in
                                                                                both Gaode and Xiyang County, the plants will
                                                                                use the effluent (further treated) from existing
                                                                                waste water treatment plants nearby as cooling
                                                                                water. The options to use water from nearby a
                                                                                dam were rejected during the preparation of
                                                                                feasibility study reports.
                            Projects on International           No               No subproject will be located in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways. The policy is not triggered and no
                                                                                actions are required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  No project area will be located in disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                The policy is not triggered and no actions are
                                                                                required.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will bring significant net positive environmental benefits through facilitating the gas
                              utilization and displace of coal use in Shanxi Province, which will have significant environmental
                              benefits including replacement of coal consumption and reduction of pollutants discharge.

                             The potential adverse impacts such as dust, wastewater, solid waste, noise, soil erosion and social
                             impacts will occur during construction phase, and potential risks related to fire and explosion
                             during operation phase. The relevant mitigation measures were incorporated into the EIA/EMP.
                             The air pollutant of primary concern in the operation stage of CHP plants is NOx. A steady-state
                             dispersion model recommended in the EA Technical Guideline for Ambient Air (HJ2.2-2008)
                             issued by the Ministry of Environmental Protection is used to predict the NOx concentration
                             distribution within the assessment area. The modeling results show that the Max. hourly


                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                          concentration of NOx for Baode CHP plant is 572.8397 μg/m3 on a disused land 1340 m WNW
                          from the stack; for Xiyang CHP plant is 379.7832μg/m3 on a disused land 1780 m SE from the
                          stack. The Max. daily and Max. yearly concentrations of NOx in the assessment area and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sensitive receptors comply with the required standard.

                          Beijing Dafei Risk Assessment Company has been contracted to prepare the Risk Assessment
                          Report for domestic approval. The procedure for risk assessment required by risk assessment
                          guideline of China has been followed. In the risk screening procedure, the potential risks
                          associated with the CHP plants and gas pipelines have been identified respectively to be
                          occupational damages, and leakage of pipelines due to the quality control problem in construction
                          stage; The guideline only identifies the gas storage tank with a volume of over 10 tons, and the
                          larger gas pipelines within public areas rather than within plant boundary, as well as the bigger
                          waste gas boilers, as the critical sources of risk in operation phase. The critical sources for the
                          risks are the waste gas boilers under the CHP components and the gas pipeline with DN more than
                          200 mm under the gas network components. The probabilities of the risks and the radius of buffer
                          area have been estimated. Based on the layout of the CHP plants and the alignments of the gas
                          pipelines under the pipeline network components, the aftermath of the risks have been estimated
                          also.

                          The whole territory of Baode County has been classified into the Vertebrate Fossil Area protected
                          at provincial level and the Baode CHP plant will be located in the protection area of Diaoyutai
                          Rock Cave protected at municipal level. The Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) policy is
                          therefore triggered.

                           Baode CHP plant is 11.3 km from the core area of the Vertebrate Fossil Area and 500 m from the
                           Diaoyutai Rock Cave, the water supply pipeline will be constructed along the existing highway
                           G249 with the closest distance to the cave at 20 m. during the construction of Baode CHP plant, it
                           is concluded that the vibration impact on the Diaoyutai Rock Cave is negligible. As the water
                           supply pipeline is small requiring small quantity of earth work, the impact of dust and vibration is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           also minor.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Shanxi Province has developed an ambitious target for air pollution reduction through its 12th
                           Five Year Plan (2011-2015) for Environmental Protection. In response to the Plan, a series of
                           action plans have been initiated including the Shanxi Provincial Gasification Program. The
                           proposed project is an integral part of the Shanxi Provincial Gasification Program. Based on the
                           feasibility study reports, it is expected that the project would contribute to the reduction of TSP
                           13,700 tons/year (t/a), SO2 15,100 t/a, and CO2 emission 1.5 million t/a. It will make great
                           contribution to the air quality improvement in the project cities in Shanxi Province. The
                           experience and practices to be summarized in the project design and implementation are expected
                           to be replicated in other areas of Shanxi province.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project has been subject to intense analysis of alternative options. During the design phase the
                           EA teams worked closely with project planners/ owners and the feasibility study teams to compare
                           and evaluate alternatives. The EA identified, evaluated and compared various options for pipeline
                           alignment selection, CHP plant location selection, fuel type selection, NOx Control technology,
                           cooling water source and its treatment process, and optimal alternatives were selected based on the

                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                          avoidance of (or least adverse) social and environmental impacts, as well as other engineering
                          technology, and financial considerations for least cost solutions. A “no project? scenario was also
                          considered as an alternative. Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          expected impacts, including noise reduction equipment, intensive greening plan etc.

                           As the result, the pipeline alignment, CHP locations were optimized so as to reduce the land
                           acquisition, decrease construction risks, minimize resettlement, avoid environmental sensitive
                           sites, and with less cost. Further optimization will be conducted during preliminary design and
                           detailed design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project was classified as a Category A project as per OP4.01 due to its potential impacts and
                           risks. Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared by the EA consultant (Coal Chemistry
                           Institute of China Academy of Sciences) hired by GXED in accordance with relevant national
                           laws, regulations, and technical guidelines and standards applicable to the project, as well as the
                           World Bank Safeguards Policies. The reports include an EA Executive Summary, and EIA and
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) reports for each investment sub-project. The EA Report
                           has incorporated the Bank’s comments, and found to be satisfactory.
                           The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are thoroughly addressed
                           in the EIA report, and necessary mitigation measures have been developed in the EMP. It is
                           concluded that these adverse environmental and social impacts can be adequately avoided,
                           minimized and mitigated with good management practice and mitigation measures as developed in
                           EIA/EMP. The main conclusions of impacts and mitigation measures are summarized as follows:

                          Project Feasibility Study and Design. During the design phase the EA teams worked closely with
                          project planners/ owners and the feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives. The
                          EA identified, evaluated and compared various options for pipeline alignment selection, CHP
                          plant location selection, fuel type selection, NOx Control technology, cooling water source and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                          treatment process, and optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of (or least
                          adverse) social and environmental impacts, as well as other engineering technology, and financial
                          considerations for least cost solutions. A “no project? scenario was also considered as an
                          alternative. Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the expected impacts,
                          including noise reduction equipment, intensive greening plan etc.

                          Construction phase. To address the potential adverse impacts such as dust, wastewater, solid
                          waste, noise, soil erosion and social impacts during construction phase, preventive and mitigation
                          measures have been developed in the EMP to adequately avoid, minimize and mitigate these
                          adverse environmental and social impacts. These impacts will be avoided, minimized or mitigated
                          by the following measures, it includes but not limit to: implementation of soil and water
                          conservation plan, public consultation throughout the construction period to address public
                          concerns and improve construction activities, proper management of solid wastes, careful
                          scheduling of construction activities; restricting night-time construction; use of advanced
                          construction technologies such as directional drilling and pipe-jacking technique; Measures for air
                          and wastewater pollutant control, risks assessment and Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                          measures etc.

                          Operation phase. To address potential impacts during operation phase, a number of mitigation
                          measures were adopted. They include but are not limited to: use of low noise equipment,


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                         installation of noise barrier, installation of low noise silencer, vibration-reduction facilities will be
                         installed, collection and treatment of wastewater, and solid waste, EHS measures, implementation
                         of safety management plan, monitoring of waste gas, wastewater and noise regularly etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safety Management Plan. A Safety Management Plan has been prepared to cope with these
                         potential risks which include the institutional arrangement, mitigation measures and management
                         system, emergency response plan, training plan, community awareness and education program and
                         monitoring plan.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11: Adequate site survey and consultation with relevant
                         stakeholders was conducted during EA preparation to ensure all the relevant cultural relics are
                         identified, and the potential impacts were carefully addressed through project design, construction
                         technologies, good construction management and other mitigation measures. Chance-find
                         procedures will include provisions and procedures stipulated in the Cultural Property Law and will
                         be included in bidding documents and contracts. Baode CHP plant is 11.3 km from the core area
                         of the Vertebrate Fossil Area and 500 m from the Diaoyutai Rock Cave, the water supply pipeline
                         will be constructed along the existing highway G249 with the closest distance to the cave at 20 m.
                         during the construction of Baode CHP plant, it is concluded that the vibration impact on the
                         Diaoyutai Rock Cave is negligible. As the water supply pipeline is small requiring small quantity
                         of earth work, the impact of dust and vibration is also minor.

                         In addition, A Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan has been prepared as part of EIA/
                         EMP which includes the mitigation measures, institutional strengthening, the procedure of Chance
                         Find will be applied throughout the construction stage of Baode CHP plant and its associated
                         works, and monitoring plan. The compensation for the relocation of the tombs has been considered
                         in the RAP.

                         A stand-alone EMP has been developed which details the policy bases, applicable environmental
                         standards, environmental management organization and responsibilities, sufficient mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures, capacity training plan, environmental monitoring program, and budget estimates of
                         EMP implementation. The EMP measures were developed in consistency with World Bank Group
                         EHS Guidelines. The EMP measures will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts in
                         order to ensure effective implementation.

                         Environmental management responsibility will be built into the relevant divisions of the overall
                         project management structure, with dedicated management staff to ensure effective EMP
                         implementation. A training plan will be implemented prior to/and during construction for project
                         management staff, technical staff and Contractors.

                         ECOPs and site-specific management plan, as well as the soil conservation plan have been
                         developed and incorporated into the EIA and the EMP. An environmental monitoring plan and soil
                         conservation monitoring plan have been designed for both construction and operation phases of
                         the project, and are incorporated into the EMP, which includes the monitoring location,
                         monitoring parameters, methods, frequency and cost estimate. Environmental monitoring report
                         will provide key and timely information, especially on environmental impacts and mitigation, to
                         the borrower and the Bank to evaluate the success of environmental management.

                         The project is to be implemented by Shanxi Guoxin Energy Development Group Corporation
                         (GXED) and its three subsidiaries (Shanxi Natural Gas Company, Shanxi CBM (NG) Pipeline and

                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                          Transportation Company, and Qingxu Kaitong Natural Gas Company). A Project Management
                          Office (PMO) has been established, led by GXED and participated by its three subsidiaries, to be
                          responsible for the coordination of the project preparation and implementation. GXED and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                          subsidiaries have no experience with Bank funded projects.

                           In order to effectively address the environmental issues, the Institute of Coal Chemistry of Chinese
                           Academy of Sciences has been selected to prepare the EA document for the project. The institute
                           has rich experience on the preparation of EA for the similar projects including gas-fired power
                           plant. The Bank mission provided them with guidance on the World Bank Safeguard Policies. For
                           land acquisition and resettlement impact, an experienced agency – Institute of Sociology of Shanxi
                           Academy Social Science has been selected to prepare resettlement action plan for the project. The
                           Bank’s social and environmental specialists will work closely with the PMO and its consultants to
                           address the potential impacts and formulation of mitigation measures during the preparation and
                           implementation of the project, the capacity building for safeguard will be integrate part of the
                           project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Two rounds of public consultation were conducted by the EIA team during EA preparation. The
                           first round was conducted from April to July 2013 through meetings, field interviews and
                           questionnaire surveys among project affected people, experts and relevant key stakeholders, and
                           focused on environmental screening to define public concerns, to assist identification of key
                           environmental issues and to draw public response and comments on the initially developed
                           mitigation measures for the potential adverse impacts identified before EA TOR finalization. The
                           main concerns raised by the public are resettlement compensation, construction related impacts,
                           safety of gas use, and affordability issue etc. All these concerns were addressed in the RAP and
                           EIA/EMP.

                          The second round was conducted in August 2013 after the draft EIA report had been prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          During the consultation, the key findings of draft EIA report and proposed mitigation measures
                          were explained, as well as the responses to the questions raised from the first round consultation.

                          Through the consultation, it is understood that the public strongly support the project as they think
                          it would be a good approach to improve the air quality and livelihood. Responding to the public
                          consultation, the public concerns have been carefully considered in the impact assessment and
                          development of mitigation measures. As a result, the public who raised the concerns are satisfied
                          with the conclusion and mitigation measures.

                          In accordance with the OP 4.11, the relevant government departments and experts have been
                          consulted as a part of the public consultation. The relevant departments have confirmed the
                          significance of the Diaoyutai Rock Cave and the Baode County Vertebrate Fossil Area and agreed
                          the location of the Baode CHP Plant, and required that the chance find procedure be included in
                          the mitigation measures. During the second-round consultation, these relevant departments and
                          experts are satisfied with the physical cultural resources management plan.

                          The project information has been disclosed to the public throughout the public consultation. The
                          availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them, was announced in local major
                          newspaper of each project county in early August 2013, and EIA/EMP was also disclosed at



                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           Shanxi Economy Daily on August 6, 2013. The EA report has been disclosed on the website of
                           GXED on October 3, 2013, as well as on the World Bank’s Infoshop on November 6, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        06-Nov-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              03-Oct-2013
                           Comments: Project information has been disclosed to the public throughout the public
                                         consultation process. The availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them,
                                         was announced in a major local newspaper in each project county in early August
                                         2013. The EIA/EMP was also disclosed in the Shanxi Economy Daily on August 6,
                                         2013. The EA report was further also disclosed on the website of GXED on October
                                         3, 2013 and through the World Bank’s Infoshop on November 6, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        16-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              06-Oct-2013
                           Comments: To address these impacts, a resettlement action plan (RAP) has been prepared in
                                         accordance with relevant Chinese laws and regulations and World Bank Operational
                                         Policy (OP4.12), disclosed locally on October 6, 2013 and through the World Bank’s
                                         InfoShop on November 6, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?



                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ximing Peng
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 06-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                              Date: 06-Nov-2013




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
