                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA7948
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Guyana                              Project ID:    P147250
                            Project Name:       GY Flood Risk Management (P147250)
                            Task Team           John Morton
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Apr-2014                         Estimated   20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban planning and housing policy (60%), Climate change (20%), Water
                                              resource management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      11.89           Total Bank Financing:                      11.89
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    11.89
                              Total                                                                                          11.89
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to reduce the risk of flooding in the low-lying areas of the East
                           Demerara.
                            3. Project Description
                           Guyana has a land area of 215,000 square kilometers (83,000 square miles) and a low population

                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                         density, with ninety percent of its 762,300 inhabitants living on the narrow coastal plain, which
                         represents ten percent of the country’s area. This is an area of reclaimed lands, much of which lies
                         below sea level. It is crucial to the economy of the country, supporting the majority of the population
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including the nation’s capital, Georgetown, and agricultural areas that account for approximately 27
                         percent of the nation’s GDP.

                         In addition to hosting the majority of the population and providing land for most of the country’s
                         agricultural activities, these areas are flood-prone, making the national economy susceptible to the
                         impacts of the country’s high seasonal rainfall and storm events. In January 2005 extreme rainfall
                         caused widespread flooding in the coastal lowlands resulting in an estimated US$465 million in
                         damages, which amounted to 59% of Guyana’s GDP at the time. Other more recent severe rainfall
                         events (e.g. February 2006, December 2008; January 2009; February 2011; January 2012) have
                         caused economic and livelihood loss, which further highlighted the importance of reducing Guyana’s
                         vulnerability to flooding to foster shared prosperity as an engine for equitable economic growth, job
                         creation and poverty reduction.

                         The Project provides investments and institutional strengthening to reduce the risk of flooding. It is
                         composed of 3 components: 1. Priority Works for Flood Risk Reduction; 2. Institutional
                         Strengthening for Flood Risk Reduction; and 3. Project Management.

                         Component 1: Priority Works for Flood Risk Reduction (USD 10.4 million). This component will
                         include works and equipment for upgrading and reconstruction of critical parts of the EDWC dam
                         and improving the east coast drainage system. The component will also finance construction
                         supervision and quality assurance for all works. The dam upgrading will include re-enforcing and
                         upgrading critical sections of the northeast EDWC dam through purchase of heavy machinery
                         (excavators) to upgrade and maintain the dam; and contracting of works for upgrading the critical
                         portions of the dam. Investment in the east coast drainage area will focus on improvements in one or
                         more of the 6 priority drainage areas (the identified drainage areas include: Liliendaal; Montrose-
                         Sparendaam; Mon Repos-Annandale; Strathspey Enterprise Paradise; and Beehive Clonbrook all of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which are located east of Georgetown along the coast). A set of priority investments in those areas
                         has been identified under the CAP and includes works and equipment to improve pumping capacity,
                         upgrading and constructing culverts, widening and upgrading channels and separating urban and
                         agricultural drainage systems. During implementation, the specific interventions to be implemented
                         under this Project will be identified by the Bank and GoG from this priority list and in the context of
                         the GoG’s strategic planning process being finalized through the Master Plan for Drainage and
                         Irrigation.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (USD 0.3 million) This component will support MoA in
                         the execution of their responsibilities under the project. In particular it will finance institutional
                         strengthening to improve EDWC dam maintenance and management, including updating operation
                         and maintenance procedures; improving instrumentation for surveillance and forecasting; and
                         developing emergency preparedness procedures. It will also provide training and technical support to
                         flood modelling and support project communication and dissemination activities.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support (USD 1.2 million IDA) This
                         component will finance the provision of support to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the
                         Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU), including hiring of specialized staff; preparation of
                         designs and tender documents; monitoring and evaluation; contract supervision; reporting and
                         auditing; environmental and social safeguards and training.

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guyana’s Region 4 (see Project Map) is an area of 1,843 square kilometers (711 square miles) with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         its population living predominantly on coastal reclaimed lands that are bound to the north by the
                         Atlantic Ocean, to the west by the Demerara River and to the east by the Mahaica River and Region
                         5. The reclaimed lands are supported by a flood protection system that consists of a seawall along the
                         Atlantic Ocean that prevents the sea from inundating the area, and an inland water reservoir that is
                         dammed on three sides. The dam parallels the Mahaica River, the Atlantic Ocean and the Demerara
                         River and prevents storm water from the inland area from entering the reclaimed coastal land. The
                         reservoir - referred to as the East Demerara Water Conservancy (EDWC) - is a large, shallow water
                         storage system with a catchment area of 571 square kilometers (220 square miles). In addition to
                         flood control, the EDWC provides agricultural lands (rice and sugar production especially) and urban
                         areas with irrigation and drinking water.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                         M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Project is a category B - Partial Assessment -
                          BP 4.01                                            assigned to projects that are likely to have
                                                                             localized, limited and reversible environmental
                                                                             impacts. Overall the Project will have a largely
                                                                             positive social and environmental (health and
                                                                             safety) impact through its role in reducing
                                                                             vulnerability to flooding.

                                                                             Physical interventions resulting from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             implementation of investments could have low to
                                                                             moderate negative environmental impacts. The
                                                                             most significant impacts will result from the
                                                                             construction and rehabilitation works (back-
                                                                             filling, excavation, earth-moving, dredging).
                                                                             Impacts to the biophysical and socio-economic
                                                                             environments are expected to be limited in nature,
                                                                             as much of the EDWC Dam and Drainage
                                                                             System, and the east coast drainage system are
                                                                             located in areas that have been subjected to
                                                                             significant human interventions. Nevertheless,
                                                                             care will be taken to schedule civil works to avoid
                                                                             key breeding and nesting periods. All
                                                                             construction sites and embankments will be
                                                                             rehabilitated and re-vegetated with native shrubs
                                                                             and trees after works are completed.

                                                                             Given that the project may affect roads and
                                                                             bridges, road safety measures and traffic



                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                                                     diversion plans will be adopted, and any
                                                                     construction waste will be disposed of
                                                                     appropriately
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Given that the specific nature and location of all
                                                                     components is not going to be definitively
                                                                     determined prior to appraisal, a framework
                                                                     approach has been adopted. An Environmental
                                                                     and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has
                                                                     been prepared, which includes an environmental
                                                                     baseline, a screening process for further
                                                                     investments, and proposed mitigation measures.
                                                                     An EA for the first year’s investments (the
                                                                     rehabilitation of the EDWC dam) was completed
                                                                     and was disclosed on March 18, 2014. The ESMF
                                                                     has consulted on, and disclosed prior to project
                                                                     appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Appropriate mitigation measures will be followed
                                                                     to limit the impact on local fauna, and avi-fauna
                                                                     to protect indigenous plant and tree species, and
                                                                     preserve the Demerara and Mahaica riverine
                                                                     ecosystems. Although the EDWC is a man-made
                                                                     structure, is not a Protected Area, nor a critical
                                                                     natural habitat, it serves as habitat to caiman,
                                                                     giant otters, and bats. Numerous species of birds
                                                                     also nest in or migrate through the EDWC,
                                                                     including Muscovy Ducks, Blue-winged Teal,
                                                                     Pied-billed Grebes, Cormorants, Stripe-backed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Bitterns, Egrets, Vultures, Snail Kites, and Great
                                                                     Kiskadees. Nevertheless, given the vast area of
                                                                     the uninhabited EDWC, the localized and short –
                                                                     term works proposed will not significantly affect
                                                                     fauna and avi-fauna, as there is adequate refuge
                                                                     for these species away from project works.
                                                                     Moreover, the proposed project will not result in
                                                                     significant degradation or conversion of natural
                                                                     habitats, given that the works are limited to
                                                                     upgrading and rehabilitation of existing
                                                                     structures. Care will be taken to schedule civil
                                                                     works to avoid key breeding and nesting periods.
                                                                     All construction sites and embankments will be
                                                                     rehabilitated and re-vegetated with native shrubs
                                                                     and trees after works are completed.
                                                                     The Guyana Amazon Tropical Birds Society and
                                                                     the Environmental Protection Agency confirmed
                                                                     during preparation that, in their opinion, the
                                                                     EDWC has been sustainably managed.



                                                             Page 4 of 10
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            It is not expected that Project investments would
                                                                         affect the management of forests, the use of
                                                                         forests for livelihoods or would support
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         investments such as plantations or other industrial
                                                                         uses. As such, OP/BP 4.36 will not be triggered.
                                                                         The ESMF will explicitly forbid any project
                                                                         activities that would lead to the destruction,
                                                                         degradation or conversion of forests and key
                                                                         forest ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The Project will not finance any activities that
                                                                         would result in procurement or significant use of
                                                                         pesticides. All vegetation clearing activities will
                                                                         be undertaken manually or mechanically.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project is not expected to have negative
                         BP 4.11                                         impacts on cultural property. However, “chance
                                                                         finds” during implementation of activities could
                                                                         be possible. Chance finds procedures will be
                                                                         incorporated into EMPs and construction
                                                                         contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10) is
                                                                         not triggered by this project. The Project will be
                                                                         implemented along the Coastal zone of Region 4
                                                                         and the majority of the country’s Amerindian
                                                                         population resides in the Hinterland Regions.
                                                                         There is one Amerindian community, St.
                                                                         Cuthbert’s mission, located upstream of the Lama
                                                                         and Maduni Sluices along the Mahaica River.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         However this community is distant from the
                                                                         project areas and no works will be undertaken
                                                                         near this community and no impacts are expected.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Given the potential for land acquisition
                         4.12                                            (temporary and permanent) as well as impacts on
                                                                         assets, for works of this nature, the Involuntary
                                                                         Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been
                                                                         triggered.

                                                                         A Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) has been
                                                                         prepared to allow application of the OP 4.12
                                                                         policy requirements. The RPF clarifies
                                                                         resettlement objectives and principles,
                                                                         organizational arrangements and funding
                                                                         mechanisms for any resettlement activity that
                                                                         may be necessary during project implementation.

                                                                         Any impacts are likely to be limited and sub-
                                                                         project level Resettlement Plans will be



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                   developed and disclosed prior to sub-project
                                                                   financing. The RPF was disclosed on March 18,
                                                                   2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes           OP/BP 4.37 – Safety of Dams is triggered by the
                                                                   project. The embankment dams for the EDWC
                                                                   are all significantly less than 10 meters in height,
                                                                   however, because the EDWC has an extensive
                                                                   surface area; provides water and protects a
                                                                   significant population from flooding; is adjacent
                                                                   to natural habitats along the adjoining rivers; and
                                                                   there is a risk of significant adverse impacts due
                                                                   to potential failure of the dam on local
                                                                   communities and assets, the policy was triggered
                                                                   under the project.
                                                                   An evaluation of the EDWC dams was
                                                                   undertaken covering the safety status,
                                                                   performance history and operation and
                                                                   maintenance procedures. Necessary remedial
                                                                   work and safety-related measures were identified
                                                                   in order to upgrade the safety status of the dam
                                                                   including immediate priority works on the
                                                                   northeast dam for which the Project will be
                                                                   providing financing.
                                                                   The task team has agreed on appropriate safety
                                                                   measures with the Borrower. The works will be
                                                                   undertaken by qualified engineers with
                                                                   experience in these types of works and the
                                                                   construction quality, cost and time control will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   supervised by qualified engineers.

                                                                   In order to ensure the works quality of the
                                                                   rehabilitation of the EDWC northeast dam and
                                                                   sustainability of all EDWC dams, the following
                                                                   plans will be prepared/improved and/or
                                                                   implemented: (a) a Plan for construction
                                                                   supervision and quality assurance will be
                                                                   prepared as part of the specifications for bidding
                                                                   of the construction and the supervision of the dam
                                                                   works and will be ready before construction
                                                                   starts; (b) an Operation, Maintenance and
                                                                   Surveillance (OMS) Plan exists and will be
                                                                   refined and updated before bidding of the works;
                                                                   (c) an Instrumentation Plan will be elaborated
                                                                   before bidding of the works and included as part
                                                                   of the construction technical specifications; and
                                                                   (d) an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) will
                                                                   be developed during Project implementation.



                                                           Page 6 of 10
                            Projects on International           No              Both the Demerara and Mahaica rivers originate
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                in Guyana, and a third canal drains directly into
                                                                                the Atlantic Ocean, so OP 7.50, Projects on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                International Waterways, is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts associated
                              with the proposed project works. The Project will have a largely positive social and environmental
                              (health and safety) impact. Benefits that will accrue from the flood risk reduction investments
                              include: reduced risk of flood damage to infrastructure, agricultural land, residential and
                              commercial property; and reduced mortality and morbidity arising from flooding.

                             Although the EDWC is a man-made structure, it serves as a habitat to caiman, giant otters, and
                             bats and numerous species of birds nest in or migrate through the EDWC, including Muscovy
                             Ducks, Blue-winged Teal, Pied-billed Grebes, Cormorants, Stripe-backed Bitterns, Egrets,
                             Vultures, Snail Kites, and Great Kiskadees. Given the vast uninhabited area of the EDWC, the
                             localized and short – term works proposed will not significantly affect fauna and avi-fauna, as
                             there are areas away from the project works that provide refuge to these species. Moreover, the
                             proposed project will not result in significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats, given
                             that the works are limited to the upgrading and rehabilitation of existing structures. Care will be
                             taken to schedule civil works to avoid key breeding and nesting periods. All construction sites will
                             be rehabilitated and re-vegetated with native shrubs and trees. Re-vegetation will be undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                             along embankments and contiguous areas after works are completed.

                              Temporary or permanent land acquisition is a possibility and impacts will be mitigated in
                              accordance with the project’s Resettlement Policy Framework.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no long term indirect impacts as a result of this project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Given the importance of the EDWC in flood vulnerability reduction, there are no appropriate
                              project alternatives.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Given that the specific nature and location of all components is not going to be determined prior to
                              appraisal, a framework approach has been adopted. An Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework (ESMF) has been prepared as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The
                              former includes an environmental baseline, a screening process for further investments, and
                              proposed mitigation measures. An EA and EMP has been prepared for the first year’s investments


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           (EDWC dam rehabilitation) and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                           As subprojects are finalized, the following process will be undertaken: For each of the subprojects,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           screening will be undertaken based on an analysis of impacts, World Bank safeguards policies and
                           Guyana National Legislation. On that basis requirements for an Environmental Impact Assessment
                           (EIA) and/or an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                           will be identified. After screening of the subproject, the EMP, EIA and/or RAP will be prepared in
                           order to analyze and develop mitigation measures for any impacts identified. In addition to the
                           issuance of the environmental permit by the EPA, the ASDU will be in charge of assessing
                           whether the draft E IA/EMP responds adequately to the requirements of this framework. The
                           World Bank will undertake review of the implementation of the framework including the quality
                           of the EMPs as part of the regular supervision. The applicable mitigation measures identified in
                           the EIAs/EMP(s) will be incorporated into the bidding and contract documents. ASDU and the
                           contracted construction supervisor will supervise the implementation of the provisions related to
                           the mitigation measures. RAPs will be implemented by the MoA. Projects will commence works
                           only after sub-project RAPs have been cleared by the Bank and compensation has been paid.

                           Management and/or mitigation of the potential environmental and social impacts will be
                           implemented by contractors and monitored by ASDU. Technical staff from the NDIA and ASDU
                           will be assigned to the Project to oversee the implementation of the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework and to supervise activities carried out during preparation and implementation of the
                           civil works.

                           Capacity to prepare safeguards documentation and adequately report on safeguards
                           implementation is acknowledged to be limited. However, surveys of ongoing works during
                           preparation indicated that appropriate environmental mitigation measures are largely followed.
                           The Guyana Amazon Tropical Birds Society and the Environmental Protection Agency also
                           confirmed during preparation that, in their opinion, the Conservancy Dam has been sustainably
                           managed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the residential, commercial, and industrial communities in the vicinity of
                           the drainage systems; local environmental NGOs such as Conservation International and the
                           Tropical Birds Society; the Environmental Protection Agency; and relevant line ministries.
                           Consultations on the ESMF were held with concerned stakeholders on March 7th, 2014. Minutes
                           of these consultations are incorporated into the ESMF, along with any suggested revisions to the
                           ESMF, as appropriate. Thereafter, the ESMF was disclosed in the Infoshop and on the Ministry of
                           Agriculture’s website prior to the start of appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      18-Mar-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guyana                                                           31-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guyana                                                           25-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:      Name: John Morton
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (SM)                  Date: 10-Apr-2014




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
