                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8876

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Iraq                             Project ID:      P150441
                            Project Name:       IQ - Railway Safety Improvement Project (P150441)
                            Task Team           Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Apr-2015                      Estimated        28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSTI                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Railways (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Trade facilitation and market access (60%), Regional integration (20%), Export
                                                development and competitiveness (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                      Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         200.00
                              Total                                                                         200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To improve the safety, capacity and reliability for passengers and freight on the railway line between
                           Um Qasr seaport and Baghdad.
                           C. Project Description
                           The World Bank’s support will focus on institutional development and safety improvement. The
                           reform TA component of this proposed project will introduce IRR and Ministry of Transport
                         officials, who have been relatively isolated due to the war and embargo imposedby the international
                         community, to the reform options available to support efficient and market oriented transport service
                         provision including a program for the revitalization of the railway system. The investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component, on the other hand, will address a technically complex and critical safety gap—signaling
                         —on the South Line between Baghdad and Basra, and combine it with an overall program of safety
                         improvement measures especially as the railway increases traffic volumes and speeds.

                         The proposed activities to be financed under the project are:

                         Component 1: Railway Modernization and Revitalization
                         Technical assistance to support modernization of the IRR to become more efficient and cost effective
                         in planning and operating the railway. This would include: a) TA to expose IRR to new technology
                         on signaling and communication; b) TA to support the establishment of a Management Information
                         System (MIS) to improve train and freight operations; and maintenance of infrastructure and rolling
                         stock, and to strengthen financial management; c) TA to review the operating rules and procedures
                         and recommendations for improvement; d) explore options for private sector participation in the
                         railway sector; and e) TA to support location selection, associated land acquisition and design of
                         grade separated railway crossings to maximize impact on safety for both road and rail users.

                         Component 2: South Line Infrastructure Development
                         Investment in a modern, robust signaling system for the railway line from Baghdad to Um Qasr. This
                         would include the supply and installation of equipment for central dispatching, communications to
                         locomotives/drivers, communications to stations staff, control of point machines that operate
                         switches, protection of level crossings, and the systems that integrate and operate equipment. It
                         would also include training of IRR locomotive staff, maintenance staff, station staff and train control
                         staff to operate and maintain the new system.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance in Citizen Engagement, Safety and Logistics Programs
                         Technical assistance and investment towards supporting a system which ensures that service delivery
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is directly responsive to the needs of its users (i.e, citizens). The project will therefore: a) develop
                         and operate a Citizens’ Railway Reporting System to ensure user feedback on service delivery
                         performance; b) develop a comprehensive safety program for the proposed line. This component
                         includes the following sub components: (i) Training to ensure the IRR has the human resources
                         (skills and organization) necessary to maintain international levels of safety standards; (ii)
                         Development of an emergency response plan and capabilities to avert as well as to manage risks
                         related to accidents, among other catastrophes; and (iii) Safety awareness campaigns for resident
                         (especially children) alongside the railway related to dangers and hazards of railway crossing and
                         related issues; and c) develop IRR’s ability to attract freight traffic to the railway. This program
                         would, inter alia, include: (i) Study of logistics opportunities for IRR; (ii) develop a transport
                         logistics platform to enhance road/rail linkages and provide improved logistics for oil, agricultural
                         products and containers; and (iii) pilot upgrading of at least one railway terminal facility.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location will be in Southern Iraq and that cover the railway track between Baghdad and
                         Basra. The environmental and social impacts based on this location will be subject to a detailed
                         assessment by the Feasibility and Environmental and Social Impact Studies that will be prepared for
                         this project
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Iraqi Republic Railway Company have limited knowledge and experience related to the World
                           Bank Safeguards Policies therefore the Bank is anticipating the need to build in substantial capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                           building in environmental and social safeguards, including specifically, on what are the Bank’s
                           requirements; what is the nature of Environment and Social risk under this project as well as what are
                           some international best practices to manage these. The client is expected to comply with Bank
                           safeguards policies, guidelines and processes. The designated Bank safeguards specialists will work
                           with Government partners to ensure that safeguards deliverables are met. The Government team will
                           also benefit from continuous support and guidance from Bank’s safeguards specialists during project
                           preparation and implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nina Bhatt (MNSSU)
                           Dariusz Kobus (MNSTI)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
                           Anil S.V. Das (MNSSU)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              While the Bank’s support is not expected to
                           BP 4.01                                              incur environmental issues, the Governorate’s
                                                                                activities related to constructing grade separated
                                                                                railway crossings which are considered as
                                                                                “Associated Facilities” may have an impact on
                                                                                the environment. This policy is triggered due to
                                                                                the minor civil works associated with pilot
                                                                                upgrading of at least one railway terminal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                facility, the railway crossing, installation of
                                                                                equipment for central dispatching, and
                                                                                installation of railway signaling. An
                                                                                Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                                (ESMP) will be prepared, reviewed, approved
                                                                                and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop
                                                                                prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               This policy is not triggered, as existing railway
                                                                                does not pass through critical or non-critical
                                                                                habitats. Besides, the nature of works is
                                                                                confined to improving safety through installing
                                                                                signaling and communication system on the
                                                                                existing railway tracks.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               This project does not pass through any forested
                                                                                areas.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               Use of pesticides is not envisaged in this project.

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     TBD              While it is not anticipated that physical cultural
                           BP 4.11                                              resources impacts will accrue under this project,
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.11 is marked as "TBD" pending further
                                                                                                                                 data confirmation including from the
                                                                                                                                 archaeological entities. The project will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 a chance find clause as part of the ESMP annex
                                                                                                                                 which will establish the protocol to follow in the
                                                                                                                                 event of a chance find as per OP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered as per Regional
                                                                                                                                 practice.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           While the proposed project is not expected to
                                 4.12                                                                                            incur major adverse social impacts, OP 4.12 is
                                                                                                                                 triggered to mitigate small-scale impacts that
                                                                                                                                 may arise associated with the presence of
                                                                                                                                 encroachers and/or minor land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 associated with the grade separated railway
                                                                                                                                 crossings (associated facilities). These issues
                                                                                                                                 will be investigated and appropriate safeguards
                                                                                                                                 instruments will be developed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The OP/BP 4.37 on dam safety is not triggered.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             This project does not trigger this policy.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP/BP 7.60 is not triggered as there no known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputes over the project area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Launch preparation of Safeguards Documents August 30, 2014 with completion by March 25,
                                      2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Takeaki Sato (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 27-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                                                                                          Date: 30-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
