                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/26/2013                                    Report No.: AC7052
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P105024                  Original Project Name: Social Protection
                                              Project
Country: Jamaica                              Project ID: P146606
Project Name: JM (AF) Social Protection
Task Team Leader: Francesca Lamanna
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 27,        Estimated Board Date: February 11, 2014
2013
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                     Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Other social services (80%);Central government administration
(10%);Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance (10%)
Theme: Social safety nets (50%);Improving labor markets (25%);Social risk mitigation
(25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            40
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project will support Jamaica in further strengthening its social protection system.

3. Project Description
The Additional Financing would finance a scaling up of the original Project activities.

 Component 1. Improving effectiveness of the PATH: This component will continue to
support the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Program PATH through: (i) financing
eligible government spending on PATH grants; and (ii) financing the institutional
strengthening of the PATH program itself. Specifically, support to the PATH will
include:

 Sub-component 1.a. Conditional Cash Transfers: Under this sub-component, the
additional financing will finance eligible government spending on PATH grants.
 Sub-component 1.b. Institutional Strengthening of PATH: This sub-component will
continue supporting activities in three core areas: (i) strengthening and improving
administrative systems for efficient delivery of PATH benefits; (ii) improving
accountability, monitoring, and evaluation of the PATH; and (iii) strengthening the
capacity of the MLSS to implement the PATH and the graduation strategy. All the
activities under this sub-component will be implemented through the provision of
consultant services, training, goods, and operating costs.

 Component 2. Improving effectiveness and scale up Steps-to-Work Program: This
component will continue to finance strengthening of the capacity to implement the Steps-
to-Work (StW) program. Specifically, it will directly finance provision of tailored
services to PATH households' members to facilitate sustainable human capital
development and their graduation from PATH. This will be done via public-private
partnerships, and the development and operationalization of a well-functioning
monitoring and evaluation system for the program. More specifically, this component
will support: (i) Provision of services such as job readiness and skills training, education
completion at the secondary level, job placement services, entrepreneurial training and
support, and stipends to trainees; (ii) Strengthening of capacity for implementing StW at
central and Parish levels, including: improving StW design, systems, procedures and
tools to provide adequate services to beneficiaries, recruitment and training of personnel
to coordinate the provision of services and provide personalized coaching to
beneficiaries; (iii) Strengthening the StW Monitoring and Evaluation system, including
the design and development of a Management Information System (MIS) for StW which
would track the trajectories of each StW participant. All the activities under this
component will be implemented through the provision of consultant services, training,
goods, stipends, and operating costs.

  Component 3. Supporting implementation and operationalization of the Public Sector
Pension Reform: This component will finance activities to support the implementation
and operationalization of the pension reform for public sector employees. Specifically, it
will support: (i) Carrying out a public information campaign for public sector workers to
inform them of the changes introduced in the public sector pension system; (ii) Providing
technical advisory services to support the implementation of reform measures contained
in the White Paper; (iii) Capacity Building of the Pensions Administration Unit in the use
of the earning database to capture and record contribution and earning information of
public employees; (iv) Setting up of the Pensions Policy Unit to monitor the effective
implementation of pension reforms and consolidate analysis and policy of private and
public sector employer- provided pension systems; and (v) Purchasing of equipment for
the Human Resource Unit for ministries, departments and agencies to support the pension
administration. All the activities under this component will be implemented through the
provision of consultant services, training, and goods.

 Component 4. Operational Support to the Implementation of the Social Protection
Strategy: This component's focus will be to support the operationalization of the Social
Protection (SP) Strategy. The following activities will be financed under the AF: (i)
Dissemination of the strategy to various audiences; (ii) Institutional Capacity Building in
key agencies; (iii) Policy Development and formulation in key areas; (iv) Research and
diagnostic work on relevant priority areas, including but not limited to poverty and
unemployment insurance; and (v) Developing a monitoring and evaluation system for the
implementation of the social protection strategy. All the activities under this component
will be implemented through the provision of consultant services, training, and goods.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
National scope.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
None of the safeguards policies are triggered by the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Francesca Lamanna
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Mansoora Rashid
  Comments:
