INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:    20-Nov-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:                 Jamaica          Project ID:           P151302
Project Name:            Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector
of Jamaica (P151302)
Task Team Leader:        Enos E. Esikuri
Estimated Board Date:    19-Jan-2016
Managing Unit:           GENDR
Sector(s):               General agriculture, fishing and forestry (100%)
Theme(s):                Climate change, Other environment and natural resources management,
Environmental policies and institutions
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00  No
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   4.875                Total Bank Financing:  0.00
Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                 4.875
WBG Technical Assistance
Total                                                                        4.875
Environmental Category: B
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this a Transferred    No
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance community-based climate resilience among
targeted fishing communities of Jamaica. This would be achieved by investing in (i) strengthening the
fisheries policy and regulatory framework including making it climate-smart, (ii) diversification and
viable alternative livelihoods that enhance sustainable fisheries, and (iii) capacity building and


﻿awareness raising among the fishing and fish farming communities. These measures would be
implemented in a participatory approach with the targeted fisheries communities. While national and
international best practices will inform the design and implementation of the supported activities, the
use of local knowledge will be crucial to the success of the Project.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening the Fisheries Policy and Regulatory Framework (US$1 million). An
updated and strengthened policy is critical for ensuring a sustainable and climate resilient Jamaican
fishing industry. This component would support updating the regulatory framework for the
management of the fisheries sector, including restoration of resources in overfished areas through
community based measures, and carrying out community-based monitoring, control and surveillance
actions to limit illegal activities. Furthermore, Jamaica's Strategic Programs for Climate Resilience
(SPCR) notes that livelihoods in the agriculture and fisheries sector are the most vulnerable to climate
related disasters, and this partially explains the chronic levels of poverty observed in fisheries
communities. Indeed the decline in the performance of the fisheries sector is directly related to the
sector's vulnerability to climate-related disasters coupled with unsustainable practices. This highlights
the importance of integration of climate change resilience measures in fisheries management. This
component would support measures, including consultations, to incorporate climate change resilience
considerations into Jamaica's fisheries policy and regulatory framework in line with the measures
identified in the SPCR.
Component 2: Diversification, Alternative Livelihoods and Aquaculture for Sustainable
Fisheries (US$3 million). This component would support viable alternative livelihoods for the
targeted fishing communities. The depletion of near-shore fish stocks has led to more stringent
regulation. But given the high degree of pressure from artisanal fishers, measures to limit further entry
of artisanal fishers into the industry and to encourage exit are necessary with appropriate incentives
including provision of alternative livelihoods. The depletion of domestic fish stocks has the
consequence of increased dependence on imported food fish, unless the food fish deficits can be
significantly reduced, if not eliminated, by corresponding increases in aquaculture products. The
proposed activities are:
Sub-component 2.1 Conintunity-basedAquaculture: Given concerns about declining fish stocks and
the rising demand for fish and fish products in the domestic market as well as globally, aquaculture is
seen as a key component in the development and management of fisheries resources and an important
climate resilience measure. The Project would facilitate the development and management of
responsible aquaculture based on the best available scientific information, specifically through support
for establishing a fish farm cluster in select communities, training and technical inputs (e.g.,
fingerlings) and partnering with aquaculture/processing enterprises to contract the new fish farmers
and provide technical inputs and farming materials. The Project will support suitable activities in
selected areas (e.g., South coast) to promote this model. In addition, the Project would support fisher
folk, women and youth in targeted fisheries communities to invest in the production, sale and export of
ornamental fish (i.e., ornamental fish development and expansion) to provide a ready opportunity for
high value employment and income-generation for Jamaican fishers.
Sub-component 2.2 Coastal Mariculture/Poly-culture: Support and training will be provided for
marine-based sustainable livelihoods activities, selected and validated by the participating
communities. With fish stocks being depleted, mariculture is not only an alternative means of
economic benefit for the communities but also a means of reducing pressure on the wild populations
and to fill the demand for these products, while keeping the communities' seafaring traditions alive.
The main thrust of this sub-component is poly-culture which is the growing of one or more species in
conjunction with the primary target species of cultivation on the same location in order to maximize


﻿returns and reduce risk. For example, seaweed (the primary species) would be grown in conjunction
with lobsters, sea cucumber, conch, and crab. Typical seaweeds harvested on the Jamaican coast offer
numerous commercial uses including local consumption as food and drink, production of carrageenan
for food ingredients, dietary supplement, fertilizer, bioplastics, dyes and colorants, pharmaceuticals,
and potentially biofuel. Seaweeds also help to reduce water pollution from farm waste and agriculture
run-off and wastewater by absorbing nutrients.
Sub-component 2.3 Artisanal Long Lines for Offshore Pelagics: The Project would support the
diversification of fishing effort with a pelagic fishery that is currently under-utilized. Targeted fishers
are primarily the north coast communities who would not otherwise look at alternatives outside of
fishing due to the strong cultural bond of many fishers to seafaring. This activity would involve strong
research, development and training components to ensure that any fishery established for offshore
pelagics would be done on a sustainable basis and in conformity with international best practices. This
would be modelled after similar small scale pelagic fishing activities in the Eastern Caribbean.
Component 3: Capacity Building and Awareness Raising (US$0.4 million). This component would
support the capacity building of the fishing cooperatives to provide commercial services to fishermen
as well as to serve as facilitators in the process of transitioning to alternative livelihoods. This would
include the improvement of the organizational capacity of cooperatives and civil society involved with
the artisanal fishers by enabling them to spearhead programs for upgrading of artisanal fisheries and
facilitating their transition into alternative activities. The proposed activities include:
Sub-component 3.1 Training: The Project would provide suitable skills-based training to facilitate
their transition to the new fishing zones or to alternative livelihoods. This training would also include
targeted community-to-community learning tours/visits and knowledge exchange in order to share best
practices.
Sub-component 3.2 Support to Fishers' Organizations: The formation and strengthening of
cooperatives and other types of associations of fisher folk would be supported. This would promote
empowerment of local fisher folk and effective implementation of climate-resilient fisheries activities
supported tinder the Project in a community-based manner by the fishing communities.
Sub-component 3.3 Awareness Building and Behavior Change: The Project would support
measures, including development of strategies, to increase public awareness and education about
capture and culture fisheries and related issues in order to increase public support and participation in
sustainable fisheries management policies. The transformation of the fisheries sector will require
significant behavior change.
Component 4: Project Management including Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$0.4
million): This component would support the Project management including implementation, M&E,
and fiduciary services. The M&E aspect would include targeted knowledge management activities
aimed at capturing and sharing overall lessons within Jamaica and across countries under the PPCR
Caribbean regional track. This would include tailored South-South learning and exchange visits.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Project activities will be country-wide, including inland areas for aquaculture (e.g. Spanish Town
west of Kingston where existing facilities are located) as well as coastal areas for a variety of
subprojects in and near fishing communities.
Upgrades to existing inland aquaculture facilities near Spanish Town will include improvements to
prevent river flooding. Changes in facility design will be evaluated to ensure sound environmental
management of wastewater discharges, to optimize water sourcing, to minimize potential release of


﻿cultured species, and to build in the international best environmental management practices for
aquaculture projects.
Coastal projects may affect a variety of environments and communities, including some with major
tourist developments, sensitive environments, and protected areas near the shoreline. There are several
Marine Parks in Jamaican waters and along the north coast (near Ocho Rios, Montego Bay, and Port
Antonio) and the west coast (at Negril), and projects on the south coast may affect the Protected Areas
of Portland Bight or the Palisadoes. Specific areas for intervention will be prioritized during project
preparation, and may include Portland Cottage and Alligator Pond on the south coast for aquaculture,
mariculture, or polyculture activities.
Protection of Jamaica's reef-related fisheries may yield associated benefits of ecosystem restoration
and preservation of high biodiversity critical natural habitats, as well as enhanced function of
ecosystem services such as coastal erosion protection and tourism value. Small patch reefs and
seagrass meadows occur along many of the island's coastlines and support local fishing activity, and
efforts will be explored to integrate the conservation of reefs and seagrass in concert with the project,
to generate additional project environmental benefits.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared to guide the evaluation and
screening of ecologic and economic aspects of projects in reefs and coastal areas, the challenges of
species selection and control of invasives, and the feasibility of artisanal long-line fishing
improvements. During project preparation, the TORs for the EMF will be developed to explore in
more detail the possible interventions and their environmental relevance in the Jamaican context.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Michael Darr, Environmental Consultant (GENDR)
Martin Lenihan, Social Specialist (GURDR)
6. Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01    Yes          An EMF will be developed and
incorporated into the Operations Manual
to lay out the framework for screening,
planning and management, to minimize
potential negative impacts and to
maximize environmental benefits. The
EMF will provide a preliminary
assessment of impacts, and will guide
any additional assessment needs once
specific projects are defined during
implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            Yes           The policy is triggered because
aquaculture or mariculture projects could
affect or alter sensitive coastal zones and
marine environments, via construction or
clearing, emissions of nutrients and
particulates, introduction of species, or
other impacts.


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36                     No           The project does not consider any
changes to forest management or any
works in forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                Yes           Pest management agents to control
disease and parasites pose a risk of
contamination and will be managed with
best international practice for
aquaculture activities.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No           Screening for presence of coastal or
submarine physical cultural resources
will be included in the EMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10          No            Jamaica is an ethnically diverse country
with people of Maroon, Indian and
Lebanese descent constituting important
minorities. However, there are no groups
present in Jamaica who display the four
characteristics of indigenous people as
defined by OP 4. 10. Therefore this
policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No            The project will not finance the
construction or installation of facilities in
locations that would require involuntary
resettlement or land acquisition, as
defined under OP 4.12. The EMF will
include sub-project screening measures
to ensure such impacts do not occur.
The strengthening of the legislative
framework anticipated under component
I involves the regulation of fisheries
resources on a national level to promote
their sustainability. The project will also
strengthen community-based monitoring,
control and surveillance actions to limit
illegal activities. These represent
community based natural resource
management activities, where the
beneficiary communities work
collectively to sustainably manage
access to fisheries. These
community-based measures will be
subject to an assessment of the adequacy
of the community based decision making
process, and measures necessary to
mitigate adverse impacts on vulnerable
community members (if any). As such,
the policy does not involve the
restriction of access to natural resources


﻿in parks or protected areas as defined
under OP 4.12, but rather national
legislative efforts and community based
measures for climate smart fisheries
management.
Given that the project will not involve
resettlement, land acquisition or
restriction of access to parks or protected
areas - the policy is not triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No           The project will not finance the
construction of new, or rehabilitation of
existing, dams. No project investments
will rely on the operation of existing
dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No        The project will not support activities
7.50                                                which affect international waterways as
defined under the policy. Therefore the
policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No           The project will not be implemented in
areas known to involve disputed areas as
defined in the policy. Therefore the
policy is not triggered.
Projects are not defined at the time of appraisal, so an EMF will be prepared with appropriate
screening, consultation, and environmental management actions to meet the environmental assessment
requirements ofOP4.01. Inadequate screening or poor management practices could result in impacts
to sensitive coastal or marine areas, contamination from nutrients and pest management agents, or
introduction of damaging species, thus triggering OP4.04 and P4.09. Physical cultural resources in
coastal and subaquatic areas are expected to be minimal, but a screening mechanism will be included
in the EMF to avoid any effects in accordance with OP4. 11. None of the other environmental
safeguard policies apply. The EMF will also provide criteria for additional assessment or impact
analysis related to introduced species, effects on coral reefs or seagrass, discharge of wastewater, or
management of pest or disease control agents, as required. Also, screening measures for potential
land acquisition and resettlement impacts will be included in the EMF, along with an assessment of
existing community based decision making mechanisms for fisheries management, potential adverse
impacts of improved community based management of fisheries on vulnerable community members,
and possible mitigation measures for these adverse impacts (if any).
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Aquaculture projects could affect sensitive riparian areas, coastal zones and marine environments, via
emissions of nutrients and particulates, introduction of species, and/or habitat alteration, and by poor
control of pest management agents to control disease and parasites; accordingly, best management


﻿practices will be defined in the EMF and required in project design. Better management of reefs and
seagrass beds could result in significant positive benefits which link to improved biodiversity, storm
protection, and erosion control. Changes in long-line fishing practice based on updated feasibility
studies may improve conditions for affected pelagic by avoiding overexploitation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Improvements in fishing management practices can strengthen the long-term sustainability of coastal
and marine resources, particularly opportunities for conservation or preservation of reefs and sea grass
beds, and feasibility studies to avoid overexploitation of pelagics.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Individual projects have yet to be defined, therefore screening and alternative evaluation will be
included in the EMF.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower will develop an EMF and include it in the Operations Manual to address the safeguards
issues. PIOJ has direct recent experience with development of EMFs for another PPCR project
(hydroneteorologic monitoring) as well as other World Bank projects, and understands the processes
involved with developing, disclosing and implementing the instruments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NGOs and workers in the protection of marine areas, artisanal fishermen, and other stakeholders will
be consulted by conducting workshops. Additional consultations on future projects will be called for
in the EMF,
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to Info Shop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Jamaica
Conuents:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ x ]  No [  I NA [  ]
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ I  No [   I NA [x]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes ( I  No [ I NA [x]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes I I  No [  I NA [ I
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public  Yes  I 1  No  I NA I I
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes  I 1  No [  I NA I I
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in  Yes t  ]  No  I I NA I  I
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include  Yes  I 1  No [ I NA I I
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with  Yes [ I  No  I I NA [ I
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:          Name: Enos E. Esikuri
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                            Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:  Name:                              Date:


