                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        Appraisal Stage
.
                                                                            Report No.: 83971
Date ISDS
                            December 10, 2013
Prepared/Updated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                  Hashemite          Project ID: P145241
                              Kingdom of
                              Jordan
    Project Name:             SUPPORT TO         BUILDING      ACTIVE      LABOR     MARKET
                              PROGRAM
    Task Team Leader:         Setareh Razmara (Lead Social Protection Specialist, MNSSP)
    Estimated Appraisal       April 12th, 2013   Estimated Board         N/A (to TF Steering
    Date:                                        Date: NA                Committee on April
                                                                         19th, 2013)
    Managing Unit:            MNSSP              Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                     Financing
    Sector:                   Social Protection (70%); Vocational Training (30%)
    Theme:                    Social Protection and Risks
    Financing (in USD Million)
      Financing Source                                                                 Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   1.20
      International Development Association (IDA)                                          0.00
    Other (MENA Transition Fund)                                                           4.75
      Total                                                                                5.95
    Environmental             C
    Category
    Is this a Repeater        No
    project?
.
    B. Project Objectives

    1. This ISDS has been updated based on the agreements reached during Negotiations in
    November 11, 2013. The overall objective is to pilot selected labor market interventions, to
    learn about their effectiveness towards building a coherent active labor market system and to
    improve job readiness and job placement opportunities for unemployed men and women
    graduates. The project development objective is to increase access to career guidance,
    job search, and on the job training among targeted youth.

    C. Project Description

    The proposed project responds to the Government’s request for World Bank support in
    supporting implementation key aspects of the Jordan Jobs Compact initiative (JJC)
    which is a multi-pillar active labor market program (ALMP) of the National
    Employment Strategy Action Plan.

    2. The MOL will be responsible for the overall coordination and management of the
    project under the strategic and policy guidance of the E-TVET Council and in close
    coordination with KAFD. The Project Operations Manual (POM) will provide details on
    implementation of all project components. The POM is expected to be ready no later than
    three months after effectiveness.


                        Component 1: School to Work Program (STW) (US$730,000): This
                         component will provide “school to work” transition support for two groups
                         between ages 19-25: (i) students during their final year university through
                         counseling centers; and (ii) unemployed youth through the Ministry of Labor
                         (MOL) employment offices. MOL has developed three sets of manuals for
                         career counseling and vocational planning for: community college graduates,
                         university graduates, and youth unemployed. Moreover, KAFD is currently
                         reviewing the counseling services of the 25 universities to assess their
                         strengths and weaknesses and plans to improve career counseling manuals for
                         university students. The project will support the implementation of these
                         manuals for these two target groups in four universities and six employment
                         offices in selected governorates1 by: i) hiring of the technical experts who will
                         assist in overall design, planning and quality assurance, provide training to
                         counselors, and oversee the delivery and coverage of career services in selected
                         universities and the employment offices; and ii) providing needed
                         refurbishment of university and employment offices including equipment and
                         software. It is estimated that during the project period approximately 10,000
                         youth (19-25 years of age) could benefit from the counseling in the selected
                         universities and employment offices in the governorates. The POM will
                         provide details on the implementation of this component, including the
                         selection criteria of universities and employment offices.

                        Component 2: Market Information and Job Search Program (MIJS)
                         (US$685,000): This component will facilitate job matching through improving

1
 It is planned that the Component A will be implemented in three Governorates. Thus the number of universities and EOs where the Manuals
will be implemented may vary accordingly.
              information available to both employers and prospective job seekers.
              Currently, several initiatives are being developed by several players and
              financed by various sources (MOL, ILO, IYF, Microsoft, EU, UNDP,
              NCHRD, E-TVET Fund). To ensure synergy and complementarity, KAFD is
              currently in charge of the coordination of the various initiatives. The project
              will support MOL to update and expand the Electronic Labor Exchange (ELE)
              by providing technical assistance for: i) capacity building of MOL staff for
              improving data collection and analysis for effective intermediation services; ii)
              building capacity for employment offices staff on facilitating job matching
              (including the use of the updated and expanded ELE); iii) developing
              interactive online career guidance, mentoring, vocational planning system; iv)
              a communication campaign to increase the awareness about the ELE for both
              jobseekers and employers; and, v) providing related IT hardware and software
              for the employment offices. The POM will provide details on the
              implementation of this component.

             Component 3: Job Readiness and Placement Program (JRPP)
              (US$2,867,970): This component will support graduates from universities and
              from community colleges in selected governorates (between ages 19-25) who
              have been unemployed for at least one year and following the eligibility
              criteria in the POM. It will provide the unemployed graduates a package of 75
              hours employability training and partial salary voucher/social security
              registration for one year. The salary vouchers and training compensation will
              be financed by the project and the training providers and social security
              contribution will be financed by the E-TVET Fund. This scheme will
              encourage private employers and job seekers to engage in on-the-job training
              to facilitate job placement. This pilot will target 1,200 unemployed graduate
              youth in the selected governorates based on the selection criteria as below. The
              POM will provide details on the design and implementation of this component.

             Component 4: Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and
              Management (US$467,030): This component will support (i) Monitoring
              and evaluation: The PMU will collect data on day to day project activities
              through agencies which are responsible for the different components (MOL,
              KAFD, E-TVET Fund), and responsible for conducting beneficiary assessment
              for career guidance programs and impact evaluation of the voucher program;
              (ii) Project Management: This sub-component will support day to day
              operational activities of the project in conformity with the Financing
              Agreement, project document and the Project Operation Manual (POM).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Project will be implemented across the Kingdom, with a breakdown as follows:

Under component 1, the school to work program will support the implementation of the career
counseling manuals in four universities and six employment offices in selected governorates.
    Under component 2, the project will support MOL to update and expand the Electronic Labor
    Exchange (ELE).

    Under component 3, the project will support graduates from universities and from community
    colleges in selected governorates (between ages 19-25) who have been unemployed for at
    least one year.
.
    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    The design, nature and scope of the project do not result in environmental or social safeguards
    issues and safeguards policies are not triggered as a result of project interventions.
.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Banu Setlur (MNSEN)
    Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (MNSSD)
.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                    Triggered     Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP            No
    4.01
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No
    Pest Management OP 4.09                   No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP         No
    4.11
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP            No        All the project 3 components will not
    4.12                                                finance activities that may involve civil
                                                        works, land acquisition or restriction of
                                                        access during the implementation.
                                                        Therefore OP 4,12 will not be triggered
                                                        and there is no need to prepare a social
                                                        safeguards documents.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No
    Projects on International                 No
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP          No
    7.60
.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.
    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        The PAD was finalized on November 22, 2013
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
       needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
       ISDS.
        Not applicable.
.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:             Name: Setareh Razmara
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards           Name: Maged M. Hamed                      Date:
    Coordinator:
    Sector Manager:               Name: Yasser El Gammal                    Date:
.
    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be
    disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible
    locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
