                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/03/2013                                      Report No.: 81664
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Jordan                               Project ID: P147689
Project Name: Jordan- Emergency Services and Social Resilience
Task Team Leader: Balakrishna Menon Parameswaran
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2013
Managing Unit: MNSSU                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: Solid waste management (30%);General transportation sector (20%);Sub-
national government administration (20%);Public administration- Other social services
(15%);Water supply (15%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%);Conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction (25%);Other social development (25%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       3.00
         MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                            40.00
         State and Peace Building Fund                                10.00
                                                                      53.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project is to help Jordanian municipalities and host
communities address the immediate service delivery impacts of Syrian refugee inflows
and strengthen municipal capacity to support local economic development.

3. Project Description
The proposed project will improve living conditions in select Jordanian cities and towns
highly affected by Syrian refugee inflows and promote broader crisis resilience through
three elements: support to participating municipalities to provide additional services
based on local needs, the strengthening of community resilience through local economic
development and community engagement, and the strengthening of institutional
resilience to crises through development of emergency response and disaster
preparedness plans at different levels of government. The project will initially support
nine municipalities most affected by Syrian refugee inflows. These municipalities will
receive multipronged support based on the extent of refugees accommodated. Based on
ground conditions and emerging needs, the project may include additional municipalities
or eliminate existing ones in the future. The project will be implemented over a period of
38 months. It will comprise two components: (i) Municipal Grants; and (ii) Institutional
Development and Project Management.

 Component 1: Municipal Grants.

  The project will provide financial support to participating municipalities through a
direct Municipal Grant based on the extent of Syrian refugees hosted. The grants will
allow municipalities to finance additional municipal services and programs to help reduce
communal tensions and enhance social cohesion. These services would include those that
are directly within the municipal competence (e.g., solid waste management (mainly
garbage compacting trucks), rehabilitation of existing roads, street lighting, pest control,
recreational facilities, local economic development and livelihoods, etc.), as well as
certain services that can be contracted out by municipalities to other service providers
(e.g., water, wastewater, sanitation, etc.). Grants will also allow municipalities to support
community development programs and services amongst vulnerable communities.
Finally, municipalities can also procure urgent and temporary human resources to ramp
up their capacities to deliver various services and programs. The Municipal Grants will
finance goods, works and services.

 The municipalities would employ a participatory model, leveraging existing platforms
supported by other donors and stakeholders, to include communities in the needs and
solutions identification, planning and accountability process in order to build strong local
ownership and thereby strengthen community resilience and social cohesion. The
prioritization of key investments will especially take into account needs of women, youth
and other targeted/vulnerable groups.

 Component 2: Institutional Development and Project Management.

 This component will provide technical assistance to participating municipalities in
utilizing the Municipal Grant effectively and efficiently to meet the urgent service
delivery, local economic development and livelihoods needs of host communities and
refugees, as well as project management support to the Ministry of Municipal Affairs
(MOMA), the Cities and Village Development Bank (CVDB) and other relevant central
and subnational agencies to coordinate, manage and oversee the project. The component
will also aim to enhance the institutional capacity of government (municipal,
governorate, and central) and communities to strengthen their resilience to external crises
and shocks by developing their capacity for emergency preparedness, and risk planning,
management and financing.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Irbid and Mafraq Governorates and selected municipalities within the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan. Additional locations may be considered.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Tracy Hart (MNSEE)
   Ms Nina Bhatt (MNSSD)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Sub-projects would be identified by municipalities in consultation with their communities
against a positive list of preapproved eligible expenditures. This positive list includes
services that are directly within the municipal competence (e.g., solid waste management,
rehabilitation of roads and minor infrastructure, street lighting, pest control, recreational
facilities, local economic development and livelihoods, etc.), as well as certain services
that can be contracted out by municipalities to other service providers (e.g., water,
wastewater, sanitation, etc.), while excluding activities that could potentially pose
negative social or environmental safeguard risks. Individual sub-projects will be
reviewed on the basis of specific screening criteria, including economic/financial, social
and environmental considerations. Typical investments would be in small civil works
sub-projects that would likely include improvements in basic municipal infrastructure and
services (e.g. solid waste equipment (garbage compacting trucks), water/wastewater
network rehabilitation/extension, storm water drainage systems, roads rehab/extension,
street lighting, retaining walls, etc.). Small to medium scale subprojects would be
financed only if the measures stipulated in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) are adopted. For projects with identified negative impacts, this may
require carrying out a sub-project level Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with a
focus on how negative impacts will be mitigated and through measures set. The
safeguards instruments, ESMF and RPF must be finalized, cleared and disclosed as a
condition of first disbursement of Component 1.

 The project anticipates only positive social impacts through community service delivery
and other services. No adverse impacts such as relocation of households; adverse
impacts on incomes/livelihoods/businesses; or any restriction of access to natural
resources are anticipated under this project. No permanent or temporary land acquisition
using the principle of eminent domain is expected under this project. Land requirements,
if any, are expected to be small scale in nature and subproject investments will be carried
out only on municipally owned land (or other government owned land). In addition to sub
project investments being carried out only on government land, the investments are
expected to be flexible thus their siting will be flexible. A Resettlement Policy
Framework is being prepared not in anticipation of land acquisition as a precautionary
measure in the unlikely situation that squatters and/or encumbrances are found on
government land used for the project. In such an event, Resettlement Action Plans will
be prepared to address any adverse impacts that may arise as per OP 4.12. A safeguards
capacity assessment of the counterpart has been carried out. The counterpart is familiar
with the provisions of the Bank's social safeguards policies due to their experience with
the Regional and Local Development Project (RLDP), and should any gap in capacity
become evident, this will be addressed through provision of additional staff with
appropriate skills and/or further training.

 In addition, the Bank supervision team will be responsible for monitoring potential
impacts on an ongoing basis. The Bank team would include an Environmental Specialist
and a Social Safeguards Specialist during supervision missions to ensure compliance with
the agreed screening mechanism, and to provide regular guidance and feedback to
counterparts on relevant safeguard provisions.

 Finally, a yearly audit, to include safeguards compliance, will review quality of sub-
project screening, quality of subproject EMPs, on-site safeguards compliance during
construction, and counterpart agency compliance with respect to monitoring.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The following are some of the anticipated impacts:
 * Worker health and safety;
 * Dust, noise and odor due to small-scale rehabilitation;
 * Risk for inadequate handling of waste material during construction and operation;
 * Disposal of construction wastes;
 * Pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic diversions and/or limited accessibility of public
spaces of short duration;
 * Water (wastewater, surface water discharge, storm water) during construction and
operation;
 * Remote potential of "chance finds" with respect to cultural heritage assets.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During initial project design, the project considered funding larger-scale municipal needs
involving expansion/rehabilitation of trunk infrastructure and/or networks. As bilateral
and multilateral partners are leading support in these areas, this project will only support
small-scale municipal service improvements (e.g. rehabilitation, expansion, and/or
limited new construction). This will enable more rapid funds disbursement due to a
lighter safeguards process.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The investments can be classified under category B in accordance with World Bank
Operational Policy 4.01 and requires the preparation and implementation of an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The EMPF and RPF will be
cleared and disclosed as a condition of first disbursement of Component 1 The EMP for
the Regional and Local Development Project, or RLDP, (P070958) was prepared by a
qualified international consulting firm recruited competitively by the Government per
Terms of Reference acceptable to IBRD and will be used as a basis for this emergency
project. The RLDP EMP provides a review and analysis of a sample sub-projects that are
supported by RLDP, and likely to be supported by the Jordan Emergency Services and
Social Resilience Project (JESSRP), and recommends appropriate mitigation measures
that MOPIC, MOMA and CVDB and municipalities will consider during
implementation. CVDB has been in operation for many years now providing financial
assistance to municipalities towards infrastructure development investments. The CVDB
team has the necessary professional and technical background, which has been
considerably strengthened during RLDP implementation. Capacity building during RLDP
included environmental and social training for municipal staff and contractors as per the
EMP. JESSRP safeguards management will gain from the safeguards modalities
established under the RLDP. The RLDP safeguards documentation includes baseline
reports for Northern municipalities, an environmental and social management framework,
a subproject screening checklist, a safeguards monitoring and evaluation framework, a
municipality "toolkit", and a social and environmental audit form for use as part of the
yearly subproject audits. The ESMF will update the RLDP documents with regards to
current capacities of the targeted governorates and municipalities as well as the addition
of any subproject category not included in the RLDP.

  As part of preparation, discussions on safeguards specifics were held with client
counterparts including discussions with MOMA technical staff responsible for
aggregating, tendering and procuring the same types of goods (e.g. solid waste equipment
for use for neighborhood collection, transportation to site, and within the landfills;
slaughterhouse equipment; and pesticides and related mobile sprayers used for pest
control). Discussions on the requirements of the Bank safeguard policies have been
carried out including on specifics regarding consultation and disclosure requirements, as
well as Government of Jordan parallel policies and procurement guidelines governing the
delivery of the ESMF and RPF. For social safeguards, a screening tool will be used to
ensure that only currently-owned public land devoid of squatters is to be used. The RPF
is being included in the project to ensure that if unexpected land-related issues arise
during implementation, there is a framework already in hand for managing these issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main beneficiaries are the communities in which the investments will be made and
the participating municipalities that would operate and manage them. The ESMF will
include capacity assessment of each of the selected municipalities to supervise and
monitor small-scale infrastructural works. This ESMF will include a stand-alone Pest
Management Plan (PMP). The ESMF and RPF will be carried out by an independent
consultant/consulting firm and will include a well-designed consultation process with
stakeholders and sample beneficiaries. An Executive Summary of the ESMF and the
RPF, in English and in Arabic, will include an accounting of the capacity assessment and
consultation processes and will be posted on the websites of MOPIC, MOMA and
CVDB.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This project is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10.00, therefore the safeguards
instruments ESMF and RPF will be prepared, cleared and disclosed prior to disbursement
of Component 1.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   No
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             No
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Balakrishna Menon Parameswaran              10/03/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tracy Hart                                  10/03/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Nina Bhatt                                  10/03/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                        10/03/2013
  Comments: Cleared, pending adding the names of the environmental and social safeguards team
  members as this information is missing.

  Maged

Sector Manager:                  Mr Franck Bousquet                                10/03/2013
  Comments: cleared as RSA's comments have been integrated by the team safeguards specialists
  _______________________
  Franck Bousquet
