                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/26/2014                                    Report No.: 91024
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kiribati                                Project ID: P144099
                                                 Parent Project ID: P122151
Project Name: Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2014 Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2014
Managing Unit: EASNS                             Lending Instrument:
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (75%);Other public sector governance
(10%);Other urban development (10%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (5%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                          15.46
         Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                6.40
                                                                           21.86
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                       Yes [ ]   No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is "The project will improve the condition of South
Tarawa's main road network and help strengthen road financing and maintenance
capacity."

3. Project Description
Component A: Civil Works - This component consists of the main civil works activities
to be undertaken on the South Tarawa road infrastructure. The activities include:

  •      Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Paved Roads on South Tarawa. The road
from the Betio Toll booth to the junction with the Ananau Causeway (22.4 km), the
Ananau Causeway to just past the airport terminal (2.2 km), the road from the Ananau
Causeway junction towards Temaiku (2.2 km) and then to the south of the airport where
it will reconnect with the Ananau Causeway road (3.9 km), and the road from Tanaea to
the north of Buota island (2.0 km) will be reconstructed or rehabilitated with safety
improvements. 8 km of water main adjacent to the road will be replaced.
 •      Rehabilitation of Betio Causeway. The pavement and revetment structure of the
approximately 3.2 km long causeway will be repaired, as well as repairs to the bridge
deck.
 •      Rehabilitation of Paved Roads in Betio and Bairiki. Repairs to localized pavement
failures and drainage improvements in Betio.
 •      Sealing of Feeder Roads. 8 km of unsealed urban feeder roads with high traffic
volumes will be sealed and provided with improved drainage. The roads were identified
in consultation with the New Zealand Aid Programme (NZAP) financed STP.
 •      Road Safety Improvements. Improvements including solar street lighting, road
signage and pavement markings to address road safety issues on paved roads not included
in the main civil works packages.
 •      Consulting Services. For the design and supervision of civil works.

 Component B: Road Sector Reform - Activities to strengthen the road sector and
ultimately lead to more sustainable main road infrastructure in South Tarawa:

  •      Micro-Enterprises for Routine Road Maintenance. Provision of assistance in the
form of (i) training, (ii) procurement of basic plant and equipment, and (iii) operational
support for the management and monitoring of contracts, in order to promote the
establishment of micro-enterprises to undertake routine maintenance on the GOK's paved
road network, using performance-based contracting methodology, and under supervision
by MPWU.
  •      Road Safety Action Plan. Development and implementation of a multi-sectoral
road safety action plan in consultation with the Kiribati's National Road Safety Task
Force Committee, including provision of breath testing equipment and radar guns for the
traffic police to improve enforcement.
  •      Drafting of Legislation. Updating the Kiribati road law as well as legislation
dealing with speed and driving under the influenc of alcohol.

 Component C: Project Support. Specialist support to the GOK for implementation of the
Project. This includes:

 •      Establishment of the Kiribati Fiduciary Services Unit (KFSU) to ensure the
smooth operation of the project. The KFSU will handle procurement and financial
management, as well as assisting in the preparation of work-plans, budgets, progress and
impact reports, and coordination of the overall implementation of the project.
 •      Establishing the Project Support Team (PST). A PST Manager/Technical Auditor
will support the MPWU with implementation of the civil works activities.
 •      Project associated incremental operating costs (e.g. telecommunications, local
workshops for stakeholders, procurement-associate activities, etc.);
 •      A valuation specialist to identify the appropriate compensation rates for trees and
other assets affected by the Project; and,
 •      An NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.
Additional financing is required to cover anticipated cost overruns and being restructured
to reduce complexity and facilitate implementation given the thin existing capacity in the
small country. No new physical works are proposed.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project activities will be located in Tarawa. The investments are on the main road
running east-west along South Tarawa, and also north towards the airport. Improvement
to the main road in Buota will be done, but it will remain unpaved. All investments are on
the existing road right-of-way.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
   Ms Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASNS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment: The Project is rated as a Category B project because the
environmental impacts are considered small scale, reversible and / or temporary.

The environmental license for civil works was issued by GoK on November 26, 2012. An
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and disclosed at the Bank’s
InfoShop on October 2, 2012. The EMP has been subsequently updated and redisclosed,
most recently on October 1, 2013, to reflect the final project designs and other
developments. It has been supplemented by the Contractor’s EMP, which most recently
was disclosed on April 1, 2014.

 The Bill of Quantity includes costs for environmental management and the contractor
shall have payments adjusted as necessary should there be non-compliance. The
government, through Ministry of Environment, Land and Agricultural Development
(MELAD), will monitor the D&S consultant and contractor as appropriate. The World
Bank and Asian Development Bank will monitor environmental compliance during
missions.

  As noted in the original PAD, the bulk of the road construction materials will be
imported from offshore destinations such as Banaba, Nauru or Fiji. The European Union
financed the 'Environmentally Safe Aggregates Tarawa' (ESAT) project with support
from the Secretariat of the Pacific Community Applied Geosciences and Technology
Division (SOPAC). The financing includes the construction of a dredging barge which
became operational in mid-2014. The Bank undertook a detailed assessment of the
proposed approach towards aggregate supply on the ESAT project and agreed, subject to
the GoK issuing an environmental license and certain other provisions being met, that the
contractor could use this material for road construction. The license was granted by GoK
in September 2012. It transpired that the material produced was not suitable for road
construction so the GoK issued a license for extraction of materials from three locations
that had previously been used as borrow areas. The Bank will review the environmental
operations at these sites in October 2014 to ensure compliance with Safeguard policies.

A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), acceptable to the Bank, was finalized and is in use on
the project. The RAP was disclosed in Kiribati and at the InfoShop on May 2, 2013. The
RAP is based on the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) disclosed during project
preparation. The GoK have been very effective in addressing land acquisition issues of
the project, and by June 2014 over 95% of land issues were resolved. For the remaining
23 outstanding cases remaining to be finalized, 15 cases involve land boundary disputes
where Court determinations are pending and for the remaining eight cases, compensation
has been agreed and payments are being processed. An NGO has been recruited by the
project to monitor RAP implementation and to ensure that any grievances that arise are
properly addressed. No major issues have been reported.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

Environmental Assessment: The main potential environmental impacts identified include:
(i) environmental damage arising from materials extraction from the lagoon; (ii)
disturbance including noise and dust arising from loading and unloading, and
transportation of construction materials (aggregates and bitumen) by dump trucks; (iii)
noise and dust arising during scarifying the existing road base, construction of the new
road base and construction of the new surface; (iv) erosion and sedimentation from
exposed surfaces that may affect the lagoon environment during the construction
processes; (v) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as used fuel
and lubricants; (vi) unexploded ordinance; (vii) impacts on the marine environment from
new and improved coastal protection measures and, (viii) increased risk of accidents from
increased vehicle movements.

As noted above, a key consideration during project preparation was where the materials
for the road construction would be sourced. The bulk of the road construction materials
will be imported from offshore such as Banaba, Nauru or Fiji. This will minimize the
demand on the limited local resources. However, the GoK has agreed for limited
extraction of materials from previously worked borrow areas so this will be closely
monitored to ensure compliance with Safeguard policies.

 The project is undertaking an HIV/AIDS education campaign for workers and affected
local residents.

  The improved road will result in higher speeds. To ensure that there is proper safety to
road users and local residents, the project undertook a road safety audit of the design.
This identified a range of actions to be taken to improve road safety. In a beneficiary
survey undertaken for the project, 98.5 percent of respondents expressed concern over
safety on the road. Women's safety was of particular concern, with requests for more
frequent bus stops and improved street lighting. The project addressed these concerns by
significantly increasing both the number of bus stops and solar street lights. Much higher
road safety standards including speed humps, kerbs, footpaths and street lighting (through
all speed control zones as identified by the local Councils) are being implemented by the
project. The project will also implement a multi-sectoral road safety action plan.

 Involuntary Resettlement: The rehabilitation works will result in:

 (i)    Loss of residential land of estimated 8,246 m2 for: (a) providing the roads with an
engineered alignment; (b) drainage easements; and (c) stopping areas. The individual
portions to be acquired from compounds are minimal and have no impact on the
concerned households' income sources and livelihood according to surveys of the
affected households.
 (ii) Loss of trees has been estimated with 131 affected coconut palm, pandanus and
breadfruit trees. There are between one and four trees per affected owner who confirmed
that their families' incomes were not dependent on these trees.
 (iii) No loss of primary and secondary structures and no relocation of households.
 (iv) No loss of agricultural land.
 (v) No loss of common property.
 (vi) No Project cases of economic resettlement and vulnerable people.

 The loss of land and trees affects an estimated 348 landowners including 21
organizations (mainly churches) and 28 owners with two or three plots potentially
affected. In the concerned 11 villages, the estimated 2,319 household members of the
affected households represent about 5% of Tarawa's total population. Taking into account
that several landowners are sometimes affected by the same strip of land to be acquired,
this leads to about 193 cases where land is lost only, 31 cases where both land and tress
are affected, and 55 cases where trees are lost only. The resettlement cost is estimated at
about AU$ 121,000, which will be financed by the GoK.

As noted above, over 95% of land issues have been resolved.
 An NGO has been recruited by the project to monitor the RAP implementation and to
ensure that any grievances that arise are properly addressed.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
This is the only east-west corridor through South Tarawa so there is no alternative to
ensuring that it meets the basic access needs to the community and remains passable.

 The main alternatives considered were with regard to road design options and,
importantly, material selection. The normal practice for materials supply is the use of
beach mined coral. The project will import high quality material from sustainably
sourced suppliers in Fiji. Any locally supplied material will come from licensed sources
acceptable to the Bank. This will minimize the negative environmental impact of the
project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For resettlement, the Borrower has existing institutional capacity for implementing the
project. They are able to identify affected people and pay compensation payments. If
needed, the project will provide additional support to the government's existing grievance
system. The project will supply a valuation specialist to update compensation for assets
such as trees. It will also finance an NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.

 As noted above, the EMP was prepared by the MPWU with assistance from a consultant
procured by the ADB. It was reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory. The
EMP was updated to reflect the final design and was included in the tender document.
The contractor has provided an EMP reflecting the MPWU EMP which is now in use
during operations and was disclosed.

 The RAP has been completed, disclosed and is being implemented.

 During implementation, the international consultant responsible for construction
supervision will ensure that the project is implemented in accordance with the EMP and
resettlement framework. An NGO has been hired to provide independent monitoring of
the RAP.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The road affects virtually the entire South Tarawa population.

 As required by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank Safeguards Policies,
public consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the EMP. Preliminary
consultations were undertaken on July 10-11, 2010 during the environmental mission to
Tarawa, and August 12-26, 2010 during the pre-appraisal mission. Additional public
consultations and information disclosure took place in Tarawa September 20-21, 2010.
Upon completion of the design work and tendering, additional consultations were
undertaken on the RAP during December 7 – 18, 2012.

 The EMP and RPF are available locally to the communities at the MPWU office and
Community centers, along with a Public Information Booklet on the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  10/02/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/06/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/24/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   4/29/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                4/29/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        N/A
review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christopher R. Bennett                    09/23/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Penelope Ruth Ferguson                    09/19/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr. Ross James Butler                        09/23/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Arturo Gomez Ardilla                        09/24/2014
  Comments: Acting as SM on behalf of Michel Kerf
