                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                          Report No.: 84013
Date ISDS
                             January 13, 2014
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     The Kyrgyz               Project ID:        P145162
                                 Republic
    Project Name:                Pasture Management Improvement Project Preparation Grant
    Task Team Leader:            Peter Goodman
    Appraisal Dates:             February, 18 2014 Estimated Board Date:     June 20, 2014
    Managing Unit:               ECSAR              Lending Instrument:      Grant
    Sector:                      Animal Production (100%)
    Theme:                       Rural Services and Infrastructure (35%)
                                 Rural Institutions and Policies (30%)
                                 Other Environmental and Natural Resource
                                 Management (35%)
    Financing (in USD Million)
        Financing Source                                                                  Amount
    ECA REGION CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT MDTF                                               US$487,500
    IBRD Bank Budget for Preparation                                                   US$250,000
    Total                                                                              US$737,500
    Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
.
    B. Project Objectives
    The development objectives of the proposed grant are: (i) to support the preparation of the
    Pasture Management Improvement Project (PMIP) in Kyrgyzstan and (ii) help to build
    capacity of local institutions and main stakeholders to implement the PMIP. These
    development objectives will contribute to the main objective of the future PMIP. The
    proposed grant is intended to serve as a preparatory step in a large-scale effort to modernize
    pasture management and livestock production in Kyrgyzstan and thereby increase the living
    standards of the population.

.
C. Project Description

Preparation of the PMIP will be funded from several different sources:

(i)     The Bank and the borrower will finance technical, financial and economic, fiduciary,
social and environmental assessments including preparation of the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

(ii)  The grant will finance assessments of the capacity and needs of government and non-
government organizations and build their capacity to implement three PMIP Components,
which will enhance the technical quality of the Project design and readiness for
implementation – this will include:

       Community Pasture Management Planning Component: The grant will undertake
        beneficiary needs assessments and build the capacity of the Pasture Department, Rural
        Advisory Services (technical aspects) and the Agency for Community Development and
        Investment (social inclusion and governance aspects) to fulfill their role in providing
        management advice to pasture committees. Grant outputs under this component will
        include:

           Governance Assessment Tools
           Conflict Resolution Tools
           Pasture Mapping Tools
           Community Pasture Management Planning Tools
           A Membership Awareness Tools

       Pasture Committee Animal Health Improvement: The grant will undertake
        beneficiary needs assessment and build the capacity of the Veterinary Chamber and
        Rural Advisory Services to fulfill its role in training Private Veterinarians to provide
        services to Pasture Committees to implement their animal health plans. Grant outputs
        under this component will include:

         PC Animal Health Planning Tools
         PC Animal Health Survey
         PC Animal Health Public Awareness Tools

       Project Management Component (Pasture Monitoring and Evaluation) will build
        the capacity of the Pasture Department and Agricultural Projects Implementation Unit
        to monitor the impact of the pasture reforms and project activities. Grant outputs
        under this component will include:
         Baseline Impact Survey design and implementation
         PC Animal Health Public Awareness Tools

These tools and surveys to be prepared under the grant will recognize recommendations from
the ESMF.


                                               2
  D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
  known)
  The Project will support pasture committees and private veterinarians locates in Chui Oblast
  and Talas Oblast.


  E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
  The Agricultural Project implementation Unit (APIU) in the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
  would be responsible for the implementation of safeguard requirements for the grant but no
  safeguards policies are triggered for the grant. The APIU has been responsible for the
  implementation of Bank funded agricultural projects since 1998 and, hence, is familiar with
  Bank procedures and safeguard requirements.
  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  German Kust (Bank Consultant)
  Asli Gurkan (ECSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY (TO THE GRANT)
  Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP         No              Preparation of the ESMF and EMP for the
  4.01                                                   PMIP will be funded by the Borrower and
                                                         not funded under the Grant. However the
                                                         TOR for all TAs under the grant will
                                                         adequately instruct consultants to take all
                                                         relevant environmental & social issues
                                                         into account in designing the project.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            No
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                     No
  Pest Management OP 4.09                No              No Pest Management Plan (PMP) is
                                                         required for the PMIP and no TA for PMP
                                                         preparation is funded under the grant.

                                                         However the TOR for all TAs under the
                                                         grant will adequately instruct consultants
                                                         to take any relevant pest management
                                                         issues identified in the ESMF into account
                                                         in designing the project.

  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP      No
  4.11
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10          No
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No
                                                         Preparation of the ESMF for the PMIP

                                                  3
                                                       will be funded by the Borrower and not
                                                       funded under the Grant.
                                                       OP 4.12 is not triggered for the PMIP
                                                       because it is a community based natural
                                                       resource management project: (i) In
                                                       particular, internal pasture boundary
                                                       demarcation to be financed under the
                                                       project does not trigger OP4.12 because it
                                                       involves definition of boundaries between
                                                       community managed pasture land and
                                                       private or state land – it does not involve
                                                       state acquisition of private land; (ii)
                                                       Furthermore, proposals for boundary
                                                       demarcation will be prepared by
                                                       community based organizations (pasture
                                                       working groups) representing pasture
                                                       users. (iii) Most boundary demarcation
                                                       disputes are expected to be resolved at
                                                       community level. Where disputes cannot
                                                       be resolved at community level, the final
                                                       decision on disputes may be made by the
                                                       state boundary demarcation commission -
                                                       in this case the state is acting as the
                                                       arbitrator of last resort to define the
                                                       borders of community managed pasture
                                                       land and no state acquisition of land is
                                                       involved.


    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No
    Projects on International Waterways   No
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No
    7.60
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.
    A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

       No safeguards related studies are required under the Grant.

IV. APPROVALS

                                                 4
Task Team Leader:     Name: Peter Goodman
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Agi Kiss              Date: January 13, 2014
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:       Name: Dina UmaliDeininger   Date: January 14, 2014




                                       5
