                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/27/2014                                   Report No.: 86455
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P109736                Original Project Name: TA for Capacity
                                            Development in Hydropower and Mining
                                            Sector
Country: Lao People's Democratic            Project ID: P148755
Republic
Project Name: TA for Capacity Development in Hydropower and Mining Sectors - AF
Task Team Leader: Sombath Southivong
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2014
Managing Unit: EASTS                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Hydropower (37%); Public administration- Energy and mining (33%); Other
Mining and Extractive Industries (18%); Tertiary education (12%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (38%); Education for the knowledge
economy (35%); Land administration and management (16%); Other social protection
and risk management (11%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Grant Amount (US$m.): 8.90
IDA Credit Amount (US$m.): 8.90
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To increase human capacity and improve the performance of government oversight
institutions for the hydropower and mining sectors.

3. Project Description
The AF will finance consulting services, goods, training and workshop, and operating
cost. The activities will be implemented through the existing components as follows:



   
         Component 1: Joint Hydropower and Mining Learning Program. Additional
          support of US$3.0 million (for a total of US$5.34 million) would be provided to
          the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) to: (a) further strengthen the human
          resource capacity of the MEM1 and its provincial departments (PDEMs) by
          financing short-course training addressing immediate needs to improve core
          functions and long-term training courses in the form of scholarships for key
          personnel to pursue higher education in country and abroad in critical areas for
          both hydro and mining, and by strengthening the capacity of MEM’s Department
          of Personnel and Organization (DPO) to manage human resource development
          and training; (b) further support for the Faculty of Engineering at NUOL and
          technical schools through: (i) technical assistance to update curricula, (ii) teacher
          training, exchanges, and internships at regional universities/institutes, and
          industry (private sector), (iii) procuring educational laboratory equipment, library
          books, and teaching aids as needed for improving the quality of education; and (c)
          deepen the cooperation and partnership between industry and education institutes
          by strengthening the trade working groups established during the original project.

         Component 2: Hydropower Sector Development. Additional support of US$7.0
          million (for a total of US$10.22 million) would be provided to MEM, PDEMs,
          National Assembly (NA), Ministry of Finance (MOF), Ministry of Natural
          Resources and Environment (MONRE), and Ministry of Planning and Investment
          (MPI) for technical assistance, training, study tours, workshops, needed
          equipment, and operating costs to: (a) operationalize the PSHD, and the
          Independent Power Producer (IPP) process 2 with a focus on: (i) effective
          management and monitoring of CA, including developing standard operation
          procedures for the implementation of the IPP process, (ii) technical and
          engineering capacity to address safety issues in hydropower development, (iii)
          establish a hydropower fiscal mechanism to improve revenue collection and
          facilitate budget allocation to agencies and provinces; (b) apply the system
          avoided cost methodology and develop production costing model; and (c) prepare
          a hydropower sector strategy and road map for cross-border power trading
          (system-to-system power trade). This component is implemented in partnership
          with IFC.

         Component 3: Mining Sector Development. Additional support of US$6.0
          million (for a total of US$8.55 million) would be provided to MEM, PDEMs,
          MONRE, NA, MOF, and MPI through technical assistance, training, study tours,
          workshops, necessary equipment, and operating costs to: (a) complete and
          operationalize the improved standard terms and conditions of CAs, in particular:
          (i) developing standard operation procedures for the mining concession process,

1
  The Ministry is comprised of 8 departments/office/institutes at central level i.e. Cabinet, Department of Personnel and
Organization (DPO), Department of Inspection (DOI), Department of Energy and Planning (DEPP), Department of
Energy Management (DEM), Department of Energy Business (DEB), Institute of Renewable Energy Promotion
(IREP), and Department of Mines (DOM). PDEMs are responsible for MEM activities at provincial level.
2
  The Independent Power Producer (IPP) comprises the following key steps: Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
signing, Project Development Agreement (PDA) signing, Concession Agreement (CA signing), Commercial Operation
Date (COD), and Project Transfer.
        (ii) strengthening staff capacities for negotiation, CAs management, inspection,
        monitoring, and project evaluation, (iii) building capacity for the establishment
        of the community development funds3, (iv) establishing operation and
        maintenance arrangements for the mining cadaster system and extending it to link
        MPI, MONRE, MOF, and MEM, (v) developing geo-data collection capacity ,
        and (vi) establishing a mineral fiscal mechanism and building capacity for
        revenue collection, and facilitating budget allocation to agencies and provinces;
        (b) develop a sector strategy focused on improving sector governance, including
        further strengthening the oversight capacity of the NA, and strategic
        environmental and social assessment.

       Component 4: Project Administration and Management. Additional support of
        US$1.8 million (for a total of US$2.18 million) would be used to finance
        consultancy services for the Project Secretariat Office (PSO) established within
        MEM for ensuring effective and timely implementation of project activities. Key
        functions of PSO include, coordination, financial management, procurement,
        safeguards, monitoring, and reporting on project progress including maintaining
        all project records. In addition, the AF would finance consultancy services to
        develop: (i) an IT platform to support business processes within MEM, (ii) the
        internal control system for the hydropower and mining sectors led by MEM’s
        Inspections Department, and (iii) support the implementation of the ministerial
        decree on gender advancement.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

Similarly to the original project, activities that are not location-specific as the additional
financing (AF) will support upstream work (policy, regulatory, legal framework) through
technical assistance and capacity building. However, positive benefits due to increased
awareness and knowledge of MEM staff at national and provincial level on addressing
safeguard issues and mitigation are expected to apply countrywide. The AF activities
related to policy implementation, capacity building, and/or strategy development will not
be directly linked to any follow- up investment to be developed soon.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (IFC)
   Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)




3
 The AF support is limited to the development of guidelines and regulations for the establishment of
community development funds, and will not finance any activity related to the implementation of the funds
on the ground.
     6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
     Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
     Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
     Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
     Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
     Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
     Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
     Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
     Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
     Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Similar to the original project, all of the AF activities will involve technical assistance
(TA), training, and capacity building activities, many with positive impacts on safeguard
capacity building for the hydropower and mining sectors. The AF activities will not
involve infrastructure investment, feasibility studies, nor will they create any direct
environmental or social negative impacts, and no potential large scale, significant, and/or
irreversible impacts are anticipated. Implementation experience during the original
project indicates that the project involved only minor office renovations, with no
significant environmental and social impacts. The support to PSHD implementation and
the mining sector strategy which are planned as part of the AF will focus on institutional
capacity building, and will not promote investments in project development or in
infrastructure. The risk of not improving regulations and/or building capacity of key
agencies will be high given limited financial and institutional capacity of key agencies
and provinces. However, given the rapid development of hydropower and mining in Lao
PDR and the limited safeguards capacity of key agencies, the AF is classified as Category
B and OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.10 are triggered. The Environmental Assessment policy
is triggered to ensure that the TA and capacity building activities of the AF provide due
consideration to strengthen the safeguard knowledge and capacity of key agencies. The
policy on Indigenous Peoples is triggered to guarantee that consultations financed by the
AF on the development and operationalization of policy, legal and regulatory framework
for both hydropower and mining involve the full participation of ethnic minorities that
could be affected by hydropower and mining investments, and to ensure that their views
and interests are incorporated in the discussions.

Potential impacts: Under the original project, the joint learning component (Component
1) was designed to incorporate awareness and knowledge on safeguard issues into the
training courses under TA and training activities, such as the gender aspect, and how they
relate to hydropower and mining investments. Due to delays in project implementation
during 2010-2012 caused by slow procurement and the reorganization of MEM, the TA
on human resources development has been prolonged and only basic training has been
initiated. Implementation of outreach activities was dropped during the restructuring in
2013 due to a lack of progress and shifting priorities. Under AF the implementing
agencies will ensure that safeguard training is fully integrated into the training courses
and activities, and the project secretariat will monitor and report on progress. Potential
impacts of safeguard capacity building in the medium and long-term are positive as
safeguards technical skills and awareness among government staff will increase. Such
capacity development will improve government's ability to manage the impacts of future
projects and infrastructure investments.
For the hydropower component (Component 2) of the original project, a number of TA
packages were carried out, including fiscal policy options study, development of least
cost methodology, and development of standard CA process which incorporates
environment and social safeguards. Safeguard aspects have been considered in these
studies. Key recommendations from the fiscal policy study include the need to ensure
effective management of safeguard issues during the planning and operation of
hydropower projects; key agencies of MEM and MOF are in the process of discussing
these recommendations. The AF will further deepen discussion on issues related to
revenue and benefit sharing and fund flow mechanism to provinces and relevant agencies
in MEM and MONRE to undertake their responsibilities, including those on safeguards.
The AF will support a TA on capacity building for revenue sharing and fund flow
mechanism. The AF will finance a TA package for compliance monitoring of the CA
process (incorporating safeguards) to demonstrate ways to conduct systematic
compliance monitoring and reporting. This exercise will serve as on-the-job training for
MEM, PDEMs, and relevant agencies. Mainstreaming environmental and social
safeguards that meet World Bank policies and international standards in the hydropower
and mining sectors is a key objective of this TA support project. Under the original
project, the project provided support to GOL to develop CA templates and a CA
monitoring framework according to the international standards, which fully address
World Bank safeguards policies. These activities are underway and the AF would
support their completion. The AF would also support building the capacity of
government officials to use the CA templates for new IPP projects. The Government will
not be able to retrofit already signed CAs based on the improved CA templates and
monitoring framework under development. However, the AF will assist the Government
to better monitor the compliance of existing CAs through on-the-job training to field
level staff on the use of the monitoring framework; at the moment, CA compliance is not
monitored partly because adequate monitoring capacity does not exist in country. It is
expected that the improved monitoring framework will allow a regular monitoring ,
including of existing CAs, contributing to their better environmental and social risk
management. The gaps that may be identified through improved monitoring will also
allow the task team to engage in policy dialogue with the Government in order to
improve safeguards, technical, and institutional aspects.

TAs will be conducted to strengthen MEM regulations and engineering capacity to
address safety issues related to hydropower operations, and development of a strategy to
move forward the sector reform (system-to-system study). Results from these TAs will
strengthen technical capacity of key agencies to address priority development issues
including safeguards related to hydropower projects. There will be no negative associated
impacts linked to the development and implementation of these TAs. No physical
investments are envisaged under these TAs.

Under the original project and with additional support from IFC, the NPSH has been
updated to integrate safeguard requirements into MEM policy. The NPSH has been
renamed Policy on Sustainable Hydropower Development (PSHD) and will be applied to
all hydropower projects larger than 15 MW after MEM approval which is expected in
early 2014. Key agencies of MONRE (DESIA, DFRM, DWR, and DMH) and other
ministries (MAF, MOF) participated actively in the discussion process. An inter-
ministerial committee (PSHDC) has been established to oversee the implementation of
the PSHD including facilitating effective coordination among agencies. The AF will
continue to work closely with IFC to support the implementation of the PSHD including
further developing guidelines for implementation, enhancing cooperation among agencies
and promoting public outreach while capacity building on technical and engineering
activities will focus on the safety aspect. Furthermore, the PSHD will be used as policy
guidance for the Independent Power Producer (IPP) process. These activities will
strengthen capacity of key agencies including knowledge and experience of staff to carry
out activities related to safeguards in medium and longer term.

For mining (Component 3), the TAs provided under the original project included
mobilization of legal advisor to assist in the revision of the Mining Law approved in 2011
and three TA packages: (a) the fiscal policy study, (b) regulation regarding occupational
health and safety, mines closure, environmental, and inspection, and (c) development of
community development fund guidelines and regulations for mining operations. The
environmental guidelines for mining development are under preparation and once
approved will be implemented during future investments. There will be no follow-
up/downstream investment concerning mining or hydropower infrastructure development
related to the TA provided under this component. A technical working group,
comprising MEM, MONRE, MOF, and MPI, has been established to work with the
consultant finalizing the investment agreement template. The fiscal policy study was
completed in 2013 and recommendations for ensuring adequate budget for
implementation of mining development including safeguards during planning and
monitoring are being discussed by agencies through a technical working group
established by MOF. Under the AF, a follow-up TA on revenue sharing and fund flow for
mining agencies will be conducted and the consulting service will continue to enhance
DOM's capacity for inspection and registration of mining activities. The TAs on
occupational health and safety, mines closure, environmental, and inspection, and the
development of community fund are on-going and will be completed in late 2014. The
AF will support follow-up activities to integrate policy and technical guidelines on safety
and mines health into DOM's operation procedures, monitoring and reporting.

Guidelines for community development funds (CDF) are being developed under the
original project, and are fully compliant with World Bank safeguard policies. The AF
will finance the cost associated with finalizing the guidelines, and capacity building
activities in the use of the guidelines. The AF will finance consultations with stakeholders
including but not limited to ethnic groups, and costs for MEM to monitor compliance to
CDF guidelines. The AF will not finance actual CDF investments, feasibility studies to
identify or design CDF activities, or assistance to implement CDF activities.

A TA on the Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) will also be carried
out to strengthen DOM capacity on sustainable development of mining activities during
planning stage and to help government setting their sector strategy. The ToRs for this
SESA will include provisions of applicable Bank safeguards and will be revised and
approved by the project Bank team. On capacity building for mining main activities
under the original project include mobilization of national consultants and undertaking a
series of field/study visits, on-the-job training, consultation, and/or technical workshops;
and procurement of equipment and vehicles. The activities will be continued under the
proposed AF to enhance the capacity of DOM and provinces to reduce potential negative
impacts of mining project on the ground. These activities have been developed in
consultation with World Bank safeguard specialists and following Bank standards and
procedures. The Bank environment and legal specialists have been consulted during TOR
preparation and throughout the assignments to ensure that Bank standards are
incorporated and adopted. The support to community development funds draws on
international best practices and analytical work which has been conducted at a global
scale.

Safeguard instrument and supervision by PSO: MEM updated the Environment and
Social Safeguards Activities Document (ESSAD) which has been adopted as the
safeguard instrument for the original project. The ESSAD aims to document safeguard
activities to be carried out as part of the TAs and capacity building activities during the
implementation of the project. It was developed during the preparation of the original
project in order to clarify and document exactly how all activities supported under the
project will comply with the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies.
The form and style used under the ESSAD were considered appropriate because project
environmental and social risks mostly concern the extent to which the TA activities are
informed by Bank safeguard policies. ESSAD is intended to describe in detail exactly
how safeguard issues are integrated and mainstreamed in respective project activities. this
ESSAD outlines the AF project description, legal and institutional structure related to
natural resources and environmental management, original project implementation
progress including challenges/lessons learnt, potential impacts on safeguard capacity
building of the AF, and mechanisms to ensure the participation of ethnic groups in
consultations regarding policy, legal and regulatory framework for the hydropower and
mining sectors.

The team considers that the updated ESSAD is adequate for the implementation of the
AF which will continue supporting safeguard capacity building of MEM, PDEMs, and
related agencies, and educational institutes. The PSO is aware of the need to supervise,
monitor, and report safeguard performance of the project.               However, due to
implementation delays, the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist was mobilized
only in late 2013 and the M&E system is being developed. Under the AF, the PSO will
take the lead in ensuring that safeguards, including gender aspects, are mainstreamed into
TA, training, and capacity building activities and the results are included in the quarterly
monitoring report as well as the annual project progress report. National consultants
recruited to work with each one of the implementing agencies will document the
integration of safeguards into project activities and will feed this information to PSO for
consolidation into the reporting system.

Safeguard rating: The safeguard rating of the original project is considered satisfactory
given the implementation progress of the project activities especially those related to the
development of the sustainable hydropower policy (PSHD), the approval of the revised
Mineral Law in 2011 and the Electricity Law in 2012 which have explicitly stipulated
safeguard requirements, and MEM's efforts to mainstream safeguard aspects into the
project development process for hydropower and mining. Awareness and policy support
of MEM agencies on the need to integrate safeguard requirements are high, however
technical and financial capacity of MEM and key MONRE agencies to implement the TA
and capacity building activities remains limited and this is the reason for additional
capacity building under the AF.

Gender: During the design of the original project gender was considered integral part of
safeguard mainstreaming and capacity building and PSO has begun to keep record on
gender involvement in training provided under Component 1. Under AF, more explicit
actions will be provided to enhance gender involvement through a number of specific
training on gender aspects in hydropower and mining sectors (under Component 1) as
well as through incorporating gender aspects to the development of guidelines and
regulations for community funds under the mining component (Component 3).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

Similar to the original project, potential indirect and/or long term impacts of the AF will
be positive. GOL actions on legal and institutional reforms related to natural resources
and environment during the past 5 years have strengthen capacity of the country to
address safeguard issues especially those related to hydropower and mining. The
establishment of DESIA in 2009, the approval of EIA decree in 2010, the establishment
of MONRE in 2012, and the issuance of EIA regulation in late 2013 have resulted in the
clear division of responsibility between natural resources and environmental management
from the development functions. The original project has strengthened cooperation
among key agencies of MEM and MONRE through joint field visits and a series of
meetings and discussions, especially through the PSHD development process. The AF
will continue to support activities that could forge effective cooperation among agencies
to move toward sustainable development in the hydropower and mining sectors. Impacts
of future hydropower and mining investments are expected to be better managed and
mitigated as a direct result of the current AF since capacities at all levels will be
reinforced. The AF activities will have no direct link with any downstream infrastructure
investment in the mining or hydropower sectors.
To address potential perception risks in connection with the construction and operation of
mainstream dams in the Mekong River, the Bank team will ensure that: (a) all ToR are
reviewed by the Bank for AF consultancy services to confirm that these are not link to
any mainstream dam, (b) the AF will engage a wide range of stakeholders in the
consultation process for policy and regulatory framework development, when possible,
(c) risks related to stakeholders' perception are closely monitored during the AF
implementation, (d) a communication strategy will be prepared for the project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
NA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Recognizing the need for ensuring effective management of hydropower and mining
development, MEM took actions to incorporate environmental and social safeguard
requirements into the revised Mining Law (2011) and Electricity Law (2012). These laws
provide a strong legal basis for MEM agencies to ensure safety and prevent and/or
mitigate potential negative impacts. Under the on-going project, MEM agencies
conducted a number of technical assistance and capacity building activities with potential
positive impacts on safeguard capacity for the hydropower and mining sectors (see A1
above). Implementation of technical assistance and capacity building activities related to
safeguard issues for hydropower and mining development under the original project has
facilitated effective coordination between these agencies and MEM agencies during the
planning stage at national level. The AF will continue to provide technical assistance and
capacity building support to DESIA and DFRM and MEM agencies to monitor safeguard
performance of the hydropower development projects. Policy supports regarding the need
for further mainstreaming safeguard into the development process of hydropower and
mining projects in MEM is high. Implementation of TA and capacity building activities
related to safeguard has provided clear legal requirements, enhanced active involvement
of decision makers, and increased capacity of technical staff on ways to address
safeguard issues during the planning, supervision, and monitoring of the project
development including safeguards. Safeguard capacity at provincial level need further
support and capacity building.


Under AF, the implementing agencies will remain the same as for the original project
(DEPP, DEB, DEM, and DOM). These agencies are aware of and familiar with WB
safeguard policy and requirements. In addition, two working groups, one for hydropower
and the other for mining, will be established to increase coordination among departments
and with the PSO. To be in line with OP/BP4.10 and to ensure that safeguard monitoring
will be systematic the following actions will be carried out:

     The PSO in close coordination with the agencies will conduct a public
      consultation on the PSHD and/or CDF at least one time per year. The
  participation of ethnic communities in the dialogue on the development and
  operationalization of policy, and legal and regulatory frameworks will be
  achieved through national and regional consultations organized in Vientiane
  Capital and in the northern and southern parts of the country. Representatives of
  ethnic minorities, including the Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC),
  which is the official national mechanism to facilitate dialogue with the diverse
  ethnic groups, the National Assembly, and development partners, will attend the
  consultations. The AF will engage local people in the implementation of the
  upstream work through dissemination workshops, training, and involvement in
  the monitoring of the CA, where feasible. Specific actions on CDF are described
  in more details in the ESSAD.

 The PSO will ensure that safeguard considerations including gender are integrated
  into the technical training courses and the human resources development activities
  to be carried out under Component 1, including activities to be carried out by the
  two technical working groups for hydropower and mining. PSO will closely
  monitor the implementation progress related to safeguard and include the results
  in the project progress report. PSO will also conduct safeguard training at least
  one time per year during the first 3 years (2014, 2015, and 2016).

 MEM implementing agencies (DEPP, DEB, and DEM) will ensure that safety,
  and environmental and social safeguard are effectively integrated into MEM's
  policy and procedures to be applied to hydropower projects throughout the
  development cycle (planning/awarding CA, construction, and operation, and
  closure/transfer), and will report on the implementation progress and results of the
  safeguard monitoring in the component/subcomponent progress reports.

 DOM will ensure that safety and environmental and social safeguard are
  effectively integrated into MEM's policy and procedures applied to mining
  projects throughout the development cycle (planning/awarding CA, construction,
  and operation, and closure), and will report on the implementation progress and
  results of the safeguard monitoring in the component/subcomponent progress
  reports. For mining, a process of consultation among agencies, local authorities,
  and local communities on benefit sharing will be facilitated by DOM.
  Consultations will be a key element in the development of policy, regulations, and
  guidelines for mining. To be in line with OP/BP 4.10, the CDF regulations and
  guidelines to be developed under the AF will have provisions that (i) ethnic
  screening will be carried out in the area of influence of respective CDF activities,
  that (ii), if ethnic groups are found to be present in the zone of influence, free,
  prior and informed consultations will be carried out with them leading to their
  broad community support to respective CDF activities; and that (iii) a simple
  Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) will be developed in line with OP 4.10.
  Progress in this area will be properly included in quarterly AF progress reports.
  Gender aspects will be explicitly addressed/ promoted during the development of
  guidelines and regulations for community development fund.
      The PSO will supervise and monitor the implementation progress of safeguard
       activities and include the results in the quarterly project progress report. The WB
       team will periodically monitor the implementation progress related to safeguard
       activities throughout the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Direct beneficiaries are MEM’s agencies responsible for the oversight function of
investment and technical development activities in the hydropower and mining sectors.
Other stakeholders are the agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forest (MAF) and
the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT) that are involved from the water
user aspect, the provincial authorities, the local communities, the project investors, and
general public.

PSO conducted a public consultation on the AF and the updated ESSAD on March 4,
2014. The overall feedback from the public consultation is positive. The public
highlighted the need to improve inter-agencies coordination, knowledge transfer through
on-the-job training, and monitoring and evaluation system in order for AF to be
implemented successfully and effectively.

During implementation, in line with OP/BP 4.10, national and regional consultations will
be organized in Vientiane Capital and in the northern and southern parts of the country to
ensure that the views and interests of ethnic minorities are incorporated in the dialogue on
the development and operationalization of policy, and legal and regulatory frameworks.
Representatives of ethnic minorities, including the Lao Front for Construction, which is
the official national mechanism to facilitate dialogue with the diverse ethnic groups, the
NA, and development partners, will attend the consultations. The AF will engage local
people in the implementation of the upstream work through dissemination workshops,
training, and involvement in the monitoring of CAs, where feasible.

Consultation for hydropower during implementation will be made through the PSHD
implementation process which will facilitate technical meetings/workshops, field visits,
PSHD committee meetings, PSHD national workshop, and other capacity building
activities to be implemented under Component 2. For mining, a process of consultation
among agencies, local authorities, and local communities on benefit sharing will be
facilitated by DOM. Consultations will be a key element in the development of
regulations and guidelines for community development funds under Component 3.
Through the Mining Working Group, efforts will be made to strengthen coordination
and/or consultation mechanism between DOM, DESIA, and other stakeholders related to
mining development.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other*:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/15/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/19/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/19/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
  *Environment and Social Safeguard Activities Document
  (ESSAD)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework*:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/15/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/19/2014
  Date of submission of Infoshop                                  03/19/2014
  *Environment and Social Safeguard Activities Document
  (ESSAD)
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report*?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
*Environment and Social Safeguard Activities Document (ESSAD)
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework* (as                 Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  *Environment and Social Safeguard Activities Document (ESSAD)
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information*
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  *Environment and Social Safeguard Activities Document (ESSAD)
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr. Sombath Southivong                       03/16/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms. Manida Unkulvasapaul                     03/16/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr. Satoshi Ishihara                         03/16/2014
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms. Ruxandra Maria Floroiu                   03/18/2014
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:


Regional Safeguards Advisor:        Mr. Peter Leonard                            03/31/2014

Sector Manager:                     Ms. Julia M. Fraser                          03/18/2014
  Comments:
