                                                                                                          94683

                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
           Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             6-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                         Lao People's           Project ID:                  P102398
                                  Democratic
                                  Republic
 Project Name:                    Road Sector Project Additional Financing (PI 02398)
 Task Team Leader(s):             Sombath Southivong
 Board Date:                      I 0-May-20 12
 Managing Unit:                   GTIDR
 Sector(s):                       Roads and Highways
 Tbeme(s):                        Infrastructure services for private sector development (P); Regional
                                  integration (S)
 Is tbis project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                       No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:           34.5                       Total Bank Financing:        121.0
 Financing Gap:                0.00
   Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                        13.5
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                               21.0

   Total                                                                                                     34.5
 Environmental Category: A
 Is tbis a Repeater project? No
 Is tbis a Transferred            No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The project development objectives are (a) to improve road services on two main national corridors
 and the provincial road network, (b) to rehabilitate roads damaged by Typhoon Ketsana, and (c) to
establish and operationalize a contingency fund for quick disaster response in the road sector.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
No change.

3. Project Description
Background - At the time of their preparation, both the original project and the Additional Financing
(AF) were considered environmental assessment Category B as the scope of activities including road
improvement works of two national roads and maintenance works of provincial roads was not expected
to have potential large scale, significant, and/or irreversible environmental or social impacts. The
original project and AF triggered the OP/BP 4.00 Pilot Use of Country Systems as well as the OP/BP
4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. A Safeguards Diagnostic
Review (SDR) conducted during project appraisal in 2008-2009 in line with the OP/BP 4.00
requirements determined that MPWT's Environmental and Social Operation Manual (ESOM) was
equivalent and acceptable to OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, 4.04 Natural Habitats, and 4.11
Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). The project is in full compliance with applicable safeguard policies
provisions, and no outstanding safeguard issues exist.

During AF preparation it was decided that a feasibility study (FS) for a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
road pilot would be financed under the AF. At that stage the overall potential of PPP road construction
was uncertain in Lao PDR given the very low traffic volume, and specific location and various technical
parameters under which PPP would be viable need to be first assessed and clarified. To determine PPP
viability, location, and scope, funding was initially mobilized from the Public Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility (PPIAF) for a preliminary Feasibility Study (pre-FS).

The pre-FS was duly conducted during the AF implementation, between February and May 2013. The
pre-FS identified sections of National Road 13 (NRI3) where PPP is potentially viable and
recommended that a full FS be carried out to identify specific sections of the NR t 3 where PPP is viable
and the specific technical parameters under which PPP is viable. The pre-FS results also concluded that
widening the road from two to four lanes on sections with the highest traffic is potentially viable and
recommended that the FS identify the sections where such widening would be feasible and
economically, financially, environmentally and socially optimal.

The full FS commenced on November 25, 2013, with the funding of the AF under the Component 2.
The FS findings indicated that the PPP is viable for sections from Km t 2 to Km 70 of the NR 13N and
from Km 13 to Km 63 of the NR 13S. It was also found that road expansion from two to four lanes is
viable on NR IJN from Km 12 to Km 44 and NR 13S from Km 21 to Km 28. This implies that the
potential environmental and social impacts associated with such PPP road construction will be in the
scale of Environmental Category A under the Bank OP 4.01. Consequently, the project Environmental
Category has to be revised from B to A.

The following three components are financed under the AF:

Component 1: Road Network Improvement and Preservation (Additional Fina1tci11g of US$15.62
million). AF ensured completion of 171 km of national roads (NR1B and NR6A). The AF finances cost
increases for additional civil works needed to strengthen the disaster resilience of National Road 6A and
1B including slope stabilization of some critical sections, strengthening drainage systems and water
crossing structures (small bridges and culverts). AF finances the construction of a bridge over the River
Ma (Nam Ma) connecting two sections ofNational Road 6A, replacing an inefficient ferry. The AF also
continues co-financing periodic maintenance of the provincial road network and the application of
disaster resilience measures on vulnerable sections. AF finances superv1s1on consultancy services
required due to an increase emphasis on disaster resilient standards and additional bridge works on
NR6A. Road safety activities initiated under the original project would be complemented with
institutional development activities, including strengthening capacities for traffic management, road
safety planning, accident prevention~ and enforcement of safety rules.

Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Additional Financing of US$3.58 million). The AF
finances scaling up institutional strengthening activities to: (a) develop sector capacities for the
management of Public Private Partnerships (PPP); feasibility studies ofPPP pilots; (b) further strengthen
governance mechanisms through: (i) expanding the ICT platform initiated under the original project by
integrating business processes (accounting, asset management, roads management system, and GIS); (ii)
further strengthening internal control. capacity; and (iii) strengthening citizen feedback mechanisms
through the development of the MPWT hotline; (c) continue supporting sector capacities on financial
management, safeguards monitoring, supervision and quality assurance, and M&E; (d) developing
standard operating procedures for the Emergency Contingency Fund (ECF).

Component 3: Disaster Recovery 01rd Contillge11cy (Additio11al Fi11ancing of US$1.80 million). AF is
used for topping-up the emergency contingency fund, depleted following rehabilitation efforts after
Typhoon Haima.



4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project location will have national coverage, as was the case with the original and the AF project.

The proposed PPP pilot roads would pass through semi-urbanized areas and the road improvements
may affect some 1,600 landowners, 30% residential and 70% commercial entities, in case the road is
widened for the entire pilot sections. These road sections pass along schools, small businesses/shops,
fish farms and residential houses, and impacts to community health safety and security would be
expected during the construction and operational phases of the project caused mainly by the influx of
workers, increased traffic flows, and from dust, noise and other forms of pollutants mainly during
construction but also during the operational phase (i.e., gas emissions). The landscape is typical of a
marshy area (with notable flood plains and riverine forest vegetation along both sides) combined with
small hilly zones. Furthermore, given a fairly large number of temples and graves along the road,
temporary impacts on cultural heritage are also expected. Also, some roadside residents include those
who belong to ethnic groups who migrated to the current locations.

None of these sections identified for the PPP pilot passes through national parks or protected areas or
their assigned buffer zones. The road 13 North sections are located at about 8km away from the
designated Phou Phanang National Protected Area and they do not reach the buffer zones (considered
Skm from the edge of the assigned protected area zone).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Flflvio Chaves (Consultant)
Makathy Tep (Consultant)
 6. Safee;uard Policies Trie;e;ered (please explain why)             Yes           'No
 Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                X
 Pilot Use of Country System for Environmental                        X
 Assessment (OPIBP4:00)
 Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                        X
 Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                             X
 Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                      X
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
 Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                        X
 Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                   X
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                            X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Original project Under the original LRSP project (category B), the upgrading of two national roads
(6A and 18) and the periodic maintenance of provincial road network have been implemented under
Component A, while under Component C, emergency rehabilitation has been conducted in 49 road
sections. No major environmental or social impacts have occurred so far. Minor environmental issues
such as the improper dumping of waste materials along the riverbank, and the weak integration of
safeguard planning, implementation, and monitoring/reporting in the overall project implementation,
have been addressed through safeguard trainings and the intensive supervision and implementation
support by the task team. Limited land acquisition and loss of assets occurred under the improvement
of national roads which are being addressed and compensated as per the respective Resettlement
Action Plans. No land acquisition occurred under the periodic maintenance of provincial roads or
emergency road rehabilitation. Ethnic Groups Development Plans have been prepared as per the
project Ethnic Groups Development Framework, and affected ethnic minorities have been consulted in
a free, prior and informed manner, and their broad community support established. Supervision
conducted during the implementation found no major outstanding environmental or social issues.

Additional Financing. The types and scale of impact related to these AF activities were initially
estimated to be similar to those which occurred under the original project and which have been
addressed through existing safeguard instruments. No potential large scale, significant, and/or
irreversible environmental or social impacts are anticipated as a result of improvements of National
Roads 6A and lB and the periodic maintenance ofthe provincial road network. The potential negative
impact of the construction of a new bridge over the River Ma ( 10 meters wide, 180 meters long, and 3
spans) ,are limited to minor disturbance of bottom sediment and construction site which will be
temporary, localized, and can be mitigated through the application of good construction management
practices and close supervision by field engineers as well as implementation of EMP. The River Ma
originates in Vietnam, passing through Lao PDR for approximately 70km and returning to Vietnam
again and the construction of the new bridge would not cause a significant adverse impact on
environment, hydrology and natural habitat. The access road to the bridge would be constructed on
public lands and no loss of private land, assets or access is anticipated.
During AF preparation it was discussed that a feasibility study (FS) for a Public-Private Partnership
(PPP) road pilot may be financed under the AF. The MPWT prepared the Terms of Reference (ToR)
for the full FS in line with the findings and recommendations of the pre-FS. .

IFC Advisory Services .The International Finance Corporation (IFC) provided an advisory service to
the MPWT for the preparation of the road PPP pilot. The Financial Advisory Services Agreement
(FASA) was duly signed between the IFC and the MPWT on November 12,2013. The IFC transaction
advisory service includes technical support to FS, the preparation of bidding documents, the selection
of concessionaires, assistance to financial closure and guidance to ensure compliance with its
Performance Standards.

Prior to the signing of the FASA, the IFC reviewed the draft FS ToR prepared by the MPWT to ensure
compliance with IFC's Performance Standards (PS). IFC also undertook a gap analysis between
MPWT's Environmental and Social Operation Manual (ESOM) and the PS. The ESOM was found to
cover most of the PS aspects. However, Labor and Working Conditions (PS2), Community Health,
Safety and Security (PS4}, and Ecosystem Services (part of PS6) are some of the areas requiring
additional due diligence. The FS TOR was revised to address these gaps. As part of the transaction
advice, IFC will continue providing advice in a manner consistent with the principles of the relevant
PS, and determining key environmental and social risks that the government and the concessionaire
would need to follow through the legal PPP agreement. The FS started in November 2013, based on
the revised TOR, with funding under Component 2 of the LRSP-AF.

Ongoing FS. The FS is tasked with assessing the viability of PPP, including the potential of widening
from two to four lanes on selected sections ofNR 13 North and NR 13 South, from technical, social,
environmental and economic perspectives, and refining cost and benefit estimates, including through
the preparation of preliminary engineering design. In line with the TOR, the FS includes an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to be conducted in accordance with government
regulations, including the Environmental ~d Social Operational Manual (ESOM) and with the IFC's
Performance Standards (PS) . The ESIA includes: existing baseline status of all the concerned
environmental components; prediction and evaluation of impacts; analysis of alternatives;
quantification of environmental impacts and risks, and estimate the cost of measures to mitigate them;
and an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan. Potential residual impacts will be considered
during ESIA work.

The FS also includes a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) which include:

   i.   Identification of potential positive or negative social impacts e.g. impacts of tolling on the
        mobility of local people;
  ii.   Socio-economic and demographic data on all stakeholders as well as project affected
        population; characteristics of project affected population;
 iii.   A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and an Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP);
 iv.    Engagement and consultations with project affected persons including ethnic groups and
        development of a structured Stakeholder Engagement Plan as a follow-up action item;
  v.    Defining a framework for the project to obtain the free, prior and informed consent of ethnic
        minority persons if the project:
        • Adversely impacts their land or natur~l resources under traditional ownership or
            customary use;
        • Physically relocates them from land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership
            or under customary use; or
        •   Significantly impacts critical cultural heritage associated with local ethnic minority
            persons, or plans to use cultural heritage associated with IPs for commercial purposes.

Proposed clrange in current AF Project EA categorization. The FS findings indicated that the PPP is
viable for sections from Km 12 to Km 70 ofthe NR 13N and from Km 13 to Km 63 ofthe NR 13S. It
was also found that road expansion from two to four Janes is viable on NR 13N from Km 12 to Km 44
and NR 13S from Km 21 to Km 28. This implies that the potential environmental and social impacts
associated with such PPP road construction will be in the scale of Environmental Category A under
the Bank OP 4.01. The environmental and social assessment therefore has to be carried out and
mitigation measures be identified at the level of Category A in line with World Bank safeguard
policies provisions. Consequently, the project Environmental Category has to be revised from B to A.
Consequently, the OP 4.0 I will apply for any investment of such PPP subproject (rather than the
originally use OP 4.00), although other project activities than PPP FS under the AF would continue to
be addressed under Country Systems (OP/BP 4.00) triggered for the original project and AF.
Additionally, OP 4.11 and OP 4.04 are applicable to the PPP road FS.

Environmental and social impacts being addressed Ultder tire 011-going FS. The sections of the
NR13 where PPP road construction was found to be viable do not pass through national parks or
protected areas or their assigned buffer zones. The road 13 sections are located at about Skm away
from the designated Phou Phanang National Protected Area and they do not reach the buffer zones
(considered Skm from the edge of the assigned protected area zone). The landscape is typical of a
marshy area (with n9table flood plains and riverine forest vegetation along both sides) combined with
small hilly zones.

The improvements would follow the existing alignment and right of way (I 5 meter both sides of the
center line) because the current traffic volume does notjustify further widening. The majority of social
impacts concern loss of private land and income loss for roadside shops, as well as physical relocation
of households and shops. The full magnitude of land acquisition and physical relocation will be known
once the FS is completed and the location· and scale of road widening is fully determined. the PPP
pilot roads would pass through semi-urbanized areas and the road improvements may affect some
1,600 landowners, 30% residential and 70% commercial entities, in case the road is widened for the
entire pilot sections.

As the road sections pass along schools, small businesses/shops, fish farms and residential houses,
impacts to community health safety and security would be expected during the construction and
operational phases of the project caused mainly by the influx of workers, increased traffic flows, and
from dust, noise, and other forms of pollutants mainly during construction but also during the
operational phase (i.e., gas emissions). Furthermore, given a fairly large number of temples and graves
along the road, temporary impacts on cultural heritage are also expected. Also, some ethnic groups are
found to be present along a few sections of the NR 13N.

The FS is assessing alternatives to minimize or avoid significant social impact on the most densely
populated sections. Such alternatives include construction of bypasses for the two urban sections of
NR l3N at Km 52 and Km 70, with a total length of7km, or limiting the scope ofworks in the urban
sections to the improvement of surface condition of the existing road.

A draft FS report has been presented in December 20 14 and the final report is expected for March
2015. The MPTW is currently developing the TOR for a separate consultancy to identify the gaps the
FS may have with the applicable Bank safeguard policies, and ensure its compliance
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impa~ts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The new bridge over the River Ma, by replacing the existing inefficient ferry that cannot operate over
4 to 6 months during the day season due to low water levels, will significantly increase the trade with
Vietnam and positively contribute to local economy. Road improvement and increased traffic,
however, would also increase the risk of dust and emissions pollution from passing traffic, road safety,
and other social issues related to the transport sector. Road safety including installation of speed limit
will continue to be supported under the AF.

For the PPP FS, it is expected that following the completion of the FS in March 2015, the tender
process would start and potential bidders would be invited to submit bids, with financial closure in
December 2015. The GoL has expressed its commitment to include environmental management plan
(EMP) that fully meets the Bank safeguard requirements in the bidding documents. The Lao
Government has also expressed its interest in requesting the World Bank to support the public
financing portion PPP pilot project as a follow up to the FS financed under the AF. This would be a
new project that will be of category A in line with the OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. A
Project Concept Note (PCN) to finance the public portion of such PPP project would be prepared by
March 2015, with approval expected during the last quarter of Fiscal Year 2015/16.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project alternatives for the PPP pilot are being analyzed as part of the ongoing Feasibility Study.

The OP 4.00 was triggered by the original LRSP project activities. The Safeguard Diagnostic Review
(SDR) was conducted during the preparation of the original project confirming that the Environmental
and Social Operational Manual (ESOM) was equivalent to OP 4.0 I, 4.04 and 4.11. As for the
potential impacts on involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples, it was decided that such impacts
would be addressed through OP 4.10 and OP4.12, due to the differences in the approaches of the
Government and the Bank in dealing with these impacts (lack of equivalence).

As described above, ESOM has been applied satisfactorily to all civil works financed under the
original project, albeit some gaps that have been addressed. The knowledge and understanding of
ESOM among the MPWT staff, both at the central and provincial level, has been improved and
continu~ to be strengthened under the AF through a series of trainings and workshops. The ESOM
technical guidelines that provide more detailed guidance to MPWT engineers are also under
development.

With the adoption of the EIA Decree and the establishment of MoNRE, the ESOM has also to be
updated in order to make it fully compatible with the new national arrangements.The AF will support
the updating of ESOM, and $320,000 have been allocated under the AF for this purpose; and (ii) in the
meantime, ESOM will continue to apply to all civil works that will be supported under the AF,
including the construction of the bridge over the river Ma.

As for PPP, the Bank environmental and social safeguard policies will continue to be applied to
address environmental and social impacts associated with the potential PPP road constructions
assessed under the on-going FS. The safeguard instruments developed under the FS will be further
reviewed and any gaps to meet the Category A requirements under the Bank safeguard policies will be
addressed. The IFC's environmental and social team also conducted a gap analysis of the ESOM and
IFC's Performance Standards (PS). The gap analysis found that the ESOM covers most PS aspects.
However, Labor and Working Conditions (PS2), Community Health, Safety and Security (PS4), and
Ecosystem Services (part of PS6) are some of the key areas requiring additional due diligence during
the ESIA process. The ongoing ESIA will address gaps found to exist with IFC PS.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The SDR had identified several gaps to make ESOM fully equivalent with the OP 4.0 I, 4.04 and 4.11.
These gaps were addressed in the revised final ESOM that was prepared during the original project.
The Environment and Social Division (ESD) of the Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI) has
eight staff with broad experience in safeguards and, under the support of one environmental consultant
and one social consultant, is conducting the training of MPWT staff at the central and provincial level
to strengthen their knowledge and understanding of ESOM. The Technical and Environmental
Department (TED) of the Department of Roads (DOR) has 3 staff responsible for safeguard
compliance, whose capacity has been significantly strengthened through the implementation of the
original project. Further capacity development will be provided under the AF. ESOM training has
also been initiated and this will be continued under AF but the training approach   willbe modified to
ensure that the activities will also serve the monitoring of safeguard performance at the subproject
level.

On the social side, the existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Group Development
Framework (EGDF) which were prepared under the original project have been updated and disclosed
locally and at the InfoShop. Since the AF will finance same project activities as the original project
in the similar scale, the existing RPF and EGDF, through the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and
Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) prepared as per RPF and EGDF, are considered to remain
valid under AF. In case new impacts are found to occur that are not addressed under the existing
RAPs, or ethnic minorities are found to be present in or have collective attachment to project areas that
were not supported under the original project, a separate RAP or EGDP will be developed in line with
RPF or EGDF. For this purpose, safeguard screening will continue to be conducted for the provincial
road maintenance and emergency rehabilitation programs as works are identified.

No significant issues have been identified for the implementation of ESOM, RAPs and EGDPs, and
the project has no outstanding safeguard issues. ESOM tools were attached to bidding documents of
sub-projects. Environmental and Social Division (ESD) of Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI)
will continue to conduct monitoring of ESOM application in all regions and identify key challenges
for further improvement of ESOM updates. The capacity for safeguard monitoring and reporting of
ESD, Technical and Environment Division of Roads Department as well as contractors have improved
significantly under original project. Draft ESOM update has been slightly revised based on new
Ministerial Order No. 8029/MONRE (December 2013). A national consultative workshop will be
carried out for final approval of the updated ESOM, and translated to English.

Regarding the PPP feasibility study financed under the LRSP-AF, IFC has been providing transaction
advice to MPWT, and will also support the MPWT to prepare the bidding documents for the PPP pilot.
World Bank and IFC's environmental and social specialists have reviewed the terms of reference for
the feasibility study to ensure compatibility with safeguard policies and performance standards (PS},
and have been providing MPWT and the FS consultants with guidance on environmental and social
due diligence for a PPP project. The Bank and IFC environmental and social specialists have also been
working closely together, and have reviewed and agreed on the feasibility study methodology
proposed to undertake the environment and social assessments. This methodology proposes an
iterative approach that consists of an initial fact-finding survey to define the draft road alignment
followed by data collection and detailed full impact assessment for the final road alignment.
The MPWT, the World Bank and IFC teams have reviewed the first draft FS in December 2014 and
found that the safeguard instruments developed need to be further improved in order to meet the
Category A requirements. The Bank task team will continue to advise the MPWT to ensure that the
safeguard instruments prepared under the AF will be developed to fully meet the Bank safeguard
requirements for a Category A project.

As this is a Category A subproject, all safeguard instruments will be submitted to, reviewed and
cleared by the Regional Safeguard Secretariat.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the E~D of the PTI, the TED of DOR, DESIA, the local governments, and local
communities located along the roads. Under the original project consultations with DESIA were
conducted through meetings with key officials in Vientiane while consultation meetings with local
governments and communities along project roads were conducted during the preparation. The
ESOM, RPF and EGDF have been updated for AF and disclosed in Lao and English languages at both
the Infoshop as well as the MPWT offices in Vientiane and district offices in the project areas. The
simple project booklet that describes the nature of the project, expected impacts, compensation
strategies, entitlements and grievance mechanisms would continue to be available to local population.
For the maintenance of provincial roads and disaster recovery works that have not been identified so
far, screening would be conducted and where ethnic minorities are present, they will be consulted in a
free, prior and informed manner and their broad community support will be established.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  09-Apr-20 12
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               11-Apr-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   N/A
EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                             11-Apr-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  09-Apr-~0 12

Date of submission to InfoShop                                               11-Apr-20 12
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                             09-Apr-20 12
Comments: Need to also indicate the expected disclosure ofRP and/or RPF
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 09-Apr-20 12
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 10-Apr-20 12
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                            09-Apr-20 12
Comments: Need to indicate the expected disclosure of IPP and/or IPPF
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A

C Compliance Mo11itoring Indicators at tlte Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X ]        No [ J      NA []
OPIBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [X]       No [ J      NA [ J
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X]     No [ J      NA [    1
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes [ J     No [ J      NA [X]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
or Practice Manager?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement                                      .
H~  a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X J        No [ J      NA [    1
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X 1    No [   1    NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X 1        No [ ]      NA [ 1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [X]       No[ ]       NA [ J
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [X 1    No [ 1      NA [ 1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [X 1    No [   1    NA [ 1
                                                                                                                    I




the project cost?                                                    II



Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include          Yes [X]           No[ )      NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with            Yes [X       J    No [ ]     NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

   Si~uetla11d submitted by:                      Name                                             Dllte
   Task Team Leader:                Mr. Sombath Southivong
   Environmental Specialist:        Ms. Ruxandra Maria Floroiu
                                    (GENDR)

   Socia l Development              Mr. Satoshi Ishihara (GURDR)
   Specialist:
   Additional Environmental         Mr. Makathy Tep (Consultant)
   and/or Social Development        Mr. Fhivio Chaves (Consultant
   Specialist(s):

   Apprtwed bv:
                                                         i
                                                                                   I

                                                                                                                I




   Regional Safeguards              Mr.Pe~
                                                                                                 -6l' {s:
                                                                                   I




   Coordinator:                                    ~         t_~P                           ~3
   Comments:                                         \
   Sector Manager:                  Mr. Michel Kerf\ )_ ~          _j-                  I




                                                                                            2 / 3 / 2015
                                                                                       1:




   Comments:                                                                                                    I




                                                         ·------
                                                                                                                !
