                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 93863


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 4, 2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

  Country:                    Liberia             Project ID:                 P146591
  Project Name:               Supporting Psychosocial Health and Resilience in Liberia
  Task Team Leader:           Rianna Mohammed-Roberts
  Estimated Board Date:       N/A
  Managing Unit:              GHNDR
  Sector(s):                  Health, Nutrition and Population
  Theme(s):                   Heath System Performance (20%), child health (40%),
                              And injuries and NCDs (40%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            N/A
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:       2.75                      Total Bank Financing:   0.00
  Financing Gap:            0.00
    Financing Source                                                                       Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                               0.00
    Others: JSDF TF                                                                           2.75
    Total                                                                                     2.75
  Environmental Category: C
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred       No
  project?


B. Project Development Objective(s):


                                                  1
1. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to respond to the intermediate psychosocial
and mental health impact of the EVD crisis and to build long-term psychosocial health and
resilience at the individual and community levels in Target Areas. The PDO will be achieved
through: (i) the training and capacity building of new and existing cadres of mental health
providers (i.e. mental health clinicians [MHCs], psychosocial counselors, social workers, and
general community health volunteers [gCHVs]); (ii) the implementation of psychosocial/mental
health interventions at the individual/ family and community levels; and (iii) supporting project
management, and monitoring and evaluation, which will help to guide project implementation.

C. Project Description:

2. The proposed project consists of three components. Component 1 responds to the
intermediate psychosocial/mental health impact of the EVD crisis though the implementation of
a set of psychosocial interventions aimed at addressing grief, trauma, and stigma at the individual
and community levels. Component 2 aims to build resilience and long-term psychosocial health,
by focusing on factors that promote and engender trust, efficacy, and acceptance of those with
mental health issues at the individual and community levels. Psychosocial interventions which
enhance resiliency, and health promotion for vulnerable groups (including mothers, children and
adolescents), will also be designed and implemented. Project interventions, therefore, will have a
direct impact on improving maternal and child health in Liberia. Component 3 involves project
monitoring, evaluation and management.

Component 1: Support for the Intermediate Psychosocial Impact of the Ebola Crisis

3. Component 1 will respond to the intermediate psychosocial/mental health impact of the
EVD crisis through the implementation of a set of relevant psychosocial interventions for “first
responders” and individuals directly affected by the EVD crisis at the community levels.
Interventions will take place at both the individual and community-level. In order to ensure that
the delivery of these interventions is of a high quality, this component will also provide training
and capacity-building for specific relevant cadres of Liberia’s mental health workforce (MHCs,
social workers, psychosocial counselors and gCHVs).

4. Individual-level interventions, which may be delivered on a one-on-one basis or in a group
setting, will respond to grief, trauma, fear, and anxiety, through psychological counseling and
similar support. These interventions will be provided by MHCs and social workers, and in the
initial phase, will largely target “first responders” (including staff at ETUs and CCCs, and
member of burial teams) and members of EVD-affected households, with a special focus on
orphaned children, adolescents and mothers. The enormous stress faced by all first responders,
for example, will be addressed through an innovation self-care instrument which will be
culturally relevant, and widely disseminated to all first responders.

5. In addition to this, anti-stigma activities to combat stigma experienced by Ebola survivors
and Ebola-affected households will also be supported under the project. Activities include
community-wide meetings and forums, home visits and health talks at clinics, marketplaces and
common areas of assembly Specifically, gCHVs, with the involvement of community leaders
and County Health and Social Welfare Teams (CHSWTs) as needed, will be used to support the

                                                2
implementation of anti-stigma activities.

6. At the community level, various activities will be supported to promote community
recovery and social cohesion. These include: community dialogues, community support, and
anti-stigma activities. Community support activities, for example, will aim to foster community-
wide grieving and mourning processes (e.g. community-wide memorial services, planting trees
or dedicating community projects in honor of victims of Ebola), and other activities that promote
community healing and social cohesion. Community-level activities will be implemented by
MHCs. Liberia’s traditional and religious healing practitioners will also be engaged at the
community level.

7. Proposed activities and interventions will be closely aligned with, and build upon, ongoing
activities and initiatives. Anti-stigma activities, for example, will be adapted on the basis of
activities supported by the Carter Center in recent months. Likewise, individual interventions
will also be aligned with recent UAF-supported initiatives. The latter includes support to mental
health/psychosocial interventions in previously quarantined communities- Dolos Town (Margibi
County) and West Point (Montserrado County) - through the training of 18 MHCs; and, support
to community dialogues that are currently being implemented by the MOHSW and the Liberia
Center for Outcomes Research in Margibi and Montserrado counties.

8. In order to effectively carry about the proposed interventions under this component,
capacity building and training will be needed. In order to facilitate this process, existing training
curricula will be used and new curricula developed as needed, based on the findings of a mental
health workforce needs assessment conducted at the outset of project implementation.

Component 2: Support to Build Long-Term Psychosocial Health and Resilience at the
Individual and Community Level

9. Component 2 will build long-term psychosocial health and resilience at the individual and
community level through: (a) the implementation of select psychosocial interventions at the
individual and community level; and (b) associated training and capacity building for existing
and new cadres of care providers to implement project-supported interventions and to promote
psychosocial well-being. The interventions implemented under Component 1 (i.e., psychological
counseling, community dialogues, support groups, and anti-stigma activities) will be expanded
upon and will shift in focus as the Ebola crisis subsides to focus on developing a system to
identify and address psychosocial needs while further promoting resiliency, social cohesion and
trust, and collective efficacy. Some additional activities which may be supported under this
Component include: the creation of safe space for recreational activities, peer-support and youth-
empowerment programs; and income-generating activities.

10. To address the needs of children and youth in the Liberian context, the project will support
the development of a new cadre of clinicians – Child Mental Health Clinicians (CMHCs) –
which does not yet exist in the country. A select group of social workers and registered nurses
will be provided training specifically focusing on the psychosocial/mental health needs of
children and youth and effective strategies and approaches to address them. These newly trained
CMHCs will be deployed to around 60 schools throughout the country, where they will be

                                                 3
positioned to provide support to students and teachers in these schools. A small portion of the
CMHCs will be assigned to work with other professionals identified as working closely with
children and youth.

11. Focus will also rest on support to building psychosocial health and resilience amongst
women and girls. This will be particularly important in Liberia given the general vulnerability of
women including in particular female-headed households, and stemming from, inter alia, high
levels of GBV. MHCs, who are already trained in preventing and addressing GBV, for example,
will work closely with an existing network of GBV focal points to address related issues. A
women’s health toolkit will be developed to promote women’s physical and emotional health
needs and may be distributed through this network or by gCHVs.

12. Additional skills training and upgrading of skills will be provided to existing cadres support
under this Project as determined in capacity assessments as the Ebola crisis subsides. Under this
Component, the existing referral system will also be strengthened further, thereby ensuring that
individuals in need of additional or more specialized care are directed to needed facility-based
services as available.

Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation

13.    This component covers the operational costs associated with effectively managing,
monitoring and evaluating the project. This includes support to an implementing agency, which
will be responsible for all day-to-day activities associated with the project, as well as
procurement, fiduciary management, auditing and project monitoring activities (including any
surveys). The implementing agency will be responsible for ensuring necessary monitoring and
evaluation activities at different points throughout the project.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

14. The project will be implemented primarily in two counties which have been significantly
impacted by the EVD outbreak- Monsterrado and Margibi counties. There appear to be no
physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis.


E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)


  F. Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 No                   The project does not trigger any
                                                           physical characteristics relevant to
                                                           the safeguard analysis.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No             This project will not affect or involve


                                                 4
                                                        natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             This project will not affect or involve
                                                        forest resources or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The project will not finance the
                                                        procurement of any pesticide.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No               The project will not affect or involve
                                                        physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             There are no indigenous peoples in
                                                        the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No             The project activities have no land
                                                        acquisition implications.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No             The project will not finance any dam
                                                        construction.
Projects on International Waterways      No             The project will not be located on
OP/BP 7.50                                              international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No             The project will not be located in
                                                        disputed areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project activities have no potential for adverse environmental and social
impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



                                              5
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary   N/A
of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                               N/A
Comment:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a        Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
public place in a form and language that are understandable
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [ x ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in


                                              6
the project legal documents?



III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader:              Name: Rianna Mohammed-Roberts
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards            Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi     Date: 01/16/15
Advisor:
Practice Manager:              Name: Trina S. Haque            Date: 12/17/14




                                             7
