                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                    ADDITIONAL FINANCING
.
                                                                       Report No.: 89713
.
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/09/2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                   Liberia            Project ID:              P147967
                                                  Parent Project ID:       P121686
    Project Name:              Liberia: Youth, Employment, Skills Project Additional Financing
                               (P147967)
    Parent Project Name:       Liberia - Youth, Employment, Skills Project (P121686)
    Task Team Leader:          Emily Weedon Chapman
    Estimated Board date       Not applicable
    Managing Unit:             GSPDR
    Sector(s):                 Education (25%); Health and Other social services (75%)
    Theme(s):                  Social safety nets (75%); Improving labor markets (25%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:      3.40                  Total Bank Financing:    0.00
    Financing Gap:           0.00
        Financing Source                                                                 Amount
        Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                                                  3.40
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   0.00
        International Development Association (IDA)                                          0.00
        Total                                                                                3.40
    Environmental              B - Partial Assessment
    Category:
    Is this a Repeater         No
    project?
    Is this a Transferred      No
    project?

                                                  1
.
    2. Project Development Objective(s)
      A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
      The objective of the Project is to expand access of poor and young Liberians to temporary
      employment programs and to improve youth employability, in support of the Government of
      Liberia’s response to the employment crisis.
.
      B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
      There have been no amendments to the PDO.
.
      C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
      The Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) additional financing does not propose to amend the
      PDO of the parent Project.
.
    3. Project Description
    1.      The ACGF additional financing would provide US$3.4 million to the Youth,
    Employment, Skills Project (YES) Component 1: Community Livelihoods to continue its aim to
    bridge the employment gap within Liberia through the increase of income generating
    opportunities for the poor and youth in particular. The additional financing would allow for
    expansion of the community-based public works subprojects under Component 1 with the
    adoption of an emphasis on productive activities, the piloting of business skills training, and the
    undertaking of an expanded impact evaluation to assess these revisions to the Project cycle. The
    additional financing would target 9,000 Liberians across the country’s 15 counties. In order to
    evaluate the impact of the proposed subproject revisions, the 9,000 participants would be divided
    to receive three variations of the activity, as summarized below and further detailed in the revised
    Project Operation Manual (POM).


             Community Training                                                   Community Livelihoods & Training
                                                  Community Livelihoods
               (Cash transfer +                                                       (Productive public works +
                                                 (Productive publi c works)
            business skills training)                                                   business skills training)
     •1,500 people in 30 communities        •3,750 people in 75 communities      •3,750 people in 75 communities
     •Cash transfer of US$150 per           •Cash transfer of US$150 per         •Cash transfer of US$150 per
      participant                            participant                          participant
     •10 days of life skills training       •Support for productive subproject   •Support for productive subproject
     •10 days of business skills training    identified by community              identified by community
                                            •10 days of life skills training     •10 days of life skills training
                                                                                 •10 days of business skillstraining



    2.     The additional financing would include quotas for the equal participation of men and
    women, as well as for a minimum of 75 percent of participants being aged between 18 and 35
    years old. To date, the parent Project has successfully achieved gender equality and the

                                                          2
additional financing would reflect lessons learned from these activities to maintain this balance.
The latter quota allows for the inclusion of beneficiaries above 35 years old who meet the
Project’s targeting criteria, as detailed in the POM. This inclusive approach to targeting of men
and women, as well as youth and adults aims to promote the Project’s positive contributions to
the dynamics of beneficiary communities.

3.       Subcomponent 1.1 would be revised to encourage the productive outcomes witnessed
amongst some previous Project beneficiaries, such as investing the labor and income transfer
provided through the Project’s public works activities in agriculture and non-farm household
enterprise activities. The additional financing would formalize the community-driven nature of
activities under the parent Project by facilitating community beneficiaries to develop public
works subproject proposals for investment in community farms or other productive activities.
Subproject proposals would outline the identification of activities, allocation of participant labor,
timeline for work phases, necessary inputs, including allocation of land by the community if
necessary, and sustainability and management measures. All subproject proposals will be
screened by the Project’s implementing partner, the Liberia Agency for Community
Empowerment (LACE), prior to the commencement of any activities.

4.      Subcomponent revisions include an emphasis on agricultural activities, although
communities would have the flexibility to identify other priority productive activities, such as
rural road rehabilitation. Based on recommendations of the parent Project’s mid-term review
(MTR) and analysis of work required during an agricultural cycle in Liberia, this subcomponent
proposes to increase the allocation of work days from 40 days (as provided under previous phases
of the Project) to 50 days. To support these activities, the subcomponent would invest in capital
inputs (with an established per community budget limit) as identified by the community
subproject proposals. The revised POM specifies a negative list for these inputs; it includes tree
crops, poultry/livestock, and chemical fertilizers.

5.       The additional financing also would test the viability and impact of providing business
skills training to the Project’s beneficiaries. This would build on the positive outcomes witnessed
from the life skills training taught under the parent Project. A business skills training has been
developed for illiterate learners and depends on interactive pedagogies, including games, group
discussion, and visual aids. The curriculum is based on good practice examples from Cote
d’Ivoire, Liberia, and Uganda, amongst others, has been subject to Government and
non-governmental organization (NGO) consultations, and will be pre-tested with existing
Component 1 beneficiaries. The training would be conducted at the community level over a three
week period by locally recruited trainers, hired by a local NGO partner, and approved and trained
by LACE.          The first week of training would provide introductory lessons about
starting/expanding a household enterprise and basic market research. Participants would then
have a one week break to begin developing simple enterprise development plans, with
one-on-one follow-up by the trainers during this period. The final week of training would focus
on group review and assessment of the plans. Curriculum design and implementation
arrangements prioritize the delivery of training activities in remote and unserved communities.

6.    The additional financing does not propose any changes to the institutional arrangements
of the subcomponent. LACE would remain the implementing partner. LACE would be

                                                 3
    responsible for the overall management of the activities and ensuring their implementation in
    keeping with the revised POM. As outlined in the POM, LACE would recruit local NGO
    partners, Community Facilitators (CFs), to undertake the day-to-day implementation of activities
    at the community level. The Project’s Master Trainers would be retained to provide support for
    CF implementation of the training modules.

    7.      Subcomponent 1.2 would continue to focus on capacity building and technical oversight
    for productive safety net activities. The additional financing would support an impact evaluation
    of the proposed revisions to the Community Livelihoods activities. The key research question of
    the evaluation would be to assess whether the proposed design revisions of a public works
    subproject, with a greater emphasis on training, can promote productive investment toward
    self-employment and/or household enterprise development.

    8.     There would be no change to Component 2: Skills for Jobs activities under which are
    expected to be completed by December 2014.
    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    9.      The additional financing will fund activities under Component 1: Community
    Livelihoods in rural and peri-urban areas in all 15 counties in Liberia. It is proposed that the
    geographical allocation is split equally between the 15 counties, with 600 participants per county.
    The final allocation of participants per county, however, may be revised to take into account the
    relative population and poverty levels within the counties.

    10.     Within the county, geographic selection of districts and then communities will be based
    on the following criteria: poverty, lack of access to income earning opportunities/investment
    activities and basic social services, infrastructure deficits, and previous participation in earlier
    phases of the Project. LACE will organize meetings with local government authorities and NGO
    representatives, first the county level to identify districts and then at the district level to identify
    communities. LACE will retain minutes of the meetings with the key stakeholders, as outlined in
    the POM, regarding selection of beneficiary communities as based on these criteria.
.
    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Gloria Malia Mahama (GURDR )
    Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)
.
    6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                    The project triggers OP4.01 due to the
                                                               planned small scale public works and
                                                               small scale agriculture and aquaculture
                                                               activities  under     the   Community
                                                               Livelihood subproject works. An ESMF
                                                               and RPF have been prepared to address
                                                               potential environmental/social impacts

                                                      4
                                                associated with the demand driven
                                                sub-projects and mitigation measures
                                                related to the project activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No        Natural habitats are not expected to be
                                                significantly impacted by the project; all
                                                subprojects that might trigger OP4.04 are
                                                eliminated at the screening stage.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No        Forests are not expected to be
                                                significantly impacted by the project; all
                                                subprojects that might trigger OP4.36 are
                                                eliminated at the screening stage.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No        The works to be undertaken under this
                                                project are not expected to trigger this
                                                safeguard.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No       The Project does not involve or affect
                                                physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No        There are no Indigenous Peoples in the
                                                Project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes       OP/BP 4.12 is triggered because
                                                Component 1 of the additional financing
                                                emphasizes           expansion           of
                                                community-based public works that will
                                                include investing in community farm,
                                                rural road rehabilitation, and other
                                                productive activities. These activities
                                                may require land acquisition and
                                                preparation for communal agricultural
                                                production. This may lead to temporary
                                                loss of land, livelihoods, and assets. It
                                                could also deepen vulnerability for
                                                occupiers of community lands or inflame
                                                existing land disputes if validation or due
                                                diligence are not undertaken to identify
                                                land owners and occupiers and mitigate
                                                any adverse impact.

                                                A RPF has been prepared for this Project.
                                                Given that sub-projects are identified
                                                during project implementation through a
                                                community participatory process, the
                                                exact activity and location is not yet
                                                known. Therefore, all subprojects will
                                                be screened for potential impacts during
                                                Project implementation. Where land

                                            5
                                                       acquisition and loss of livelihood, assets,
                                                       or access are involved, appropriate action
                                                       plans will be prepared to mitigate these
                                                       impacts. Even for communal land,
                                                       validation and evidence of identification
                                                       and consultation with land owners and
                                                       occupiers where applicable will be
                                                       undertaken and agreement on the usage
                                                       of the land will be evidenced in a signed
                                                       document.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No            The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International Waterways No                 N/A
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No            N/A


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
11.    In accordance with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment,
the YES Project has been classified as a Category B project. The Project is expected to have
limited, localized, and reversible adverse potential impacts on human populations and the wider
environmental which are site-specific and can be relatively easily mitigated in most cases. The
parent YES Project triggered World Bank safeguard policy OP 4.01 (Environmental
Assessment). The additional financing has triggered the same safeguard policy OP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment) and also triggers safeguard policy OP 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement).

12.     The parent Project has shown a satisfactory performance in the implementation of
safeguard arrangements. The overall safeguards compliance of the parent Project was also rated
as Satisfactory in the latest Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR). The activities
undertaken primarily included the basic road maintenance, such as clearing brush and filling
potholes, the cleaning and clearing of public areas, and a limited number of small scale
agricultural activities. The parent YES Project adopted the ESMF for the Community
Empowerment Project II (CEPII), a Bank-financed Grant managed by LACE from 2007 to 2013.
An environmental assessment in January 2009 of the Cash-for-Work Temporary Employment
Project (CfWTEP) component of the CEPII, on which the Parent YES Project Component 1 is
built, found no apparent negative impact from the subproject works.

13.    A safeguards audit, conducted in March 2014, confirmed the parent Project’s overall
environmental compliance as satisfactory. Site visits to selected subproject sites were
undertaken to assess safeguards compliance and performance. A risk based approach was
adopted in the selection of the sites to ensure that every type of subproject works was visited.

                                              6
This included supported sites with small scale agricultural activities that the additional financing
is looking to upscale. It was observed that the existing mitigation measures are addressing the
actual environmental impacts from the works and will be adequate to mitigate expansion of
similar activities under the additional financing. The audit noted that investments are small-scale
community-driven development (CDD) sub-projects whose overall environmental impacts are
minimal and that the project has demonstrated good environmental practice. Copies of
completed subproject screening checklist, EMP were observed as required by the ESMF for the
parent YES Project. Areas for capacity building include clarifying the responsibility of a clear
national focal point for safeguards at LACE and creating a central repository for filing of relevant
safeguard documentation.

14.     The environmental risks foreseen under the Project are limited. The upscaling of the
activities under the additional financing of Component 1 will include small scale agricultural and
aqua-cultural (fish pond) activities with minimal impact to identified environmental receptors
around the subproject sites. In March 2014, an environmental audit of a selected sample of the
activities that were supported under the parent YES Project, and similar to the proposed
upscaling activities under the additional financing, found no observable adverse environmental
impact to surrounding receptors. The additional financing will not support the use of chemical
pesticides as part of the agriculture upscaling activities under Component 1. Chemical pesticides
have been included on the negative list of the project revised POM. Moreover, as noted above,
LACE will screen all proposals for subproject activities prior to commencement of any works.
An EMP checklist will be completed for all subproject works that do not require an ESIA
following the in-house subproject screening.

15.    If the Government or other development partners contribute material inputs to the Project,
Component 1 may also undertake other activities building or improving community assets such
as replacing or laying culverts, painting public buildings, and minor rehabilitation of public
schools, health clinics, community center, and markets. Any such contributions would be
detailed in the community subproject proposal, reviewed by LACE, including screening for any
potential social or environmental impacts, and submitted for World Bank for No Objection prior
to approval. Prior to any such construction, the Project will conduct an assessment of potential
environmental and social impacts. In addition, some works undertaken may require the
provision of ear protection, protective headgear and gloves, masks, and safety shoes to workers
to mitigate safety and health concerns. The revised POM provides further guidance through
specific screening tools and mitigation measures, including a subproject-specific EMP checklist,
as well as an outline of the roles and responsibilities of all parties responsible for safeguards
monitoring and supervision.

16.     This project triggers OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and requires the preparation of a
RPF. Under Component 1, the public works emphasizes investing in community farms and other
productive activities, which may result in land acquisition. Even where lands are donated for free
by the community to the Project, LACE will conduct due diligence verification to validate the
status of land allocated to the Project by the traditional authorities or family heads. Evidence of
informed consultation with community members and occupiers of the land, if any, is required.
Agreements reached during these consultations should be signed by all relevant parties and
documented. The community identification and allocation of land for Project activities helps to

                                                7
mitigate the potential for loss of livelihoods, deepening of vulnerability, or other negative
impacts to specific persons affected by the land released for the Project. However, should there
be land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or losses of access to resources and
livelihoods, the Project will be mandated to develop a full or abbreviated Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) consistent with the guidance in the RPF.

17.     The social risks also include possible tensions regarding employment, including the
selection of project beneficiaries and beneficiary expectations of the Project. Given interest in
previous temporary employment and skills development interventions, the demand by potential
beneficiaries is foreseen to significantly outstrip the supply of work and training opportunities.
This risk can be mitigated through transparent selection processes and effectiveness
dissemination of information. Mechanisms for effective targeting and recruitment are detailed in
the POMs for Component 1. Open and transparent information campaigns will be run to ensure
that the targeting rationale of the Project is clear and well shared. Revisions to the Component 1
POM, as updated for the additional financing, reflect lessons learned under the parent YES
Project to improve targeting and communications activities. The additional financing aims also
to mitigate this risk by increasing funding support to scale-up opportunities for youth under
Component 1.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
18.   As detailed above, the safeguard issues identified are not expected to have any long-term
impacts. Furthermore, establishing preventive mitigation measures and ensuring their proper
implementation throughout the Project also should limit any potential adverse effects in the
immediate and longer-term.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
19.    Project alternatives were not considered relevant because the YES Project is envisioned to
have limited and reversible adverse impacts on human populations and the wider environment
which can be easily mitigated by simple measures. Safeguard and impact evaluations undertaken
of the pilot CfWTEP, the parent YES Project activities to date, and feedback from recent
consultations undertaken during revisions of the Project’s ESMF and RPF for this additional
financing showed an overall positive social and environmental impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
20.     The assessment of Category B projects requires examination of the Project's potential
negative and positive environmental and social impacts and identification of measures needed to
prevent, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental
performance. The Government of Liberia through its implementing partner, LACE, has revised
the existing ESMF and RPF to assess and provide suitable mitigation to all potential identified
adverse environmental and social impacts associated with the additional financing of the YES
Project. The revised ESMF and RPF were duly disclosed publicly in country on June 13, 2014
and to the World Bank’s InfoShop on July 9, 2014. As noted above, the revision of the POM for
Component 1 also reiterates the operational mitigation measures to address potentially negative
social and environmental impacts of the proposed additional financing to the YES Project.

                                               8
21.     The institutional capacity of the relevant Government ministries and Project
implementing partners has improved over the years through successful implementation of similar
World Bank funded projects. LACE has been implementing World Bank-financed projects since
2005 and has an existing ESMF and RPF for the Community Empowerment Project II (CEPII)
and the CfWTEP, which were financed by the World Bank from 2008 to 2013 and overlap
programmatically with the proposed additional financing to the YES Project. The existing ESMF
and RPF have been revised to address potential environmental and social impacts from the
upscaling activities, which include small scale agricultural and aquaculture subproject works. In
all cases, these activities constitute small community-based works that are undertaken in close
consultation with communities and local leaders. Under the parent YES Project, the Component
1 subprojects were mostly cleaning and clearing of roads and other public spaces, as well as a
limited number of cases of support of communal agriculture and aquaculture. Under the
proposed additional financing, the upscaling activities will include the Project’s support to small
scale communal agricultural and aquaculture works. The additional financing will not support
the use of chemical pesticide as part of the agriculture upscaling activities under Component 1.
Taken together, these activities (cleaning and clearing of roads/other public spaces and
communal agriculture/aquaculture) cover the entire spectrum of works that may be undertaken
by the Project beneficiaries that participate in Component 1.

22.      In January 2010, in response to recommendations of a Bank safeguard supervision
mission of the CEPII, LACE developed a Social and Environmental Impacts Management Plan,
which focuses on delegating responsibility for the oversight of safeguard measures to specific
staff, to strengthen its capacity on safeguards. This Management Plan will be sustained under the
proposed additional financing to the YES Project. It will be enhanced further through the
recruitment of a Social Protection Program Manager to serve as the main safeguard focal point at
the national level. LACE Project Engineers, Field-based Engineers, and Community Facilitators
(CFs) will oversee the potential environmental impacts arising from LACE activities. A
safeguards orientation workshop was organized on April 3, 2014 at LACE for all staff and
partners with responsibilities outlined in the Management Plan to highlight the potential impacts
associated with the Component 1 subproject activities and identify their specific roles as part of
the implementation plan. Additionally, LACE, with assistance from the Bank’s Safeguards
Specialist, has developed a detailed subproject screening checklist of potential impacts arising
from specific activities to allow responsible staff to effectively monitor and mitigate
environmental impacts of projects.

23.    The additional financing would provide resources to expand the impact evaluation of
Component 1. This will include a thorough environmental and social audits of subproject works
to assess performance and compliance with safeguard due diligence within the revised ESMF
and RPF and offer opportunity for recommended action plans address any identified
noncompliance.

24.    For Component 2, the Ministry of Youth and Sports is the responsible entity; however, the
additional financing does not allocate resources to the continuation of Component 2 activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                9
    25.     The key stakeholders involved in the YES Project include the Ministries of Planning and
    Economic Affairs, Youth and Sports, Education, Labor, Agriculture, and Public Works, LACE,
    training service providers, Community Facilitators, Community Technicians, communities
    benefiting from the Community Livelihood activities, and individuals receiving temporary
    employment or skills training through the Project. Throughout the Project’s development, these
    stakeholders have been involved in a series of discussions regarding its rationale, design, and
    implementation arrangements. They will continue to be involved throughout its implementation;
    community participation—specifically regarding the selection of Project beneficiaries and the
    works undertaken—is a key feature of Component 1.

    26.    Additionally, various stakeholder consultations have been held during the preparation of
    the revisions to the Project’s ESMF and RPF as part of the proposed additional financing. The
    consultations took the form of community fora, focus group meetings at both community and
    roundtable meetings. Key project stakeholders identified for consultations included Government
    ministries and agencies, specifically the Local Government Authorities, local NGOs, and project
    beneficiary community members. Meetings have been held with key officials and opinion
    leaders to examine the level of awareness and involvement with the Project, concerns of Project
    implementation, and to obtain relevant documents or baseline information of Project area and the
    environmental and social setting of Liberia. The consultation of the revised ESMF and RPF was
    undertaken within selected communities in geographically representative counties from March
    23, 2014 to April 3, 2014. The consultations also served to gather information on the mandates
    and permitting requirements to inform the development of the Project.

    27.    Under the previous CfWTEP (which was an activity under the CEPII) and parent YES
    Project, LACE disclosed its relevant safeguards documents in country and World Bank Infoshop.
    The revised ESMF and RPF were duly disclosed publicly in country on June 13, 2014 and to the
    World Bank’s InfoShop on July 9, 2014. Copies were also shared with the Liberian
    Environmental Protection Agency and the Ministry of Youth and Sports on June 13, 2014.
.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                            April 16, 2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                         July 9, 2014
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of Not applicable
    the EA to the Executive Directors
    “In country" Disclosure: Republic of Liberia                           June 13, 2014
    Comments:
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                            April 16, 2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                         July 9, 2014
    "In country" Disclosure: Republic of Liberia                           June 13, 2014


                                                   10
    Comments:
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
    the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
.
    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X ] No [          ] NA [   ]
    report?
    OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ X ] No [        ] NA [   ]
    framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [   ] NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
    Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [    ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Yes [        ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
    Bank?
    Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [      ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
    OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [    ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the Yes [         ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                      Yes [    ] No [ X ] NA [      ]
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X ] No [        ] NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [      ] NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ X ] No [         ] NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of


                                                   11
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [   ] NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X ] No [        ] NA [   ]
    includes the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X ] No [       ] NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?
.
    III. APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader:            Name: Emily Weedon Chapman
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards          Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi       Date: July 9, 2014
    Advisor:
    Practice Manager:            Name: Stefano Paternostro         Date: July 9, 2014




                                                12
