                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                      IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                        Report No.: 94963

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country:              Macedonia, former Yugoslav                        P154263
                                                      Project ID:
                         Republic of
   Project Name:         Local and Regional Competitiveness Project
   Team Leader(s): Gordana Popovikj Friedman,Tatiana Segal
   Estimated Date 02-Nov-2015
   of Approval:
   Managing Unit: GTCDR                           Lending         Lending Instrument
                                                  Instrument:
   Sector(s):      Public administration- Industry and trade (10%), Vocational training (10%),
                         General industry and trade sector (80%)
   Theme(s):             Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Micro, Small and
                         Medium Enterprise support (20%), Regional integration (20%), Education for
                         the knowledge economy (10%), Cultural Heritage (20%)
   Financing (in USD Million)
   Total Project Cost: 24.43                            Total Bank Financing: 0.00
   Financing Gap:      0.00
     Financing Source                                                                             Amount
     Borrower                                                                                        2.20
     EC European Commission                                                                         22.03
     Free-standing TFs for ECA PF Sector Unit                                                        0.20
     Total                                                                                          24.43
   Environment        B - Partial Assessment
   Category:

  B. Project Development Objective(s)
  12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (a) strengthen the capacity of public and private
  authorities to formulate, prepare, implement and manage integrated tourism development at the
  destination level; (b) construct and rehabilitate critical infrastructure essential for sustained economic
  activity in the tourism sector; and (c) facilitate development of destination management organizations
  and sustainable destination services.
  C. Project Description
  14.      The project will provide assistance and capacity building to enhance the business
environment and skills along with targeted investments in infrastructure, support to tourism activities
and promote destinations, and will help foster linkages with related industries and SMEs. The
project will support a limited number of potential tourism destinations in the country over a four-year
period through a combination of infrastructure investments, technical assistance, and capacity
building support to public sector and non-state sector entities. This is expected to result in an
improved enabling environment for private sector investments, including the establishment of
regional tourism destination management structures.

15.      Stakeholders and beneficiaries will be public agencies and private organizations at the
central, regional and local levels. At the central level, the stakeholders will be the Office of the
Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs in the General Secretariat, the Ministry of Economy,
the Ministry of Local Self-Government, Ministry of Culture, and the Agency for Promotion and
Support of Tourism. At the regional and local levels, the stakeholders will include the participating
municipalities, Centers for Regional Development, educational institutions, and business and non-
governmental organizations, including destination management organizations.

16.        The project will be financed through a Hybrid Trust Fund and executed as three
components, one executed by the Bank and two by the Government of fYR Macedonia. The
activities in the Bank-executed component (Component 1) will help to continue, scale up, and
expand the capacity building and technical assistance activities in tourism currently underway at the
central level under the Macedonia Competitive Industries and Innovation Support Program (grant
from Multi-Donor Trust Fund, effective through mid 2016). At the same time, the Bank will provide
implementation support for the activities under the recipient-executed components (components 2
and 3).

17.       Component 1: Capacity building for local competitiveness (Bank executed). Estimated
amount: EUR 2 million. One of the objectives of the Macedonian Government and the EU
Delegation is to strengthen the implementation capacity of key government entities and the capacity
of the private sector and civil society organizations to play an active role in the development of
tourism in Macedonia. The project would be a strong instrument to build and enhance this capacity
by creating mechanisms for more effective inter-agency coordination and stakeholder engagement,
strategic planning, entrepreneurship, and skills development for local competitiveness. The
component includes two sub-components:

18.        Sub-component 1.1. Institutional strengthening of public sector agencies: This sub-
component will provide technical assistance on strengthening of the business environment
(registration, licensing, investment, public private dialogue); inter-agency coordination; public-
private consultations and stakeholder engagement; access to information; and strategic planning for
tourism development and destination management at the central, regional and local levels. This sub-
component will finance the development of a new National Tourism Strategy and Action Plan. The
team will discuss with the Borrower the importance of including a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment in this process, including the possibility of supporting this process under the
Project.

19.       Sub-component 1.2: Business and skills development for private sector: This sub-
component will provide technical assistance and training to private sector and non-governmental
(civil society) entities at central and local (destination) levels. The objective is to stimulate
entrepreneurship, skills development, and the growth of MSMEs necessary for competitiveness and
tourism development. Areas of support to business development will include TA and training to
facilitate access to business services (consulting, mentoring, innovation); access to finance;
stimulation of business networks and supply chains in the tourism sector; and development of service
standards in tourism-related services (accommodation, catering, tour guides) based on good
international practices.

20.      With regard to skills development, the sub-component will support development of curricula
and competence-based skills training necessary for a thriving tourism sector and tailored to market
needs. The activities will (a) assess the needs of employers; (b) help to design specialized,
competency-based trainings and certification skills programs (e.g. in destination management,
marketing), in collaboration with institutions such as TVET and lifelong learning centers, industry,
civil society organizations, and local employment agencies.

21.       Component 2: Investment in infrastructure at destinations (Recipient executed). Estimated
amount: EUR 15.8 million. This component will support large and small-scale investments in
critical infrastructure at selected tourism destinations, and facilitate development and upgrading of
product offers to potential destination visitors. These investments are critical for unlocking the
tourism potential of the destinations, and will include rehabilitation of access roads to sites and
attractions, signposting, upgrading and mapping of hiking and biking routes and trails, upgrading of
ski resort facilities, rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage sites, tourist information offices,
rehabilitation of spas and ski resorts, local branding and marketing at key sites, rehabilitation of
publicly owned vacation facilities, upgrading of tourist services and products along transport routes,
and development of tools for destination promotion and marketing. The component will include two
sub-components:

22.       Sub-component 2.1: Large-scale infrastructure investments: This sub-component will
finance a few larger integrated infrastructure projects which are critical for destination and business
development. The investments will be a maximum amount of 3 million EUR per project. They will
be provided in the form of grants to qualified municipalities and will require co-financing from the
municipalities. The share of co-financing will be determined during project preparation. The
investments will support infrastructure projects in a limited number of regions (3-4) that demonstrate
the potential and institutional capacity for tourism development and destination management. The
selection of regions and projects will be conducted through a competitive, transparent and inclusive
process. The selection criteria will be defined during project preparation.

23.       Sub-component 2.2: Small-scale investments at destinations. This sub-component will
finance small-scale public and private investments in municipalities which are or are not part of one
of the larger projects, but demonstrate the potential for development of their tourism offerings and
for linkages with other business sectors to stimulate local economic development and job creation.
The sub-component will finance works, equipment and promotional activities of up to EUR 30,000
per beneficiary municipality or entity. The emphasis will be on sub-projects that demonstrate the
potential for services and employment generation among the poor, disadvantaged and marginalized
groups (e.g., Roma) in both urban and rural underdeveloped communities.

24.      Component 3: Strengthening destination and project management (Recipient executed).
Estimated amount: EUR 2 million. This component will finance technical assistance, equipment, and
capacity building at the destinations; and project management. The component will be divided in two
sub-components, as follows:

25.      Sub-component 3.1: Destination management organizations: This sub-component will
provide support through technical assistance, equipment and services for establishment of destination
management organizations, through the combined efforts of public and private sector stakeholders
and communities. Destination Management Organizations (DMOs), as multi-stakeholder bodies, will
ensure that visitor infrastructure, facilities, information and services are effectively managed and
promoted to develop tourism products and attract visitors. Up to two pilot DMOs will be initiated
during project preparation with technical assistance from the Competitive Industries and Innovation
Support Program. The pilot DMOs will be scaled up with support from the project and will ensure
that lessons are learned and adapted to other destinations, for informed replicability.

26.       Sub-component 3.2: Project management: This sub-component aims to strengthen the
management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacities of the Project Implementation Unit
(PIU). It will finance technical assistance, training, equipment, and operational costs associated with
implementation of the project, including M&E, project audits, and creation of a framework for
impact assessment and lessons learned, to inform future investments in tourism development. Staff
and consultants of the PIU will be trained in tourism development and destination management, and
in the concepts, policies and activities supported under the project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is expected to cover entire country focusing on tourism development. The project would
through component 2 target tourism infrastructures to improve which might range from large scale:
public sanitation facilities, waste management, access roads to local attractions, preservation of
cultural heritage sites, ski trails; to small scale: small-scale public infrastructure of individual
municipalities which are or are not part of one of the larger projects but demonstrate potentials for
development of their tourism offer and linkages with other business sectors (hiking an bicycling
trails, rehabilitation of cultural, natural heritage and sports sites, local branding and marketing at key
sites). Some facilities might be located in buildings of high cultural value. The support for business
(particularly agri-business) enterprises will only include measures to promote business linkages, and
not support in the form of investments in public infrastructure.
Large scale projects imply maximum amount of 3 million EUR per project and will require a
matching contribution at least 20% in cash and in-kind from the participating municipalities; while
small scale project: works, equipment and promotional activities of up to 30,000 EUR per
beneficiary. the maximum grant of € 3 million will largely limit the works to rehabilitation of
existing infrastructure or small scale new infrastructure.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Project will be implemented through a hybrid Trust Fund, i.e., as a combination of Recipient-
Executed and Bank-Executed Trust Fund. The responsible body for the project implementation will
be the General Secretariat through the Office (Cabinet) of the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic
Affairs in coordination with all relevant agencies and key stakeholders, including the Secretariat for
European Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy, Agency for Promotion and Support to
Tourism, Ministry of Local Self Government, and the Regional Development Centers in the
Government. The implementing agency will manage all agreed activities in close coordination with
the local beneficiaries and the Bank team. The Bank Team will provide implementation support and
supervision, to make sure that the activities are implemented following the relevant World Bank
rules and the Administration Agreement between the World Bank Group and the European Union.
The Bank will be also responsible for implementation of two components (component 1 and 2)
which will be established as Bank Executed Trust Fund. In this capacity, the Bank will provide
technical assistance for capacity building for the beneficiary entities from the public and private
  sector. The capacity building TA might be used for safeguards training.

  A Working Group has been established for the identification of the proposed EU action on local and
  regional competitiveness, for which they mutually approached the World Bank for assistance with
  preparation and implementation. The Working Group consists of members of the relevant ministries,
  secretariats and agencies and is actively involved in the project preparation with the World Bank.
  The Working Group will be responsible for addressing the fiduciary arrangements, environmental
  management plans, project and grant manuals, grant agreements, monitoring and evaluation
  arrangements, procurement and capacity building plans. During project preparation, the Working
  Group and the Bank will also discuss and agree on the implementation arrangements for the
  Recipient-Executed project components.

  Stakeholders and beneficiaries will be public agencies and private organizations at the central,
  regional and local levels. At the central level, the stakeholders will be the Office of the Deputy Prime
  Minister for Economic Affairs in the General Secretariat, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of
  Local Self-Government, Ministry of Culture, and the Agency for Promotion and Support of Tourism.
  At the regional and local levels, the stakeholders will include the participating municipalities,
  Centers for Regional Development, educational institutions, and business and non-governmental
  organizations, including destination management organizations.
  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
  Natasa Vetma (GENDR)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              For the Component 1 – Capacity building for
  BP 4.01                                               local competitiveness (Bank executed)
                                                        The Environmental and Social Specialists on the
                                                        Task Team will review the TORs to support
                                                        entrepreneurship and skills development as they
                                                        become available, to assess where there might
                                                        be Safeguards-related implications, particularly
                                                        opportunities to promote environmental and
                                                        social sustainability approaches to tourism. The
                                                        team will discuss with the Borrower the
                                                        importance of including a Strategic
                                                        Environmental and Social Assessment in this
                                                        process, including the possibility of supporting
                                                        this process under the Project. (If so,
                                                        preparation of the SESA should be consistent
                                                        with both national laws and WB policies).

                                                        For the Component 2: Investment in
                                                        infrastructure at destinations (Recipient
                                                        executed), an Environmental Management
                                                        Framework (EMF) will be prepared by Working
                                    Group, identifying EU, FYR Macedonia and
                                    Word Bank requirements and practices for the
                                    supported sub-projects. The EMF will define the
                                    environmental screening and assessment
                                    procedures for the project and sub projects.
                                    According to the EMF, the sub project
                                    applicants will be required to carry out adequate
                                    type of environmental assessment of the
                                    proposed subprojects according to World Bank
                                    safeguards procedures and to obtain
                                    environmental permits as prescribed by the
                                    national and EU legislation. The EMF should
                                    include guidance for going beyond an
                                    assessment of the specific investments to be
                                    financed directly by the project, and undertaking
                                    appropriate environmental and social “due
                                    diligence” assessments of existing facilities and
                                    activities that would receive the support.
                                    EMP checklists, site specific EMPs or EIAs
                                    depending on the environmental impact will be
                                    prepared for individual sub-projects. For those
                                    identified and confirmed EMP checklist or EIAs
                                    will be prepared and disclosed prior to
                                    appraisal. The project will support solely
                                    category B and C sub-projects.
                                    The environmental and social risks will be
                                    limited both by the exclusion of Category A
                                    activities and by the amount of funding
                                    available: i.e., it is anticipated that the
                                    maximum grant for any one project will be € 3
                                    million, which will largely limit the works to
                                    rehabilitation of existing infrastructure or small
                                    scale new infrastructure. Other risk-limiting
                                    decisions include the exclusion of sites within
                                    designated “Special Tourism Development
                                    Zones” (based on social issues and potential
                                    controversies), and excluding investments
                                    within protected areas.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   It will be determined, during the project
                                    preparation, whether the sub-projects affecting
                                    natural habitats will be excluded.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    OP 4.36 is not triggered as the project will not
                                    involve forest exploitation or management. To
                                    the extent that there would be the potential for
                                    impacts on natural forests, these would be
                                    covered under OP 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project will not finance purchase of
                                        pesticides, but OP 4.09 is triggered as the
                                        project aims to support the development and
                                        expansion of agribusiness enterprises, which
                                        could involve agricultural intensification and
                                        other activities that could affect pest
                                        management practices including pesticide use.
                                        No separate Pest Management Plan will be
                                        prepared, but the EMF will provide specific
                                        guidance for ensuring appropriate selection and
                                        use/handling of pesticides and for promoting
                                        Integrated Pest Management among
                                        agribusiness enterprises receiving project
                                        support.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project might support rehabilitation of
BP 4.11                                 historical / protected buildings. Therefore the
                                        EMF will include a section that will serve as the
                                        “Physical Cultural Heritage Management
                                        Framework” for the project, setting out selection
                                        and screening criteria and measures to be taken
                                        in such cases. This should include instructions
                                        that the beneficiary should prepare a “Physical
                                        Cultural Heritage Plan,” which can be a separate
                                        document or can be a dedicated section in the
                                        sub-project EMP.
                                        The EMF, as well as individual EMPs will
                                        include chance find clause.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Second component of the project might finance
4.12                                    infrastructure projects such as access roads,
                                        hiking and bicycling trails, ski resort facilities,
                                        rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage
                                        sites, spa’s, signposting, tourist information
                                        office or anything else that will support tourism
                                        development in the region. The investments will
                                        be financed based on the prior strategy or action
                                        plan defined by coalition of public and private
                                        partners. There will be public investment as
                                        well as private beneficiaries. For the public
                                        investments there might be need for involuntary
                                        land acquisition or small scale displacement and
                                        thus the proposal is to define a policy
                                        framework to address any potential need for
                                        involuntary private land acquisition or any other
                                        land in private use or small scale displacement.
                                        The framework will provide also a template for
                                        the Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan if
                                        needed
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
  Projects on International           TBD             During the project preparation, the team will
  Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                discuss with the Borrower whether any water-
                                                      related investments will be eligible. It might be
                                                      decided that only rehabilitation of existing water
                                                      schemes/networks will be eligible, in which
                                                      case the policy will be triggered but the Team
                                                      can seek an exception to the riparian notification
                                                      requirement.
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
  7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
  A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
       i. Explanation
          yes, to detrermine the status of OP 7.50 and OP 4.04
       ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
          22-Apr-2015
  B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
     EMF, EMPs for sub-projects identified and confirmed during reparation period and Resettlement
     Framework will be disclosed and publically consulted prior to the project appraisal. Once
     finalized, EMF will be disclosed on the General Secretariat website both in English, Macedonian
     and Albanian and hardcopies will be available at General Secretariat and Delegation of the
     European Union premises for at least two weeks. In addition, the EMPs will be disclosed on the
     sub-project websites if existing, and hard-copies will be available at premises. At the same time,
     call for public consultation meeting of the will be issued (through the website and direct mail to
     different stakeholders) and date and venue of the meeting will be set. The Working Group will as
     well request written comments and will provide both postal and email address for sending
     comments and suggestions on EMF and EMPs. EMF, EMPs and Resettlement Framework will be
     finalized according to the comments from public consultations and sent to InfoShop before project
     appraisal. Public consultation minutes which will include invitations, announcements, list of
     attendants, summaries of comments received, etc. should be collected and attached to the final
     version of EMF and EMPs for Infoshop disclosure.

     During project implementation, the type of environmental due diligence documents for individual
     sub-projects (works) would be determined, based on the EMF. The beneficiary will prepare the
     required documents (including EIAs, EMPs, EMP Checklists), which will be reviewed by the
     Working Group, disclosed and consulted according to EMF (prepared for the project), prior to
     approval of the sub-project.

     During project implementation, the type of environmental due diligence documents for individual
     sub-projects (works) would be determined, based on the EMF. The beneficiary will prepare the
     required documents (including EIAs, EMPs, EMP Checklists), which will be reviewed by the
     Working Group, disclosed and consulted according to EMF (prepared for the project), prior to
     approval of the sub-project.
IV. APPROVALS
  Team Leader(s):                  Name: Gordana Popovikj Friedman,Tatiana Segal
  Approved By:
  Safeguards Advisor:              Name:                                                              Date:
  Practice Manager/                Name:                                                              Date:
  Manager:



  1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
  InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
  affected persons.
