                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/22/2014                                   Report No.: AC7146
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096481                  Original Project Name: Municipal Services
                                              Improvement
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav           Project ID: P150342
Republic of
Project Name: ADDITIONAL FINANCING - MSIP (EU-IPA)
Task Team Leader: Toshiaki Keicho
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30,        Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: GSURR                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);Water supply (30%);Sanitation
(20%);Solid waste management (20%)
Theme: Decentralization (20%);Rural services and infrastructure (60%);Municipal
governance and institution building (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      5.17
         Free-standing TFs for ECA CU4 Country Unit                   21.37
                                                                      26.54
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) 'to improve transparency, financial
sustainability and delivery of targeted municipal services in the participating
municipalities' remains relevant and will not be changed.

3. Project Description
The proposed project additional financing will introduce a new component for the rural
investment window. The additional finance funds will mainly target rural municipalities,
but urban municipalities with rural settlements will also be eligible if such urban
municipalities consider infrastructure investments in rural settlements within their
jurisdictions. The project would continue (i) financing investments in basic local
infrastructure and municipal services; (ii) providing technical assistance (TA) to
municipalities and Communal Service Enterprises (CSEs); (iii) supporting institutional
reforms in municipalities through performance grants; (iv) supporting operation of the
Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for project implementation (v) additional
component E will finance same type of projects as in component A with the difference
that eligible municipalities will be rural ones and urban with limit to their rural
settlements.

 Component A (Municipal Investments) – This component provides loans to
municipalities that are eligible to borrow. Investments financed under this component are
mainly for revenue-generating services and other investment projects of high priority to
municipalities and with cost saving potential. Sub-projects are not limited to certain
sectors. However, revenue-earning investments are primarily for services and
infrastructure provided by CSEs, while cost-saving projects are either under CSEs or
under the direct provision of municipalities.

 Component B (Capacity Building and Institutional Reform) – This component includes
consultancy services and technical assistance for:

 1.    Sub-project preparation: feasibility studies and required financial, environmental
and social assessments; support preparation of final designs and bidding documents; and
provide support for bidding procedures for the kinds of investments funded under
Component A.

 2.      Local capacity building: finance technical assistance, training and consulting
services for municipalities and CSEs to improve performance in service provision and
meet the reform objectives of the Project. Capacity-building activities and institutional
strengthening would be related in particular to helping the municipalities and CSEs meet
criteria for Component C. The TA would also support communications and public
outreach activities.

 3.    National level Institutional strengthening: support to national agencies through
study of policy issues and strategy development related to the financial sustainability of
services.

 Component C (Performance-based Investment Grants) – This component provides
grants to municipalities as an incentive and reward fo implementation of reform
initiatives aimed at performance improvements in service delivery. Performance grants
are awarded according to simple and objective criteria based on the enforcement of legal
and regulatory requirements currently in place in FYR Macedonia (outlined in the Project
Operational Manual, POM). Performance criteria are formulated as a menu for
municipalities to prioritize their own reform agenda. The performance grant can be
awarded anytime up to one year before the close of the Project, whenever the measures
are verifiably implemented. The grants can be used for new investment of the same type
funded by the MSIP, including extension of the original investment funded by the
subloan. The municipality needs to present to the PMU a subproject proposal meeting all
the same appraisal criteria as for Component A investments. The Performance Grant is
subject to a separate Grant Agreement.
  Component D (Project Management and Operating Cost) – This component supports
operation of a project management unit (PMU) and assists with project implementation
and monitoring, as well as preparation of new sub-projects. The component finances
incremental operating costs incurred by the PMU, which is responsible for overall project
management and reports to the Ministry of Finance. The project management services
assist with project implementation in municipalities and CSEs, provide guidance and
support to local project entities, and ensure that the Bank fiduciary (procurement and
financial management) and safeguard (environment, social/land acquisition or other)
guidelines are observed. The PMU is also responsible for appraisal of sub-projects that
become eligible during the course of project implementation. In addition, the PMU will
establish a project portal website as central forum for stakeholder dialogue and feedback.

  Component E (IPA-Rural Investment Window): This component will provide grants for
municipalities to develop rural infrastructure. The grant will finance works, goods and
technical assistance associated with rural infrastructure sub-projects in eligible
municipalities. Eligible municipalities are all rural municipalities. Urban municipalities
will be eligible with condition that investment will be for a rural settlement.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project activities are located throughout the country. Location of sub-project is not
known at present, as it will be determined on eligibility basis based on multiple criteria
analysis. The sub-projects are likely to be located in all regions of the country. Until now,
sub-projects prepared for additional financing are located in municipalities of Vinica,
Berovo, Bosilovo. Kriva PAlanka, Rankovce, Petrovec, Cashka, Shuto Orizari etc and
include activities related to: improvement of public street lightning; rehabilitation and
energy efficiency measures in public buildings (schools, kindergartens, municipal
administration buildings); reconstruction of municipal roads; rehabilitation of water
supply networks; construction and/or rehabilitation of storm water drainage systems;
provision of basic equipment and vehicles for communal waste management.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
   Mr Nikola Ille (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Due to the demand driven nature of project Component A (Municipal Investments) and
Component C (Performance-based Investment Grants), the list of sub-projects to be
financed throughout the project life is not known at present. However, there will be no
significant change of scope of the Project activities as compared to the existing, ongoing
Project, which is classified as environmental category B. Due to nature of activities and
scale of the sub-projects, which are financed by municipalities, if properly executed the
sub-projects, will not have large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Activities
under Components A, C and E, if properly executed, are not expected to generate
significant adverse environmental effects. Sub-projects that belong to environmental
category A according to OP 4.01, or negatively affect trans-boundary rivers are not
eligible for financing under the Project. The Additional Financing part of the Project may
include financing of a small-scale wastewater treatment plants (capacity up to 10
thousands e.p.). Sub project requiring permanent land acquisition are unlikely but eligible
and the LARPF prepared for the original project is relevant as the same nature of the
activities under the component E, IPA additional finance are foreseen as in component A.
Social safeguard due diligence practice will be the same as in the original project. The
procedure for determining whether subprojects are eligible or not for Project funding is
outlined in the Project Operational Manual (POM). The procedure for determining
whether an EA/EMP or EMP alone is required for a subproject, depending on its nature,
is laid out in the Environmental Assessment and Management Framework Document,
which has been disclosed in August 2014.

 The expected environmental impacts are closely related to the nature of sub-projects,
but are generally associated to health and safety of construction workers and general
population alike; management of construction waste; prevention of water and soil
pollution from construction activities; dust and noise management; and management of
hazardous waste (mostly asbestos panels and related material). Mitigation of these
negative impacts will be undertaken using already widely applied and known methods
contained in the code of good construction practice, which will be enforced on all
construction sites.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Provided that the environmental mitigation actions, which will be specified for each
specific sub-project, are implemented – there are no indirect and/or long term impacts
anticipated. The Project implementation team is already experienced in design and
implementation of relevant measures, through the ongoing Project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives for each sub-project are evaluated in sub-project PADs that are
prepared for any proposed investment, including the alternative of doing nothing.
However, in most cases, doing nothing would not be an option, as the municipal
infrastructure would deteriorate to the point where provision of even the minimal
municipal services in respective area would not be possible.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy 4.1, an Environmental Assessment and
Management Framework (EAMF) Report has been prepared for the project and disclosed
in the country on October 28, 2008. The final report was submitted to the Bank in
November 2008. The EAMF Report presents an overview of the legal framework of
environmental and local-self government sectors in Macedonia; procedures for
environmental assessment for the project development required under national
legislation; procedures for environmental assessment for project development under
World Bank procedures, and analysis of potential environmental impacts caused by sub-
projects during implementation of different types of activities. The Report lists the
potential negative environmental impacts for each type of project activities and provides
lists of environmental mitigation and monitoring activities in order to mitigate and
neutralize the relevant impacts. The Report provides a framework outlining how
Environmental Mitigation Plans and Environmental Monitoring Plans (EMPs) are
developed for each type of sub-project, and when site-specific EA/EIA is needed. The
EAMF has been updated in June 2014 to include subsequent development and revisions
of the legal framework in the country and to include generic EMPs for all sub-project
activities (per type of activity) which are funded by the existing Project. EAMF has been
re-disclosed in country in August 2014 and final version provided to the Bank in
September 2014.
  The EAMF and POM detail the implementation roles of the Borrower and the Bank in
preparation, approval and execution of EMPs for each sub-project.

 As part of sub-project identification, the Project Management Unit (PMU) undertakes
environmental screening for each proposed sub-project and develops respective
environmental management and mitigation plans (EMPs), which are subsequently
included in bidding documents. Environmentally-related activities and procedures are
carried out by the Borrower as designed, with due diligence and sufficient attention to
details. Compliance with measures prescribed in sub-project specific EMPs is reviewed
by PMU staff at regular intervals and written reports on findings prepared and filed in the
PMU.

 Contracts for civil works under the project are subject to screening for environmental
impacts by the Ministry of Environment in the Borrower country. All studies and bidding
documents related to civil engineering works include measures to minimize and/or
mitigate potential environmental damage. Separate EMPs alone or site-specific EA/EIAs
and EMPs are prepared for each sub-project; even if EA/EIA studies are not required by
the national legislation, the Borrower observes requirements set in the EAMF Report and
respective EMPs prepared for this project. Those EMPs/EAs/EIAs are reviewed and
endorsed by both the responsible environmental entity in the Borrower country and the
World Bank.

 Monitoring compliance in accordance with the findings of the Environmental
Assessment Report and requirements of relevant EMPs, including progress monitoring on
EMP implementation, is undertaken by the Ministry of Finance and reported to the World
Bank twice per year in the semi-annual progress reports.

  In addition to the environmental safeguard above, the project triggered involuntary
resettlement safeguard policy (OP 4.12) because some subprojects may require temporary
access to land, possibly land acquisition. However, subprojects are not likely to require
resettlement. The PMU checks potential for this trigger in all investments and ensures:
(i) whether land acquisition or access to land is required; (ii) if private land acquisition
can be avoided; and (iii) where resettlement is required, that it is done in accordance with
agreed procedures. Chance finds might be discovered during civil works, and these
should be reported to the appropriate authorities and dealt with accordingly. The
procedures will continue to be the same also for the component E, given to the same
nature of the sub-projects, with the difference that the sub-projects will be financed as a
grant.

 A land acquisition and resettlement policy framework (LARPF) has been developed for
the project to be used for sub-projects to be appraised. For appraised sub-projects, all land
acquisition and resettlement issues are clarified and, if needed, a land acquisition and
resettlement action plan (LARAP) would be developed accordingly. The LARPF was
disclosed on October 28, 2008. Any subsequent LARAPs, if required, would have to be
reviewed by the Bank and publicly disclosed. To date, there was no need for LARAPs.
The Operational Manual includes the environmental and land acquisition frameworks as
well as instructions on how to handle chance finds. The POM also includes the Bank
OPs 4.01 and 4.12 requirements dealing with these safeguards, as well as FYR
Macedonia laws and regulations. These are provided to participating municipalities and
consultants/contractors.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key beneficiaries of the subprojects are citizens, benefitting from improved local
government services, the customers of the communal service enterprises (CSEs) owned
by the municipalities; in cases of services managed directly by the municipalities, such as
greenmarkets, the beneficiaries are all users including vendors and consumers.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/11/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/26/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/24/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/01/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/28/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/18/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not applicable.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Toshiaki Keicho                           10/14/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Nikola Ille                               10/14/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr Bekim Imeri                               10/14/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sumila Gulyani                            10/15/2014
  Comments:
