                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/11/2013                                    Report No.: AC7078
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Malawi                              Project ID: P148964
Project Name: Second Additional Financing to the Malawi Agricultural Sector Wide
Approach - Support Project
Task Team Leader: Olivier Durand
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2,        Estimated Board Date: October 23, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTA3                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%);Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (17%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (13%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (83%);Land administration and management
(10%);Rural policies and institutions (7%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Malawi Agricultural Sector Wide Approach Support Proj MDTF120.00
                                                                      120.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve the effectiveness of investments aimed
at food security and sustainable agricultural growth, and to strengthen the natural
resource base in agricultural lands, through a doubling of the area under sustainable land
management as a basis for securing ecosystem services and sustainable agricultural
productivity.

3. Project Description
The Agricultural Sector Wide Approach – Support Project (ASWAp-SP) project has the
following four components:
 (1) Institutional development and capacity building in support of the ASWAp;
 (2) Sustainable food security, agricultural growth and diversification;
 (3) Project coordination; and
 (4) Improvement and maintenance of unpaved rural roads.
  AF2 will be financed by a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) established to pool
contributions from various donors as a joint effort to improve harmonization, alignment
and donor coordination in the agricultural sector in Malawi. The core objective is to
reduce the number of agricultural projects with similar objectives by jointly support the
existing ASWAp-SP which is implemented using country systems by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security (MoAFS). Contributing donors are: European Union;
Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs; United Kingdom's Department for
International Development; Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of
Ireland; Flanders International Cooperation Agency; and United States Agency for
International Development.

 The overall objective of AF2 is to scale up on-going activities with particular attention
to: (a) Strengthening MoAFS administrative systems, particularly at the district level with
a stronger focus on monitoring and evaluation systems; and strengthening MoAFS's
capacity to implement the ASWAp; (b) Enhancing FISP organization and
implementation, monitoring and evaluation, with a stronger focus on maize and legumes
seeds availability; (c) Increasing the nationwide coverage of research and extension
activities to reach out to more farmers and to increase FISP payoffs and sustainable
impact on smallholders; and (d) Improving the efficiency of agricultural research and
extension services while promoting a more pluralistic approach to delivering these
services.

 AF2 will translate into a scaling up of existing activities and adding new ones to
increase the impact of the Project as described thereafter:

 Component 1: Institutional development and capacity building in support of the
ASWAp: AF2 will continue improving the capacity of MoAFS's staff in planning and
budgeting, in internal communication and coordination, in policy making, in sector
coordination, and in monitoring and evaluation of public investments in the agricultural
sector. The leadership of the Ministry on the overall sector investment coordination
should be further strengthened to improve the efficiency of public investments in
agriculture. New studies will be carried out to strengthen the knowledge base and
monitoring of the agricultural sector and to ensure the timely production and publication
of reliable agricultural statistics (using a range of methodologies based on a combination
of satellite imagery and field surveys to improve the existing Ministry's APES ). Under
the land administration subcomponent, the Project will further support the policy decision
making process by providing up-to-date information and analyses on land management
and land use planning. This will include the development of a land information system to
help the Ministry of Lands and Housing ensure and secure a proper recording of deeds,
with a specific objective of monitoring the evolution of land use under Estates
management.

 Component 2: Sustainable Food Security, Agricultural Growth and Diversification: The
objective will be to look beyond food security by not only supporting the existing and
generalized maize-based farming system, but also encouraging diversification and
marketing. This will translate into developing expanded and new research and extension
activities to increase the adoption rate of selected technologies, diversified crops and
livestock production by farmers. The component will expand the coverage and improve
the quality of extension activities to reach out to more farmers by promoting innovative
and more pluralistic extension methodologies. As a result of the scaled-up agricultural
extension program, it is expected that smallholder farmers will increase their agricultural
productivity and outputs, while diversifying from their maize-based subsistence farming
practices.

 Further support will be provided to the design, programming and implementation of the
Farm Input Subsidy Program (FISP), including support to improve the efficiency of the
FISP in terms of procurement, tracking of fertilizer and seeds distribution and
implementation time line. The Project will support the MoAFS in revisiting the overall
design, objectives and implementation modalities of the FISP, to strengthen its impact on
the ground. The approach will be based on analyzing various options for modernizing the
FISP and to better articulate its content and targeting with complementary social
protection programs.

  Component 3: Project Coordination: AF2 will provide further support to the ASWAp
secretariat within the Ministry of Agriculture which has a critical role in coordinating the
different Departments in charge of the execution of ASWAp-SP activities. Additional
support will consist of technical studies, consultancies and technical assistance, the
details of which will be determined in the course of project implementation. As per the
recommendations of the last implementation support mission, the additional support will
also be provided through technical assistance to speed up implementation of activities,
financial management and procurement processes, as well reporting of activities.

 Component 4: Improvement and maintenance of unpaved rural roads: the scope of the
road improvement and maintenance will be expanded from five to ten Districts, and 780
kilometers of roads will be improved. In addition, the Project will strengthen the capacity
of the implementing bodies including Local Authorities and local contractors in the target
districts. Rural roads maintenance systems will be established by rolling out the existing
"maintenance clubs" methodology which employs groups from the community to carry
out the work (a 40% participation of women will be encouraged). Resettlement costs will
arise when the need for compensation for any land, crops or buildings that are identified
for appropriation through the social and environmental screening process. Compensation
will be defined in the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that will be prepared for roads
where the need for resettlement is triggered. GoM will finance the maintenance of the
rehabilitated rural roads and compensation payments under RAPs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The agriculture-related component of the Project, with its additional activities, will retain
its focus as a nation-wide project. The number of smallholder beneficiaries benefiting
from the Project's research and extension activities will increase from 2.5 million to 3.5
million. The rural roads component is targeting roads in areas with the potential for high
agricultural production. The following Districts have already been targeted: Chikwawa,
Chitipa, Salima, Mwanza and Ntcheu. The AF2 will add five new Districts: Karonga,
Kasungu, Machinga, Nsanje and Phalombe.

 Production areas within the districts will be identified by the MoAFS, and the selection
of individual roads will then take place. Tertiary, District and Community Roads will be
the main focus for improvements works, although unpaved Secondary Roads may also
benefit where they constrain access to areas of production. It is estimated that 780km of
road will be improved. The majority of the roads that will be the subject of interventions
will be identified during the course of the project as a result of dialogue between the
Ministry of Agriculture, the District Administrations and the Roads Authority.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The original Project was classified as category B and triggered two safeguards policies,
namely OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.09 (Pest Management). With
the inclusion of the rural roads component (Component 4), AF1 retained the same
Category B rating and triggered the OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
Consequently, AF1 prepared three standalone safeguards instruments, namely an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Pest Management Plan
(PMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which, individually lay down the
basic principles and prerogatives to be followed during project implementation, once the
clear footprints of project activities are known. As required by the World Bank public
disclosure policy, all three safeguards instruments were simultaneously disclosed both in-
country and at the InfoShop prior to project appraisal. Since AF2 build pretty much on
the same footprints of AF1, it therefore retains the environmental and social category B
classification as well as the same triggered three safeguards policies and standalone
instruments. Nonetheless, these will be updated to reflect the AF2 strategic vision, and
upon cleared by the World Bank, disclosed simultaneously both in-country and at the
infoShop prior to appraisal.

  The initial Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) report had identified
potential adverse environmental and social impacts such as loss of vegetation, soil
erosion, siltation, water and soil pollution, and adverse impacts on human health due to
increased use of agro-chemicals. None of these impacts will be of large scale or
irreversible. AF2 will scale up extension activities to increase productivity and promote
new extension messages in diversification with no new anticipated adverse impacts on
the environment and social. New agricultural activities do not trigger any new safeguards
policies. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Pest
Management Plan (PMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) are in place and
remain de facto applicable to AF2 since there were only disclosed publicly both in-
country and at InfoShop in February 3rd, 2012.

  To date, the project has focused on supporting the Government's agricultural policies,
extension services and technical assistance/capacity-building. The project will finance the
rehabilitation and upgrading of additional feeder roads in the selected new five districts,
which will have environmental and social impacts, including small scale land-taking or
isolated cases of displacement similar in nature to those identified under AF1. The
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) disclosed in the InfoShop on February 3, 2012
under AF1 (P128576) remains applicable to the AF2. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed as and when necessary during project
implementation. The screening of candidate roads in the five districts selected for
improvement under AF1 for environmental and social impacts has confirmed that the
Category B classification remains appropriate, as does the triggering of the three
safeguards policies, namely OP/BP 4.01, OP4.09 and OP/BP 4.12. The field-site
screening process has identified isolated cases where candidate roads pass close to a
burial site or nearby the boundary of a forest. In neither situation, if the anticipated
activities (i.e. the limited widening of an existing road) have significant impacts this
will/could ultimately warrant the triggering of additional social and environmental
safeguards policies. However, once sites and works have been finalized, Environmental
and Social Management Plans will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.

  Under AF2, the scope of the road improvement and maintenance will be expanded from
five to ten Districts, and 780 km of roads will be improved (increased from 400km as
appraised under AF1). The ESMF, PMP and RPF have been updated to reflect the
widened geographical coverage of the project and have been re-disclosed both in-country
and at the InfoShop before appraisal.

 In addition to social and environmental safeguards, AF2 will also provide an
opportunity to enhance the capacity of Ministries' staff and core stakeholders on the
ground on gender and HIV/AIDS dimension. The Ministry of Agriculture has just started
a study on mainstreaming gender and HIV/AIDS in ASWAp-SP activities that will
provide key lessons and recommendations for implementation under AF2.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is not expected to have any indirect and/or long-term impacts as the potential
impacts are limited, small scale, site specific and can be easily mitigated. The roads
component will involve rehabilitation, spots improvement, low-volume sealing and
maintenance of sections of the existing rural roads network. Given the uncertainty on the
priority roads to benefit from the foreseen overall improvements works under AF2, these
as well as the details footprints of these investments will only be identified when project
implementation starts. Although OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered, it
is anticipated that resettlement will primarily involve limited land-take along the roads.
The RPF provides the needed guidance to be followed to adequately mitigate any of such
impacts through the development of site specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A since his project supports the Agricultural Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) of the
Government of Malawi.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The original Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Pest
Management Plan (PMP) are still in place and have been disseminated to agricultural
extension staff on the ground. The last mid-term review of the Project noted significant
improvements in the monitoring of potential adverse impacts, as well as in disseminating
information on pesticides management to farmers through training of extension staff and
farmer-field days. All pesticides (insecticides and herbicides) being tested under the
Project have been officially registered for sale by the Pesticide Control Board. Farmers
visited during supervision missions appeared to be well versed in the need for careful
pesticides management. Adequate equipments and protective clothing have been
distributed to farmers. It was however recommended to check the application of pesticide
use prevention measures by farmers for which a field survey will be carried out in the
coming cropping season.

  Under the proposed AF2, further training will be developed to increase awareness
raising and dissemination of key messages to farmers and to strengthen the monitoring
and evaluation of safeguards-related activities and impacts on the ground. Large scale
demonstrations and extension activities are also being developed to promote sustainable
land and integrated water management production techniques.

 For the roads component introduced under AF1, the existing ESMF includes a social
and environmental screening process to determine if, for each selected road (i) a site
specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be/is required, and (ii)
resettlement will be necessary that will require the preparation of a site specific
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). In line with the policy and the mandate of the Roads
Authority, a Consultant has been procured to carry out the field social and environment
screening work. Furthermore, expressions of interest (EOI) have been sought for
qualified consultants be procured to prepare any necessary site specific ESIAs and/or
RAPs for the selected roads sections with proposals being requested once results of the
screening process have been reviewed by the Bank. Moreover, where resettlement is
required, then it will be done in accordance with the legal requirements, guidelines and
the project's Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The Roads Authority has an
Environmental and Social Management Unit which will work with the Department of
Environment to ensure that the component activities comply with the environmental and
social requirements as stipulated in the Environmental Protection laws and the Bank's
safeguard policies. It is expected that resettlement costs will be borne by Government.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders consulted during the original ESIA preparation included staff at the
relevant ministries, the Environmental Affairs Department, the Pesticides Control Board,
members of District Development Committees, agricultural extension staff, local leaders
and chiefs, and farmers in the selected districts throughout Malawi. Their views had been
incorporated into the ESIA Report with, as a result, a stronger attention given to capacity
building on mitigation measures for stakeholders at the District level, especially for
extension workers who will work at the grassroots level and for farmer leaders who will
be in direct contact with other farmers. Specific training and equipment were also
planned upfront for farmer leaders who will develop on-farm trials and demonstration
plots on integrated pest management and post-harvest treatments. As part of the updating
of the ESMF and preparation of the PMP further consultations were organized with
extension officers and lead farmers. Public consultation and community participation will
be mandatory for all projects requiring land acquisition, compensation and resettlement
for the road component activities. During the first roads screening carried out under AF1,
consultation with local communities and potential affected persons was properly
managed and received positively huge feedback from villagers on the ASWAp-SP road
rehabilitation component.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     11/04/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 11/29/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  11/29/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     11/04/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 11/29/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  11/29/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/04/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/29/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/29/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Olivier Durand
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Tijan M. Sallah
  Comments:
