                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC7060


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/09/2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Maldives                           Project ID: P145482
Project Name: Accelerating Sustainable Private Investment in Renewable Energy Project
Task Team Leader: Sandeep Kohli
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 17, 2014 Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2014
Managing Unit: SASDE                        Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Climate change (60%);Other Private Sector Development (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      4.00
        IDA Guarantee                                                 4.00
        Asian Development Bank                                        0.40
        Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                 11.90
        GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 2.90
        JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)         11.00
        Miscellaneous 1                                               0.80
        Financing Gap                                                42.50
                                                                     77.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project objective is to increase share of renewable energy generation in Maldives by
engaging private sector.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
This is a joint IDA-SREP project. Maldives is one of the pilot countries selected to benefit from
the Scaling-up Renewable Energy Program (SREP). SREP operates under the Climate
Investment Fund (CIF) that supports programs with potential for scaled-up, transformational
action aimed at specific climate change challenge. CIF resources are available through
Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs), and ASPIRE is one of the SREP supported programs
in Maldives focusing on Greater Male Region. The main objective of ASPIRE is to promote RE
with private sector participation to effectively contribute to poverty reduction and sustainable
development in the Maldives. This also complements GoM objectives of becoming carbon
neutral by 2020, diversifying private sector investments, as well as widening access to energy
services so as to generate new economic opportunities. As an SREP requirement, the MEE
developed the Investment Plan (IP) for the period 2013-2017 through extensive consultations and
submitted it to the SREP Sub-Committee for approval. In line with SREP IP which has been
endorsed by then President of Maldives in 2012, ASPIRE is seeking US$ 11.9 million from
SREP, US$ 4 million from IDA, US$4 million from Government of Maldives, to leverage
US$15.1 million from other bilateral and multilateral partners and $42.5 million from private
sector. Total investment of about US$73.5 million will be mobilized through ASPIRE to
incentivize deployment PV generations by private sector developers, modernize electricity
delivery infrastructure, and improve institutional capacity. This will support the transformation
of the energy sector by scaling up RE in the country.

 The proposed activities under ASPIRE will have the following two inter-related components,
which will be phased:

  1. The Private Sector Component: This will include all activities that are geared towards
attracting private sector investments in RE generation. This will have two models: (a) grid
connected solar at a single location using a standard power purchase agreement, and (b) roof-top
solar with a feed-in-tariff. This component includes use of IDA financing for setting up payment
guarantee and facilitates unique ability of WBG guarantee to leverage US$ 16 million from IDA
financing of US$ 4 million to mitigate risks for private sector developers. This component will
also mobilize larger portion of SREP and other funds to incentivize private sector developers by
partially subsidizing capital cost of PV installations and by offering other financing and risk
mitigation instruments. Preliminary allocation for this component is US$68.01 including
expected US$ 42.5 million investment from private sector and 11 million from JICA.

 2. The Public Sector Component: This will include all the TA and investment elements that
are needed to make Male and the program regions ready for renewable energy integration. This
will include feasibility studies and upgrading and modernization of the T&D infrastructure.
Renewable energy resource mapping and mechanisms for determining feed in tariff, prices in
PPAs, and levels of subsidy will be developed as part of this component. It is proposed that the
SREP funds, appropriately supplemented with other funds be used in this phase. This is not an
extensive T&D initiative but is an effort to ensure appropriate integration of PV generations into
existing electricity networks. This component will also include human capacity building for
planning, implementation, and operation of RE systems. Preliminary allocation for this
component is US$ 5.48 million.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project is located in the Maldives with activities to be carried out in different
islands including Greater Male Region. The Maldives is among the most geographically
dispersed countries; spread over 90,000 square kilometers, with only 192 of its 1,192 islands
being inhabited. These islands are grouped within 26 atolls composed of live coral reefs and sand
bars, which are sensitive natural habitats. The Maldives is the lowest country in the world, with a
maximum natural ground level of only 2.4 m, with the average being only 1.5 m above sea level.
However, more than 80 per cent of the country's land is composed of coral islands that rise less
than 1m above sea level.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Ministry of Energy and Environment (MEE), is the apex agency for the formulation and
implementation of various environmental regulations in the county. The Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) within the Ministry is responsible for implementing the regulations.
The legislative and regulatory framework for environmental management in the Maldives is
satisfactory, although the monitoring and enforcement are still weak mainly due to lack of
resources. However, the MEE is currently implementing World Bank financed projects, which
has resulted some capacity building for managing both environment and social safeguard within
the Ministry.

 State Electricity Company (STELCO), the largest vertically integrated state-owned utility
corporatized in 1997. STELCO serves the capital Male and surrounding islands accounting for
86 MW of generation (35% of total generation in Maldives). STELCO has the experience of
deploying and managing similarly sized power systems, including those supported by the World
Bank and Asian Development Bank. Utilities in outer islands are managed by utility companies
set for each region. Both the STELCO and other utility companies do not have capacity to
manage safeguards requirements. In addition, project developers will be private companies (with
or without foreign involvement). They are likely to have varied capacities for effective
implementation of environmental and social management systems (ESMSs). Once identified,
their institutional capacity will be assessed as a part of IDA due diligence and summarized in the
Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS).

  While the EPA and the existing PMU have a good understanding of the World Bank
environmental safeguard policies, their requirements and IFC Performance Standards, they are
limited to each project context. Therefore, it would be necessary to ensure that an Environmental
Specialist is recruited or a qualified staff from EPA is assigned to ensure safeguard due
diligence. During project preparation, it will be explored on improving EPA's environmental
guidelines for renewable energy sector projects, which would be in line with the performance
standards of the World Bank.

  There will be a strong need to orient and build capacity in the ministry on social aspects for the
implementation as they will be coordinating the implementation. In this regard, capacity for
social management will be created at the MEE, PMU, and at the island -level nodal
implementing agencies. A Social Development Specialist will be recruited at PMU who will be
responsible for guiding different island's implementation agencies. Suitable orientation and
training programs will be conducted for the specialist on safeguard policies of the World Bank.
Similar staffing is envisaged for island-level implementing agencies. Apart from safeguard
issues, the central and island level specialist staff will also be responsible for stakeholder
consultations and preparation and implementation of communication plan.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Francis V. Fragano (SARDE)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                   Yes              No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

      Proposed conversion to solar energy to produce electricity will reduce the fossil fuel-based
power generation, hence no adverse environmental impacts are expected. The likely negative
environmental impacts are expected to be localized in nature and arise only during the
construction and future decommissioning of the systems at the end of their lifetime. The decision
on land requirements or use of rooftops has still not been taken. Given that the specific
investment sites are not known during project preparation for the public and private components,
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared that will include
the guidelines for preparation of specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA)
to be prepared. The ESMF will also include procedures and standards to develop an appropriate
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for private sector investments and
Environmental Management Plans for public sector investments if these are to be included in the
final project design. The preparation of the site-specific ESIA/EMPs/ESMS will follow the
requirements of OP 4.01 in regard to any public sector components and PS 1 in regard to private
sector investments.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                       X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions

     This PS is applicable for the private sector investment activities. It will ensure ESMS
incorporates rights of the workers, promote safe and healthy working conditions and be in
compliant with national employment and labor laws.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention

      The choice of technology, i.e. solar energy is contributing positively in the reduction of
GHG emissions. In addition, setting up and operationalizing solar systems will have no adverse
impacts to the human health and environment. However, disposal after decommissioning will
contribute to pollution and therefore, the ESIA will be required to pay attention to the
requirement of disposal of decommissioned parts so it will not contribute to pollution including
the institutional responsibilities.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No          TBD

     As roof tops will likely to be used for setting up of solar panels, there may be impacts on
community safety due to inadequate structural integrity of the systems. This will be further
assessed based on the existing pilot project through the ESIA and the standards will be
incorporated into the ESMS.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

     There could be involuntary taking of land for solar panels (though largely they will be on
roof tops), the OP 4.12 has also been triggered for any works that may be carried out through the
public sector component. The ESMF will include the guidelines for the client to apply the PS to
private sector investors regarding their ESMS and the potential for developing Resettlement
Action Plans or Livelihood Restoration Plans as pertinent. The ESMF will include a
Resettlement Policy Framework for management of any land acquisition aspects in potential
public sector investments in transmission and distribution.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources

      Due to sensitive nature of the islands and their surrounding that consist of important natural
habitats, negative impacts are possible that could generate as a result of improper location,
construction or decommissioning of solar PV systems. Attention will need to be given to
protection and conservation of biodiversity at project sites and captured in the ESIA. Public
sector investments will consider OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) within the ESMF to screen for
critical and natural habitats and include measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate or offset any
potential impacts.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
     Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 7: Indigenous Peoples

    There are no Indigenous Peoples as considered by the Bank policy OP 4.10 or PS 7 in
Maldives hence the OP and PS have not been triggered.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
   Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above

     PS 8: Cultural Heritage

      While cultural heritage resources are relatively well documented on inhabited islands, there
is no adequate documentation of such on uninhabited islands. The project is however is expected
to take place only on inhabited islands. Also, the country does not have specific guidelines to
manage chance finds. However, finding cultural heritage sites are rare in the Maldives and
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes          No         TBD
therefore appropriate due diligence should be provided through PS 1 including use of chance find
procedures. Procedures consistent with OP 4.11 will be included in the ESMF in regard to the
public sector investments for screening and managing chance finds in regard to Physical Cultural
Resources.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                          X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                   X
    Please ignore old template safeguard title & OP/BP # above


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 02/20/2014

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The safeguards preparation for the project comprises preparation of an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework with provisions for carrying out Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the proposed investments, to identify critical safeguard issues
   and recommend strategies for compliance with the Bank and GoM's environmental and
   social policies. For sub-projects identified and developed during preparation of the project,
   specific ESIA will be prepared per ESMF guidelines for either public or private sector
   investments. The ESMS will cover a broad range of environmental and social issues,
   including, but not limited to, exploring linkages of interventions with livelihoods and gender,
   and institutional assessments of environmental and social policy and management. In
   addition, a detailed stakeholder identification and communications strategy will also be
   developed during project preparation for implementation in the project.

        The ESMF will be initiated by 12/04/2013. The client is yet to initiate the process of
       recruiting consultants for carrying out the detailed field work for the ESMF/ESIA. The
       specific sub-project ESMS's will be prepared based on findings of any ESIA's prepared for
       private sector investments defined by 01/20/2014. Public component investments identified
       prior to appraisal will prepare ESIA's per Bank safeguard requirements.



1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Sandeep Kohli        12/02/2013
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Francis V. Fragano   12/05/2013
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Julia Bucknall       12/09/2013
   Comments:
