                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: 88001


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/22/2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data

Country: Mali                                Project ID: P149445
Project Name: Legal and technical negotiation support
Task Team Leader: Kristina Svensson
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                Estimated Approval Date: May 15, 2014
Managing Unit: SEGOM                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing (RE)
Sector: Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
Theme: Other public sector governance (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Grantee                                                        0.00
        Free-standing TFs AFR Sustainable Development                  1.27 million
                                                                       1.27

Environmental category                            C
Is this a repeater project?                       No
Is this a transferred project?                    No


2. Project Objectives
The objective of this recipient-executed grant would be to strengthen the negotiation capacity of
the Government of Mali, in particular the Ministry of Mines and the Ministry of Finance. The
longer-term aim would be to ensure that the mining sector in Mali contributes to sustainable and
equitable growth of the country.

3. Project Description
The following components are proposed for support from the Africa Extractive Industry Trust
Fund (AEITF):
  I.     Legal and technical advisory support for licensing and negotiations: The objective of
this component would be to provide basic legal advice and assessments regarding the mining
titles entered into during the military regime and transition; and to support the government to
negotiate mining titles so as to align them with the newly adopted mining code. The specific
support and outputs will be as follows: (a) An urgent and rapid assessment of current status of
mining cadaster; and Legal and technical support to the review of exploration authorizations,
titles, and contracts awarded during the military regime and the transition; and (b) Legal and
fiscal analysis of existing mining operations.
  II.    Institutional capacity building for negotiations and enhanced benefits: This
component would focus on basic capacity building on strategies, legal, technical, environmental,
and financial aspects of mining contracts; and the development of tools and guides to enable
contract enforcement and compliance. As mentioned above, the new mining code has a stronger
focus on environmental protection and site rehabilitation, as well as on community development.
Expected outputs would be as follows: (a) Capacity building on mining contracts and
negotiations: (b) Mine closure, support to reviewing and negotiating mine closure plans, and
development of mine closure guides; (c) Corporate social and environmental assessment and
responsibility framework; and (d) Consultations and basic assessment of critical issues for the
improved management of artisanal and small scale mining.

4. Project location

Bamako, Mali, with some dissemination activities in and around mining areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes        No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
The social and environmental risks of this Project will be low, since no physical infrastructure
will be included; and the technical assistance will not result in the expansion of mining activities.
Further, the Project has two components that deal directly improve social and environmental
management of mining: II (c) Corporate social and environmental assessment and responsibility
framework, which will include an assessment of current status of social and environmental
impact of large scale mining operations; and II (d) on artisanal and small scale mining, which
also includes an assessment of the social and environmental impact of artisanal and small scale
mining. Both of these also include broad-based consultations with community members, civil
society, and companies. The Project is therefore proposed to be categorized as C. And while no
other actions are required by the project,

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The TA project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts through improvement of
overall understanding of environmental management risks and impacts in the mining sector; and
enhancement of environmental and social management capacity in Ministry of Mines, and Ministry of
Environment, specifically through the components on mine closure and corporate social responsibility,
as well as the one on artisanal and small scale mining. As a technical assistance grant, activities will
have no significant physical impact on the natural and/or social environment. Analytical work and
trainings will take place; however, there will be no acquisition of land, new construction or civil
works.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
It is widely understood that mining activities (both large scale industrial and small-scale) often involve
risks of significant adverse social and environmental impacts if adequate arrangements are not in place
to manage them. This grant funded project will provide the government with initial key tools to
enhance management of these risks. Specifically, the project will develop a mining corporate social
responsibility framework, through broad consultations and assessments of current social and
environmental framework. It will also support the government in drafting regulations regarding
community development, and guidelines for mine closure, which will include social and
environmental issues. Similarly, the work on artisanal and small scale mining (assessment, data
collection, and dissemination) will strengthen the capacity of the government of Mali to manage this
sub-sector and its social and environmental issues.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project is a technical assistance project. No adverse impacts are envisaged.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Bank will not require the preparation of any mandatory safeguard instrument prior
appraisal. But, the project is supporting analytical work and support for drafting, inter alia, a
corporate social responsibility framework. In addition, in the course of implementation, the
ToRs of any study related to the environmental and social aspects (standards and norms, rules
and guidelines, acquisition of tool, training modules, creation of platform, etc.) will be subject
to review by the Bank. Regarding the activities executed by the recipient, the Bank will
ensure that environmental and social ones be transferred to the appropriate stakeholder in the
Ministry of Environment and Sanitation (MEA), namely the National Directorate of
Pollutions and Nuisances Control (DNACPN) which will work closely with the Department
of mining, the Department of social affairs and the Agency of Environment and Sustainable
Development (AEDD).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Bank will not require the preparation of any mandatory safeguard instrument prior to
appraisal. However, as part of the implementation support, the bank will ensure that all the
relevant stakeholders are embarked on-board for the training sessions and the dialogue on the
CSR platform. In addition, the bank would have a suspension remedy should it determine
that: (i) prior to the disbursement deadline, the Recipient had failed to apply sound
environmental or social standards or practices in its management or carrying out of activities
in its industrial mining sector and (ii) as a result of such failure, a situation had arisen making
it improbable that the objectives of the Project would be achieved.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument,
please indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
N/A
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]       No [ x ]   NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]       No [ ]     NA [ x ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ x ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes []      No [ ]   NA [ x ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes []      No [ ]   NA [ x ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ ]     No [ ]   NA [ x ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Kristina Svensson
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi                  Date: May 4, 2014
Sector Manager:                Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon          Date: May 5, 2014
