                                                                                 82479

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/29/2013                                                 Report No.:
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mali                                 Project ID: P144442
Project Name: Mali Reconstruction and Economic Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Zie Ibrahima Coulibaly
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 6,               Estimated Board Date: December 3, 2013
                                 2013
Managing Unit: AFTU2                                 Lending Instrument: Investment Project Financing
Sector:        General agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
               Highways (30%), Primary Education (15%), Other social services (15%), Sub-national
               government administration (10%)
Theme:         Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Other urban development (20%), Other human
               development (30%), Other public sector governance (10%), Conflict prevention and post-
               conflict reconstruction (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)                                           Yes [X]    No [ ]
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD million)
Total Project Cost :                  100.00            Total Bank Financing:             100.00
Total Co-financing:                    0.00             Financing Gap:                     0.00
                               Financing sources                                         Amount
Borrower/Recipient (US$m.):                                                                0.00
IDA (US$m.):                                                                              100.00
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):
                                                                      TOTAL              100.00
Environmental Category:              B - Partial Assessment
Is this a transferred project?               Yes [ ]                 No [X]
Is this a repeater project?                  Simple [X]              Repeater [ ]

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the basic infrastructure and restore productive
activities of communities impacted by the crisis in Mali.

3. Project Description
The proposed emergency project aims to fund the rehabilitation of public infrastructure and
productive activities to allow for the economic recovery and the delivery of services in the crisis
affected areas in Mali. The project will also facilitate and strengthen the engagement of
communities and the Participating Local Governments (PLGs) in the planning, prioritization and
oversight of local development activities, thus laying the foundation for social inclusion and better
governance. A Priority Investment Program comprising public infrastructure rehabilitation and
restoration of productive assets of vulnerable households will be financed to meet urgent needs
following a quick validation by communities and PLGs. The project will use an inclusive and
conflict sensitive process for the identification of additional investments corresponding to
community priorities, during implementation. Component 1 (Rehabilitation of Local Public
Infrastructure) will allow for the resumption of services and economic activities. Component 2
(Support to Productive Investments) will jump-start economic activities of communities and
households. Component 3 (Community Engagement and Local Governance) will ensure that the
social and productive infrastructure rehabilitated under Components 1 and 2 respond to community
needs and address conflict risks.

Project Components

Component 1: Rehabilitation of local public infrastructure (US$50 million equivalent)

This component aims to rehabilitate local public infrastructure to allow for the resumption of
services and economic activity in the areas of Mali affected by the crisis. The component will
support the rehabilitation and equipment needed for the functioning of schools, health centers,
water and sanitation systems, transport and trade facilities, energy and other local public
infrastructure. The infrastructure being rehabilitated under this component will be that under the
purview of local governments (LGs), which was the infrastructure the most affected by the crisis.
This component will intervene in the North and in selected areas in the South in a total of 149 LGs.
Local governments, deconcentrated technical services, and communities will be fully involved in
the planning, prioritization and oversight of activities to be carried out under Component 3. In
addition, the works will be implemented using as much as possible a labor-intensive approach in
order to provide revenues to the local population.

This component will be executed in two parallel tracks. Track One will finance the Priority
Investment Program, estimated at about US$12 million, to allow for quick rehabilitation of
infrastructure and other related needs. The activities in the Priority Investment Program include,
inter alia, rehabilitation and equipment of classrooms, school feeding, rehabilitation and
equipment of health centers, rehabilitation of water supply systems, and rehabilitation and cleaning
of drainage structures. Track Two will finance infrastructure needs as identified by the
communities through a review of the existing Social, Economic and Cultural Development Plans
(Plans de développement socio-économique et culturel, PDSECs). The review of PDSECs, based
on a consultation process with communities to be supported under Component 3, will provide the
basis for the identification of additional investments to be funded under Component 1. The roll out
of activities and investments under Component 1 will be phased to accompany the return of
security and the civilian administration to the LGs. In line with LGs priorities, the project could
also support innovative approaches to social services delivery.

An indicative per capita allocation sets the maximum amount each LG will receive under
Component 1. This indicative maximum per capita amount will ensure transparency in the
allocation of resource across LGs under Component 1 as it is based on the estimated population
and number of displaced people in the targeted LGs. Based on preliminary estimates, the targeted
LGs in both the North and South will receive a maximum per capita funding of approximately
US$18 1 for Component 1 during the duration of the project, including resources allocated for the

1
  This per capita amount is indicative only and reflects the maximum amount to be allocated to a LG during the lifetime of the
project. It is calculated based on the total amount of funds available for investments under Component 1 divided by the population
of the targeted LGs. For LGs in the South, the total maximum amount per LG will calculated based on the number of displaced
people.
Priority Investment Program and for subsequent priorities identified in PDSECs. Component 1
will be implemented by two Delegated Contract Management Agencies (Maîtres d’Ouvrage
Délégué, MODs) to be supervised by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) as well as by local
authorities and local communities. AGETIPE will be in charge of rehabilitating infrastructure other
than roads, and AGEROUTE will be in charge of rehabilitating roads. Additional MODs may be
contracted, if necessary. Given that other donors are planning to intervene in the same regions, the
project will coordinate activities with other interventions to avoid duplication and crowding of
activities.

Component 2: Support to productive investments (US$35 million equivalent)

Component 2 will provide support for productive investments in the North to redress the impacts
of the crisis on communities and households. The objective of the component is to jump-start
economic activities by (i) helping rural households that were adversely affected by the conflict to
restore their productive assets and reduce food insecurity, and (ii) helping rural community-based
organizations (CBOs) that were adversely affected by the crisis to re-launch productive activities,
with the goal of increasing their income by addressing priority investment needs. The
implementation of the component will rely on NGOs (or MODs). Working in close collaboration
with deconcentrated agencies of the national government, the MODs will provide advice and
support to CBOs and households, with the goal of helping them identify and implement productive
investments. Activities financed under Component 2 will provide a combination of emergency
assistance and medium-term recovery support by restoring productive assets at the household level
and financing income-generating activities at the community level. Support will be provided under
two sub-components: Sub-component 2.1 - Immediate restoration of household productive assets;
and Sub-component 2.2 - Collective productive activities.

Sub-component 2.1 – Immediate restoration of household productive assets (US$3 million
equivalent)

17.     This sub-component is aimed at restoring the productive assets of targeted vulnerable
households in the zones most affected by the crisis by (a) increasing access to improved seed and
animal feed, and (b) recapitalizing livestock. Taking into account the ongoing interventions of the
government and donors to mitigate the crisis, this sub-component will support the purchase of
about 50 tons of seeds and 750 tons of animal feed (groundnut/cotton seed cake) for distribution to
about 12,000 farmers/herders to enhance domestic food production capacity. The recapitalization
of livestock will be undertaken through the provision of 1,000 kits, each consisting of fattening
sheep and 2 goats per household.

Sub-component 2.2 – Collective productive activities (US$32 million equivalent)

18.      The sub-component will support legally established CBOs by financing productive
investments proposed by them. CBOs will be selected to ensure that women, youth and vulnerable
minorities are well represented, both in terms of primary membership and in terms of leadership.
The sub-component will cover the following types of investment: (i) rehabilitation or construction
of infrastructure for agricultural production activities, such as small irrigation perimeters, storage
facilities, and small processing units; (ii) re-launching of livestock and fisheries activities,
including restocking, animal feed provision, vaccination and marketing facilities; and (iii) support
to income generating artisanal activities, including construction of small shops and facilities for
manufacturing handicrafts. Support to productive investments will be complemented by capacity
building activities designed to improve the productivity and profitability of those investments. The
trainings and capacity building activities will be delivered by relevant public agencies, private
service providers, and NGOs.

An indicative per capita allocation sets the maximum amount that can be allocated to productive
activities in a specific LG under Component 2. This indicative per capita amount will ensure
transparency in the allocation of resources as it is calculated based on the population of the
targeted LGs. Based on preliminary calculations, the targeted LGs in the North will receive
maximum per capita funding of approximately US$13 2 (this figure includes the resources allocated
for both sub-components). Component 2 will be implemented by two NGOs (or MODs) - CARE
Mali and SOS Sahel – to be supervised by the PCU. The two NGOs have extensive experience in
the North of Mali in working with communities to restore productive activities and livelihoods;
and may partner with additional NGOs for operational purposes.

Component 3: Community engagement and local governance (US$10 million equivalent)

This component aims to strengthen the engagement of communities and Participating Local
Governments (PLGs) in the planning, prioritization and oversight of local development activities,
and to support the putting in place of elements of local governance. Community mobilization
efforts will focus particularly on vulnerable social groups, including women, youth, disabled
persons, displaced persons, returnees, and minority ethnic groups. The project will also support
active involvement of PLGs and communities elected bodies at facility level in all project
activities, to enhance their interaction with communities, ensure transparency and respect for
community priorities, closely monitor project implementation, and respond to community
feedback and grievances in a timely manner. The planning and prioritization process will take into
consideration existing tensions, security issues and problems with elite capture and appropriate
mitigation measures in order not to exacerbate local conflicts. It is expected that the planning and
deliberation process at the community level will contribute to strengthening the social fabric,
supporting community dialogue, promoting the resolution of community level disputes, and by
delivering quick and visible results, establishing the legitimacy and credibility of the PLGs.

Activities supported under this component will include: (a) a well-targeted communication and
outreach effort that effectively publicizes the project objectives, investments and processes to
ensure meaningful participation of community and PLGs; (b) an inclusive and conflict-sensitive
consultation process at the village/fraction level that promotes agreement about the priority social
and economic infrastructure to be rehabilitated and that based on predetermined criteria identifies
community-based associations/organizations and individual vulnerable households to be supported
for productive investments; (c) a facilitated and fair process for finalization of priority
infrastructure for rehabilitation under Component 1 at the LG level that feeds into the review of the
PDSECs and the identification of beneficiary CBOs and vulnerable households to be supported
under Component 2; (d) a transparent validation process of the reviewed PDSECs by the
representatives from the PLGs, civilian administration, civil society and community groups

2
 This per capita amount reflects the maximum amount to be allocated to a LG during the lifetime of the project. It is calculated
based on the total amount of funds available for investments under Component 2 divided by the population of the targeted LGs.
especially of women and youth; and (e) active participation of PLGs and community in the
monitoring and oversight of implementation of infrastructure rehabilitation and productive
investments, to ensure timeliness and quality of infrastructure implementation, and to track the
utilization of productive inputs provided to CBOs and individual beneficiaries; (f) regular
dissemination of project progress and achievements to all stakeholders, especially communities
through various traditional and modern means, in addition to scheduled forums and meetings; and
(g) a functional and accessible feedback and grievance mechanism that contributes towards the
integrity of the process and principles of accountability and governance.

Components 2 and 3 will be executed by the same two NGOs - CARE Mali and SOS Sahel. The
PCU will contract these NGOs, which will be responsible for designing the modalities of the
community engagement approach to support both Component 1 and 2, incorporating the
peculiarities of operating in the North and South, and facilitating implementation with necessary
regional level arrangements. These two NGOs have proven experience and demonstrated capacity
to operate at scale and in partnership with civilian administration and PLGs, especially in the
North of Mali, and come equipped with a keen understanding of the social and institutional
dynamics that will influence implementation. These two MODs may partner with additional NGOs
for operational purposes.


Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$5 million equivalent)

This component will support project management, including coordination of activities,
communication, procurement, financial management and safeguard functions, as well as
monitoring and evaluation. The component will finance the PCU to carry out day-to-day project
management responsibilities. Project management functions will include recruitment of MODs for
Components 1, 2 and 3, preparation of work plans and budgets, preparation of regular progress
reports, monitoring and evaluation, communications and outreach, and overall oversight of project
activities. The PCU will ensure that the recruited MODs adhere to procurement and safeguards
requirements and that they comply with financial management and reporting procedures. In
particular, the PCU will ensure that the MODs execute activities according to the agreed terms of
contract. This component will rely on three regional implementation units (regional antennas,
RAs) for coordinating project activities, working closely with government entities at regional,
cercle and local government (commune) levels within their regional boundaries. The PCU will also
recruit a Third Party Monitoring (TPM) agency to support the monitoring of the implementation of
Components 1, 2, and 3, including safeguards implementation, with the active involvement of
communities and PLGs. The TPM to support the monitoring of project implementation could take
on larger responsibilities, should security deteriorate or access to project sites remain limited.

Component 5: Contingent emergency response

This component, known as the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), will be
available should the need arise to redirect project resources freed up by a future restructuring of the
project or other Bank projects in the Mali portfolio. Such resources would be made available to
finance emergency response activities and to address crisis and emergency needs. An Immediate
Response Mechanism Coordinating Agency and expenditure management procedures will be
defined in an Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual (IRM/OM), to be prepared
separately and approved by the Bank, in line with the flexibility provided in OP 10.00, paragraph
11. In case this component is utilized, the project will be restructured to allocate financing,
complete the PDO and related indicators, and detail implementation arrangements.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
The specific sites for investments in small-scale infrastructure and local productive activities will
be determined during project implementation. Component 1 will provide support to populations
living or returning to the crisis-affected areas targeted under the Component, including the three
regions in the North of Mali (Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal) and in selected communities in the South.
The target areas are those ‘’régions’’ and cercles that were the most affected by the crisis based on
the preliminary assessment of damages and number of displaced people. Activities under
Component 2 will be implemented only in the three regions of the North namely Timbuktu, Gao
and Kidal.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Maman-Sani Issa – Sr. Environmental Specialist
   Varalakshmi Vemuru – Sr. Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   x

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project is classified category B in regard of the activities to be supported essentially under
Component 1 and 2 which will support the investments such as rehabilitation of local
infrastructures and development of socio-economic activities. No large scale, significant or
irreversible negative impact is foreseen to be induced by the project activities. The negative
impacts would be minor and manageable with a minimum of efforts in place. Also, given the
significant displacement of populations as a result of the crisis, and the likely breakdown of
community leadership and conflict resolution structures in the Northern regions, returning
households could face difficulty with claiming land in the absence of documentation and/or
community verification mechanisms. The guidelines and procedures to be laid out in the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will therefore facilitate compensation and rehabilitation in
a likely event of land take, or loss of asset or livelihood; however, any involuntary resettlement is
not expected to be large or on a vast scale.

To this end, six safeguard policies have been triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment;
OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural
resources; OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement; and OP4.36 on Forests. Since the project is
processed under OP 10.00, paragraph 11, the preparation of the environmental and social
assessment documents has been deferred. However, an Environmental and Social Screening and
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared and will be disclosed after Board approval of
the project, and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was developed, approved and disclosed in country
and at the InfoShop prior to negotiations.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

Environmental and social impacts are minimal to moderate, and are not expected to have long-term
and major negative impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.

N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Since the project is processed under OP 10.00, paragraph 11, the preparation of the environmental
and social assessment documents has been deferred. However, an Environmental and Social
Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared and will be disclosed after
Board approval of the project, and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was developed, approved and
disclosed in country and at the InfoShop prior to negotiations. They will serve as the tools for the
identification and mitigation of the environmental and social impacts and risks at the early stage of
the project implementation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed publicly both in-country and at the InfoShop within four months following the
effectiveness date. Notwithstanding, when necessary and as soon as activity sites are selected and
designs of civil work completed, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP) and/or a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed prior to the commencement of works. In the specific case where a
RAP is needed it will be prepared, approved and executed prior to the commencement of works.
The PCU will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments
under the project. The PCU recruited Safeguards Specialist will ensure proper implementation,
documentation, follow up and reporting of the mitigation measures (screening, execution of
specific ESMPs, RAPs) recommended through the instruments (ESSAF, PMP, RPF). The
safeguards specialist may seek the collaboration of the national entity in charge of the enforcement
of the environmental impact assessment policy and procedures, the National Directorate for
Sanitation and Control of Polluters (Direction Nationale de l’Assainissement, du Controle des
Pollutions et des Nuisances, DNACPN), for the screening of activities. Local stakeholders
(authorities, CSO, beneficiaries and affected groups, etc.) will participate in any consultation
throughout the project lifecycle. A provision of a total amount about US$250,000 is earmarked in
the project budget for the implementation of the mitigation measures. The Third Party Monitoring
agency responsible for monitoring the implementation progress of Components 1, 2 and 3 will also
focus on safeguards implementation and provide feedback to the PCU for necessary action.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The stakeholders to be consulted in the preparation of the safeguard documents will include the
direct beneficiaries (local communities, local governments, etc.) and potentially affected people
during the determination of activities’ sites. Where displaced population are concerned,
appropriate sensitization and communication mechanisms will be implemented to involve them in
decision making. Local stakeholders (authorities, CSO, beneficiaries and affected groups, etc.) will
participate in any consultation throughout the project lifecycle. The PCU recruited Safeguards
Specialist will ensure proper implementation, documentation, follow up and reporting of the
mitigation measures (screening, execution of specific ESMPs, RAPs) recommended through the
instruments (ESSAF, PMP, RPF). The safeguards specialist of the PCU may seek the collaboration
of the national entity in charge of the enforcement of the environmental impact assessment policy
and procedures, the National Directorate for Sanitation and Control of Polluters (Direction
Nationale de l’Assainissement, du Controle des Pollutions et des Nuisances, DNACPN), for the
screening of activities. Local governments, local leaders, women associations and other civil
society organizations, where appropriate, will always be part of the consultations.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     N/A
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                     N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:                           N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10/24//2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                10/30/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 10/30/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The PMP was disclosed prior to Negotiations, as the project is being processed under OP
10.00.

 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
 by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)            Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ x ]       No [ ]       N/A [ ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in    Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or            Yes [ ]    No [ x ]      N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include   Yes [ ]    No [ x ]      N/A [ ]
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?           Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                          Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards
specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP requirements included in Yes [ x ]         No [ ]       N/A [ ]
project design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural            Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the          Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected             Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A [ x ]
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                      Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A [ x ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan ?                                     Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A [ x ]
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel         Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue,          Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in        Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the            Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public
place in a form and language that are understandable and               Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to            Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project     Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
legal documents?
D. Approvals

  Signed and submitted by:                 Name                 Date
  Task Team Leader:                  Zie Ibrahima Coulibaly   10/24/2013

  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Alexandra Bezeredi     10/29/2013
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                      Alexander Bakalian     10/29/2013
    Comments:
