                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                             Report No.: 87124

Date ISDS
                         27-March-2014
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                  Mexico             Project ID:             P145578
 Project Name:             Oaxaca Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Operation
 Task Team Leader:         Charles Delfieux
 Estimated Appraisal       March 27, 2014     Estimated Board         June 4, 2014
 Date:                                        Date:
 Managing Unit:            LCSWS              Lending Instrument: Program for Results
                                                                  and Investment
                                                                  Project Financing (TA
                                                                  component)
 Sector:                   Water Supply (65%)
                           Sanitation (10%)
                           Public administration-Water, Sanitation and
                           Flood Protection (25%)
 Theme:                    City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery
                            (60%)
                           Rural Services and Infrastructure (10%)
                           Managing for development results (30%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
     Financing Source (Program and TA component)                                     Amount
     CONAGUA (APAZU)                                                             US$38.5M
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           US$55M
     Total                                                                       US$93.5M
 Environmental             C
 Category (IPF
 Component)
 Is this a Repeater        No
 project?




                                                                                          1
    2. Program Objective (supported by the TA component)

    1. Program Development Objective. The MAS1 Oaxaca Program Development Objective
    (PDO) is to support the improvement of the institutional framework of the water supply and
    sanitation sector of the State of Oaxaca, and the improvement of the quality and sustainability
    of water supply service in selected urban areas.

    3. Description of the Operation

    Structure of the Operation

    2. The Bank Operation, called the Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Modernization
    Operation (MAS Oaxaca), is a hybrid operation financed through a combination of two
    financial instruments: Program for Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing (IPF)2,
    the latter funding a Technical Assistance (TA) Component supporting the achievement of the
    objectives of the Program. This ISDS and definition of the environmental category apply
    solely to this TA component financed through the IPF instrument.

    Description of the Program Activities

    3. Program activities3 financed through the PforR instrument include an integrated set of
    institutional reforms, institutional strengthening activities and investments in participating
    institutions to achieve the Program’s objectives, which have been structured in four Results
    Areas.

             a. Result Area 1: Modernization of the legal and regulatory framework of the WSS
                sector in the State

    4. The Program activities will consist of preparing revised versions of key legal and regulation
    tools of the WSS sector’s legal and regulatory framework in order to align them with GoO’s
    vision to modernize the sector, including: (a) a WSS sector law4 and related regulations; (b)
    standard regulations for municipal or inter-municipal WSS service provision; (c) the SAPAO
    law; and (d) the CEA and SAPAO organizational manuals and internal regulations. The


1
  Modernización del sector Agua potable y Saneamiento de Oaxaca (MAS Oaxaca)
2
  In accordance with the hybrid nature of the operation, systems and policies applying to assess and mitigate
environmental and social impacts will depend on the financial instrument used. In the case of the PforR-funded
activities, the country and state environmental and social systems will apply after they have been assessed by the Bank
and strengthened as necessary. For the activities financed through the TA component following IPF policies, Bank
environmental and social safeguards will apply.
3
  The Program will not include activities considered likely to have a significant adverse impact on the environment or
on affected people, as defined in OP 9.00, or that may require the procurement of goods, works or consultancy
contracts above OPRC thresholds.
4
  During the Program implementation, the current State WSS Sector Law that was published in 2005 will be reviewed
in accordance with the guidelines annexed to the Operational Manual and submitted to the State Congress.

                                                                                                                     2
    revision of the State WSS sector law and its subsequent legal and regulatory tools aims at
    embodying the modernization of the institutional framework into the State’s legal framework.
    The activities under this Result Area 1 as well as the possible approval of the law by the State
    Congress are however not a pre-requisite for the achievement of the objectives under the other
    Results Areas.

              b. Result Area 2: Improvement of water services in Oaxaca Metropolitan Area

    5. The Program activities financed through CONAGUA’s APAZU program will aim at
    improving the quality and efficiency of water supply service in a selected service area of the
    Oaxaca Metropolitan Area’s water utility (SAPAO) – namely the San Juan Chapultepec
    Sector which represents 20 percent of SAPAO’s total number of connections, serving 50,000
    people, through: (a) the rehabilitation of the boreholes supplying the sector; (b) the
    construction of interconnection between the boreholes and water treatment facility; (c) the
    construction of interconnection with main distribution lines; (d) the construction of a water
    treatment facility; (e) the construction of a pumping station; (f) the construction of a
    transmission line from the pumping station to storage tanks; (g) the rehabilitation and
    construction of storage tanks; (h) the rehabilitation, hydraulic optimization and sectorization
    of the water distribution network; (i) the rehabilitation of water connections and the
    installation of micro-metering; (j) the installation of macro-metering and pressure gauges; (k)
    the update of the network mapping and commercial system; and (l) the carrying out of WSS
    studies, preparation of bidding documents and works supervision.

              c. Result Area 3: Improvement of water services in secondary towns

    6. The Program activities financed through CONAGUA’s APAZU program will aim at
    improving the quality of water services and the financial sustainability of the water utilities
    operating in 18 selected secondary towns5, located outside of the Oaxaca Metropolitan Area.
    The selected secondary towns comprise those with a population above 15,000 habitants
    and/or where CEA currently operates the systems. The participating water utilities account
    for about 50 percent of the total State urban population outside of the Oaxaca Metropolitan
    Area, with an estimated 600,000 beneficiaries. Planning of the activities financed in each
    town will be based on available diagnostics and master plans and will be strengthened through
    the TA Component. Activities will be geared to the local conditions and needs, and could
    include the following: (a) the rehabilitation and extension of production, storage and pumping
    systems; (b) the rehabilitation, hydraulic optimization and sectorization of the water network;
    (c) the rehabilitation of water connections; (d) the installation of macro and micro metering
    and pressure gauges; (e) the update of the network mapping and commercial systems; (f) the
    improvement of accounting systems; and (h) the carrying out of WSS studies, preparation of
    bidding documents and works supervision. CEA will grant access to financial support to the
    selected water utilities subject to meeting certain conditions and results, as specified in a
    Results Agreement that will be signed with CEA.

5
  Heroica Ciudad de Huajuapan de León, Loma Bonita, Miahuatlán de Porfirio Díaz, Ocotlán de Morelos, San Juan Bautista
Tuxtepec, Heroica Ciudad de Tlaxiaco, Zimatlán de ?lvarez, Asunción Ixtaltepec, Ciudad Ixtepec, El Espinal, Heroica Ciudad de
Juchitán de Zaragoza, Matías Romero Avendaño, Salina Cruz, San Francisco Telixtlahuaca, Puerto Escondido, Santiago Pinotepa
Nacional, Santo Domingo Tehuantepec, Santo Domingo Zanatepec

                                                                                                                           3
       d. Result Area 4: Improvement of information in rural areas

7. The Program activities will consist of establishing an information system designed to
capture the status and sustainability of rural WSS services in the 1,130 localities with
populations between 500 and 2,500 inhabitants throughout the State, through: (a) the
provision of information technology infrastructure and equipment and carrying out of training
in the use of the said information technology’s systems; and (b) the carrying out of data survey
activities.

Description of the TA Component Activities (to which the safeguard policies apply)

8. Activities financed through the TA Component, following IPF policies, will support the
achievement of the Program’s objectives. World Bank environmental and social policies as
described in section 5 below will apply solely to this Component. These activities consist of
strategic support for services improvement and sector studies critical to improve Program
performance and to increase the likelihood of achieving its objectives: (i) Multi-annual
strategic TA to CEA, SAPAO and selected water utilities in secondary towns through the
contracting of a professional operator/consultancy firm to improve the planning of activities,
to review the quality of bidding documents, and to improve the operational, commercial,
social and environmental management of the operation of the water systems; and (ii) WSS
sector studies designed to underpin the modernization of the sector institutional framework,
including: (a) the preparation of a Rural and an Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy
for the long-term development and organization of the sector, including a diagnosis of the
rural WSS sector in Oaxaca, the definition of optimal institutional arrangements for
promoting sustainable rural WSS provision in the State, the review of current approaches to
urban sanitation and wastewater management in the State, the definition of optimal
institutional, technological and financial arrangements for sustainable urban sanitation; (b) the
undertaking of a new Public Expenditure Review of the Oaxaca WSS Sector to inform the
aforementioned strategies; and (c) the design of pilot approaches to provide sustainable rural
WSS implementation and support services. (iii) The TA Component activities will also
finance activities pertaining specifically to the management of the Operation, including the
financing of: (a) the Independent Verification Agent of the Program’s Results; (b) the
Operation’s financial audit; (c) the hiring of MAS Oaxaca Operation Coordinators; and (d) the
carrying out of training and TA to strengthen fiduciary systems.
4. Location and salient physical characteristics of the TA component activities relevant
to the safeguard analysis (if known)

9. The TA Component is financing activities that support the Program performance and thus
the TA to SAPAO and CEA, as well as the activities of the Independent Verification Agent
and are expected to impact the works in the Metropolitan Area of Oaxaca and the 18
secondary towns where Result Areas 2 and 3 of the Program will be implemented.
Nonetheless, it is expected that any review of the quality of the bidding documents and
strengthening of the supervision and social and environmental management of the water
systems’ operations will have an impact across all the areas in the State where these agencies
function.


                                                                                                4
 10. The WSS Sector studies, in particular the Rural and the Urban Water Supply and
 Sanitation Strategy as well as the Public Expenditure Review, are state-wide activities. The
 design of pilot approaches to providing sustainable rural WSS implementation and support
 services will only apply to a subset of rural localities in order to be properly designed in a
 limited number of communities before it can be scaled-up in other parts of the State. The
 location of these localities is not yet known and these will be selected during implementation,
 in consultation with CEA and other relevant State institutions.

 11. Oaxaca has a pluri-ethnic composition that includes the following indigenous peoples:
 Amuzgos, Cuicatecos, Chatinos, Chinantecos, Chocholtecos, Chontales, Huaves, Ixcatecos,
 Mazatecos, Mixes, Mixtecos, Nahuatls, Triquis, Zapotecos y Zoques, as well as Tacuates. In
 addition, there is presence of Afro-Mexican or Negro-Mexican communities in the State.
 Depending on the criteria utilized, 32 percent (linguistic criteria) or 58 percent (self-selection)
 of the population is indigenous in the State (INEGI, 2010).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Robert Montgomery, Lead Environmental Specialist
Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf , Senior Environmental Specialist
Maria Elena Garcia Mora, Social Development Specialist
Martin Leninhan, Senior Social Development Specialist


6. Safeguard Policies applying to the    Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
TA component
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      This policy is triggered to ensure that the
                                                         Rural and the Urban Water Supply and
                                                         Sanitation Strategy and the pilot approaches
                                                         to providing sustainable rural WSS
                                                         implementation and support services to be
                                                         financed under this TA takes into account
                                                         appropriate environmental and social
                                                         objectives and considerations.

                                                         The TA component of the operation is
                                                         classified as environmental category C per
                                              Yes        OP/BP 4.01, as there are no direct negative
                                                         environmental impacts that could result from
                                                         the TA activities.

                                                         The Terms of Reference (ToRs) for the TA –
                                                         to be ready by the loan’s effectiveness- to
                                                         improve bidding documents and strengthen
                                                         supervision will include, as appropriate, the
                                                         necessary environmental and social criteria.

                                                         The ToRs for the preparation of the Rural
                                                         and the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation

                                                                                                     5
                                              Strategy –that will be prepared during the
                                              second year of the operation - will include,
                                              as appropriate, environmental and social
                                              considerations. The Strategy will be
                                              adequately consulted with the relevant
                                              stakeholders (Civil Society Organizations
                                              and Indigenous Peoples Organizations
                                              working in the water sector).

                                              The World Bank will be responsible for
                                              providing no-objection to the TORs for the
                                              preparation of the Rural and Urban Water
                                              Supply and Sanitation and for the TORs
                                              related to the technical assistance to improve
                                              bidding documents and strengthen
                                              supervision.

                                              The TA will also provide assistance to
                                              improve environmental and social
                                              management systems of the two main project
                                              counterparts, CEA and SAPAO.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   This policy is not triggered since the TA
                                         No   component will not involve any conversion
                                              of natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            This policy is not triggered since the TA
                                              component will not affect forests, forest
                                         No
                                              dependent communities and will not involve
                                              changes in the management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                       This policy is not triggered since the TA
                                         No   component does not involve the purchase or
                                              use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        This policy is not triggered since the TA
                                              component does not contemplate any
                                         No
                                              impacts related to physical cultural
                                              resources.




                                                                                             6
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               This policy is triggered as the TA component
                                            will finance the development of a Rural and
                                            an Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
                                            Strategy, and the design of pilot approaches
                                            to providing sustainable rural WSS
                                            implementation and support services.

                                            The World Bank will provide the
                                            no-objection to the ToR for the preparation
                                            of the Rural and the Urban Water Supply and
                                            Sanitation Strategy to ensure that any
                                            activity and advice is in line with the
                                            principles of OP 4.10. In addition, the
                                            Strategy will be adequately discussed with
                                            the relevant IPOs working in the water
                                            sector.

                                            Indigenous Peoples comprise the majority of
                                            beneficiaries of the design of the pilot
                                            approaches to providing sustainable rural
                                            WSS and support services. In this regard, the
                                      Yes
                                            design of the pilot will not require a separate
                                            Indigenous Peoples Plan. However, in
                                            conformity with OP 4.10, the elements of an
                                            Indigenous Peoples Plan will be included in
                                            the overall activity design. The detailed
                                            design of this activity will be done during
                                            implementation in consultation with the
                                            relevant IPOs. The World Bank will be
                                            responsible for providing no-objection to the
                                            TORs of the design of the pilot approaches to
                                            providing sustainable rural WSS and support
                                            services –to be prepared during the second
                                            year of the operation.

                                            The team will assist the State of Oaxaca in
                                            the preparation of the TORs of the Public
                                            Expenditure review of the Oaxaca WSS
                                            Sector to include, when information allows
                                            it, disaggregated data to assess how much of
                                            the resources have reached the poorest and
                                            IPs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         This policy is not triggered because the TA
                                            component will finance technical assistance
                                            activities at a strategic level. The Rural and
                                            the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
                                      No
                                            Strategy will help the client identify
                                            necessary investments for the long term
                                            development of the sector. Given the nature
                                            of this activity where broad sector

                                                                                         7
                                                              investment priorities are identified, the
                                                              strategy will not support the design of site
                                                              specific investments that may require
                                                              involuntary resettlement, nor the design of
                                                              water resource management plans that may
                                                              result in restrictions in land use or access to
                                                              natural resources.

                                                              Nonetheless, any advice given in the design
                                                              of the strategy will be done in line with the
                                                              principles embedded under OP4.12.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    This policy is not triggered since the TA
                                                              component does not support the construction
                                                    No
                                                              or rehabilitation of dams nor rely on the
                                                              operation of existing dams.
 Projects on International Waterways                          This policy is not triggered as the TA
 OP/BP 7.50                                                   component will not finance activities
                                                    No
                                                              involving the use or potential pollution of
                                                              international waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        This policy is not triggered as the TA
                                                    No        component will not finance activities in
                                                              disputed areas as defined in the policy.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
 and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 There are no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts that could result from the activities
 under this TA component.
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
 the TA component area:
 Given the strategic nature of the Rural and the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy, no
 downstream impacts are expected that could cause indirect and/or long term impacts. Nonetheless, any
 advice given for the preparation of the strategy will embed the social and environmental principles under
 the World Bank’s safeguard policies.
 3. Describe any TA component alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
 adverse impacts.
 Not Applicable
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Not Applicable
 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
 safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                                                                8
 When the Rural and the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy are developed, it will be
 adequately discussed with members of CSOs and IPOs working in the water sector.

 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the TA component triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
 the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
 Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 Not Applicable


 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
 finalized by the operation decision meeting)
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]
 Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
 in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
 project-affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the operation           Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 includes the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related
 to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the operation
 legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:              Name: Charles Delfieux
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards            Name: Glenn S. Morgan                      Date: April 4, 2014
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:                Name: Wambui Gichuri                       Date: April 16, 2014




                                                                                                        9
