                                                                                    89397
                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET


Date prepared/updated: May 29,2014

I. Basic Information

 .
1 B asrc    . tD ata
      . P rOJeC
Country: Moldova                                 Project ID: PJ50873
Organization: Center for Health Policies and
Studies

                                              Additional Project ID (if any): nla
Project Name: Implementing Pmticipatory Social Accountability for Better Health Project

Task Team Leader: Massimo Mastruzzi
Appraisal Date: 5112/2014                     Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: WBIGA                          Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sectors: Health and Social Accountability
Theme: Social Development/Gender/Inclusion
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: GPSA Grant US$730,000

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X]                 No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]              Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes [ ]      No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The overall development objective of this proposal is to enhance the citizens' voice and
establishing mechanisms for participatory monitoring, thus contributing to better informed policy
design and improved health service delivery in Moldova.

3. Project Description:

Component 1: Promoting citizen monitoring of hospital performance.

The key objective of this component is to improve information flows about hospital performance
by leveraging participatory monitoring and evaluation tools, in particular:
Hospital Performance Score Card (HPSC). The proposed mechanism is a combination of
techniques of Patient Report Card, based on patient satisfaction questiormaire, and social audit of
hospitals that covers resources utilization, generated outputs, quality, and access indicators. The
HPSC process will use www.spitale.md website for data presentation, gathering feedback,
communication and media coverage. The specific steps for HPSC process will include:

   •   Development of the HPSC tool and its refinement in consultation with stakeholders.
   •   Piloting and testing of the tool.
   •   Replication at country-level and institutionalization.

Hospital Efficiency Evaluation Framework (HEEF). HEEF is a particular type of social audit
based on statistics compilation and designed for evaluation of resources' allocation and results of
hospital activity. The tool will use a set data related to hospital inputs and outputs, methodology
for data collection and data econometric analysis. The HEEF process will also use
www.spitale.md website for data presentation, gathering feedback, publication of reports and
public presentations. The HEEF process will include:

   •   Development of the tool and its adjustment in consultation with stakeholders.
   •   Producing a Report.
   •   Distribution and feedback collection.
   •   Follow-up and institutionalization.

Component 2: Strengthening performance based incentive program in family medicine
through social audits of primary health care institution.

The key objective of this component is to strengthen performance based incentive program by
promoting Primary Healthcare Performance-based Incentives Audits (PHCPIA) that would help
the National Health Insurance Fund and the Ministry of Health verify the validity of performance
indicators supplied by service providers. PHCPIA is a social audit technique based on
quantitative and qualitative analysis of PHC institutions activity in the context of performance-
based incentive program. The PHCPIA process will include:

   •   Development of the PHCPIA Tool.
   •   Conducting PHCPIA.
   •   Producing a Report.
   •   Distribution and feedback collection.
   •   Follow-up and institutionalization.

The PHCPIA process will be applied using transparency website, publication of reports and
public presentations.

Component 3: Creating an enabling environment for informed public dialogue in health.

Activities included in this component are geared towards creating the enabling environment for
effective public pm1icipation including complementing existing evaluation processes, improving
information flows and promoting opportunities for improve public dialogue. This will include:


                                                2
    •   Tools aimed at improving transparency of information in health.
    •   Annual Public Opinion Polls on health services.
    •   Promote adoption of social accountability tools as inputs for budgetary processes and
        performance based financing of health institutions.
    •   Analysis and dissemination of expenditure flows.
    •   Organize relevant policy dialogues on health reforms impact and sustainability.


Component 4: Facilitate Knowledge and Learning to enhance effectiveness of social
accountability interventions in Moldova and around the world and project management.

The objective of this component is to ensure that mechanisms for learning and sharing are
developed both to support social accountability practitioners in Moldova as well as ensure that
lessons learned from the implementation of social accountability mechanisms are taken into
account to deepen knowledge base on the effectiveness of such interventions. This will include
inter alia:

   •    Build/develop sustainable information-communication tools based on existing and
        popular tools to serve as a platform for disseminating and using health systems' data and
        project results.
   •    Promote and monitor that project results, achieved on social accountability tools, are
        effectively used by MOH, NHIC and other governmental institutions to complement
        formal M&E and to inform about policy process.
   •    Conduct a series of capacity building activities with local CSOs, local public authorities,
        media institutions, etc. for promotion of social accountability in healthcare.
   •    Network with other GPSA grantees.
   •    Documentation of what works, lessons learned and suggestion for further improvements
        in future initiatives.
   •    Management, monitoring and evaluation of project activities including audits.


5. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                        Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OPffiP 4.01)                                                      X
Natural Habitats (OPffiP 4.04)                                                              X
Forests (OPffiP 4.36)                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPffiP 4.11)                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OPffiP 4.10)                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPffiP 4.12)                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OPffiP 4.37)                                                                X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OPffiP 7.50)                                          X
Pro.iects in Disputed Areas (OPffiP 7.60)                                                   X




                                                3
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will not finance any physical activities, no risks related to environmental or social
safeguards policies are anticipated during implementation of project activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
 N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
 N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
This project is not expected to trigger any safeguards policies as the project screening identified
minimal environmental or social risks related to project activities. The project does not anticipate
any civil works to be financed under this Grant. The project is assigned the Environmental
Category C, requiring no further environmental and social assessment.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
Project's direct beneficiaries include: empowered citizens and civil society organizations that
may benefit from the information and knowledge generated by the Project, as well as from
improved governance and transparency in service delivery processes. The project proposes to
enforce the mechanisms of accountability, including efforts to enhance citizen knowledge and
use of conventional mechanisms, through promoting transparency and civic engagement. The
proposed social accountability initiatives will serve the needs of the entire population, focusing
primarily on poor and vulnerable people through establishing mechanisms for their effective
participation in decision-making and improving access to quality services. The project aims at
enhancing the citizens' voice and establishing mechanisms for participatory monitoring, thus
contributing to better informed policy design and improved service delivery.

The Ministry of Health and other relevant government stakeholders. The Project interventions
and obtained results will be used for strengthening governance and decision-making processes by
the Ministry of Health, National Health Insurance Company (NHIC), Parliamentary Committee
on Social Protection and Health, National Center for Health Management, National Council for
Evaluation and Accreditation in Health, Medicines and Medical Devices Agency, Court of
Accounts, Local Authorities, as well as hospitals and Primary healthcare institutions.

The Project's indirect beneficiaries include: (I) organizations operating in sectors not directly
targeted by the Project, but who can study its results and implement similar interventions in their
sectors; (2) the Ministry of Finance which will have additional information on how effectively



                                                 4
 education public funds are spent at the facility level; and (3) international donor programs
 supporting the health sector in Moldova.

 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Manage ment Plan/Other:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               NIA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NIA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              NIA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                               NIA
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
   Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               NIA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NIA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              NIA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                               NIA
Indigenous Peoples Piau/Planning Framework:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NIA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NIA
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues arc to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, pleas.e explain why:




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)


OP/BP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [ ]     No [ ]      NIA [X ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?




                                               5
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OP/BP 4.04 -Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest ManaJ?:ement
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X ]
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
 project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10- lndiJ?:enous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning               Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy               Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for cetiification system?


                                                 6
OP/BP 4.37- SafetYof Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes r 1   No [ )   NIA [X)
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Proiects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ )   Nor 1    NIA [X)
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Depm1ment, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
 OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the     Yes [ )   No [ )   NIA [X]
 international aspects of the project, including the
 procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
 dealing with the issue, been prepared
 Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
 referred to in the OP?
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to     Yes [ )   No [ )   NIA [X ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ )   No [ )   NIA [X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the proiect cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                7
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                                  Name/,    /,                    Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Massimo Mastruzzi           /<.A~                  5/29/2014
 Environmental Specialist:
 Social Development Specialist
 Additional Environmental and/or
 S~cial Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:                                         , A    If
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Agi Kiss       ~\     vr--:-                       5/29/2014
 Comments:                                         (\
 Sector Manager:                     Roby Send({row1tsch    """'                        5/29/20 14
   Comments:                                 171 ::;::::::;;-· ?',
                                                ~




                                                                     (Template Version November 2007)




                                                 8
