                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 86174


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 19, 2014

I.     BASIC INFORMATION

A.     Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Moldova                Project ID: P144892
                                            Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Health Transformation Operation
Task Team Leader: Son Nam Nguyen
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2014 Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2014
Managing Unit: ECSH1                        Lending Instrument: PforR (US$28
                                            million) and IPF (US$2 million)
Sector: Health
Theme: Health
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 30 million
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing              Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [x]                   No [ ]

B.     Project Objectives:

The proposed Program Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to reducing key risks for
non-communicable diseases and enhancing efficiency of health services in Moldova.

C.     Project Description:

The project is a hybrid Program-for-Results operation which includes two components:

Component 1: Program for Results (US$ 28 million)

Government’s program

Health sector development in Moldova is guided by the 2007-21 National Health Policy (the
Policy). The Policy is further elaborated and operationalized by the 2008-17 National Health
System Development Strategy (NHSDS) which forms the Government program for the coming
years with the following objectives: (a) continuous improvement of population health; (b)
enhancement of financial risk protection; (c) reduction of inequalities in the use and distribution
of health care services; (d) increase in user satisfaction; and (e) restructuring of the health system
to improve performance and population health in the context of limited resources.

A three-year Medium-Term Budgetary Framework (MTBF) is prepared on a rolling basis to
finance the implementation of NHSDS. MTBF has five programs:

(i)     “Health Policy and Management? which supports policy development, implementation
        management and monitoring through MOH, CNAM and other state institutions;
(ii)    “Priority Public Health Interventions" which focuses on disease surveillance and control
        for infections as well as for non-communicable diseases;
(iii)    “Personal Health Services? which concentrates on the delivery of a range of personal
        health care services rendered by family medicine, hospitals, specialized outpatient and
        community care providers;
(iv)    “Development of health system resources? which focuses on investments in the health
        sector and rational drug management, and
(v)     “Special medical programs? which focuses on special issues such as forensic services,
        Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS etc.

MTBF’s five programs are further divided into 19 sub-programs. The main sources of financing
for MTBF are the state budget (59 percent) and health insurance fund (40 percent). Total cost of
MTBF for the next four years (2014-17) has been estimated at 26,115 million Moldovan Lei or
US$1,964 million.

Health Transformation Program-for-Results

The proposed four-year Health Transformation Program-for-Results (HTP) will support a subset
of NHSDS activities. Its boundaries are defined by selected MTBF subprograms and, in some
cases, portions of selected subprograms. HTP corresponds to 7 of 19 sub-programs of the
MTBF, namely:

(i)     Sub-program I - “Policies and management in health care? (Implementing agency:
        Ministry of Health or MOH). This sub-program represents the operating budget for the
        MOH to carry out its functions which include: (a) health policy and strategy formulation;
        (b) coordination, regulation and quality assurance for all health providers; (c) planning of
        health resources; (d) management of national health programs; and (e) coordination of
        multi-sectoral collaboration in health.
(ii)    Sub-program II - “Administration of mandatory health insurance fund? (Implementing
        agency: National Health Insurance Company or CNAM). This sub-program represents
        the operating budget for CNAM central and regional offices to carry out its functions
        which include: (a) managing the health insurance fund; (b) contracting health providers
        for the provision of services; and (c) verifying the provision of services by providers to
        be in line with the contracts.
(iii)   Sub-program III -“Monitoring and evaluation of health system and quality management?
        (Implementing agency: National Center for Health Management or NCHM, a
        subordinated agency of the MOH). This sub-program provides the operating budget
        NHCM to carry out its functions which include: (a) collection, analysis and dissemination
        of data to monitor and evaluate population’s health status and health system performance,
        and (b) development of standards and norms in health.
(iv)    Sub-program V - “Primary care services? (Implementing agency: CNAM). This sub-
        program includes the following activities implemented by CNAM: (a) contracting family
        medicine providers to deliver primary care services and (b) reimbursing pharmacies for
        the out-patient drug benefit package. The Program is limited to two categories under this
        sub-program: (a) performance-based incentives for Family Medicine providers under
        CNAM contracts, and (b) CNAM reimbursement of hypertensive drugs in the outpatient
        drug benefit package.
(v)     Sub-program IX: “In-patient care? (Implementing agency: CNAM). This sub-program
        includes the contracting of hospitals to deliver in-patient care by CNAM. The Program is
        limited to one category under this sub-program - the performance-based incentive for
        hospitals. It will provide incentives on top of the DRG payment mechanism for hospitals.
(vi)    Sub-program XVII: “Development and modernization of health care institutions?
        (Implementing agency: MOH). Planned and managed by the MOH, this subprogram
        funds capital investment in the health sector. The Program is limited to one category
        under this sub-program, the development and rollout of the health management
        information system (HMIS) in family medicine. This HMIS is critical to the management
        of NCD and the implementation of performance-based incentive scheme in primary
        health care. Program HMIS activities will include completion of the HMIS design,
        procurement of computers, installation of the software, training in HMIS for health
        workers and administrators as well as technical support.
(vii)   Sub-program XIX: “National special health programs? (Implementing agency: MOH).
        Under this sub-program, the Program is limited to National Tobacco Control Programme
        (NTCP) which is Moldova’s comprehensive tobacco control work plan. NTCP was
        developed in line with the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) of the
        World Health Organization (WHO) and approved by the GOM in 2012. Its activities
        include demand-side and supply-side activities to control tobacco.

Total cost of the Program is US$155 million or 8 percent of the Government’s 2014-17 health
program. In the boundaries of the Program, there is no other source of funding from other
development partners. IDA financing would be US$30 million or 19 percent of the Program’s
cost.

Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$ 2 million).

To ensure adequate and timely capacity building for the Program, it was agreed that US$2
million of IDA credit will be earmarked for technical assistance under a separate component.
The preliminary proposed TA activities might include the following: (a) two household health
surveys -- one smoking among youth, one on hypertension among adults (each conducted in year
2 and year 4); (b) revision of performance-based incentive scheme in family medicine; (c) design
of performance-based incentive scheme for hospital; (d) a costing study using country-based data
to revise prices in the current payment system for hospitals; and (e) study on restructuring
business processes and workflow for hospitals under common management
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

n/a

E.      Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies: The Ministry of Health has
adequate capacity to implement national and World Bank safeguards requirements. Until now,
the World Bank has supported several projects in the country’s health sector, including the on-
going “Health Services and Social Assistance? project. This project aims to improve the quality
of primary care delivered in rural areas by: (i) adopting nationwide structural standards for
primary care facilities services; (ii) providing continuing medical education and training for
primary care workers; and (iii) funding construction/rehabilitation works and new equipment for
existing and new clinics. Under this project, about 60 primary care centers have been constructed
or rehabilitated. The World Bank jointly with the MOH representatives has periodically
conducted supervision of implemented civil. In this regard, it was concluded that the
construction/rehabilitation activities have been in compliance with the provisions of the project
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP environmental requirements have been
followed by the constructors and there were no any complaints from the MoH, Environmental
Inspectorate and supervising Engineers.

F.       Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

      Arcadie Capcelea, Sr. Environment Specialist
      Klavdiya Maksymenko, Social Development Specialist

II.      SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           x
Although this is a P4R operation which is not subject to WB safeguards policies, it also contains
a small TA component focused on conducting several analytical studies and providing consulting
services and thus it is subject to environmental screening process. Based on the proposed TA
activities it might be concluded none of them will have any direct or indirect environmental and
social impacts and due to that this OP is not triggered.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   x

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           x

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      x

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       x

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                x

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          x
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                        Yes              No             TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                               x

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           x

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    x

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                                             x
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III.         SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:

       n/a

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:

       n/a

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

       n/a

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Name: Son Nam Nguyen                                        Date: 03/06/14
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Name: Agnes Kiss                                            Date: 03/18/14
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Name: Daniel Dulitzky                                       Date: 03/18/14
      Comments:




1            Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal: (i) at
the InfoShop; and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
