                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                            Report No.:    89196
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         O1-Jul-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Mongolia                Project ID:             Pt29541
 Project Name:                Improving Disaster Risk Management in Mongolia (P 129541)
 Task Team Leader:            Artessa Saldivar-Sali
 Estimated Appraisal Dnte:
                      I       -                       Estimated Board Date: 13-Jun-2012
 Managing Unit:               EASCS                   Lending Instrument:     Technical Assistance
                                                                              Grant/Loan
 Sector(s):                   Flood protection (50%), General agriculture, fishery and forestry sector
                              (20%), Information technology (300/o)
 Tbeme(s):                    Natural disaster management (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       2".73                      Total Bank Financing:    2.73
 Total Cofinancing:        0.00                        Financing Gap:          0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                                                       0.00
     PHRD                                                                                           2.73
     Total                                                                                          2.73
 Environmental Category: B
 Is thls a Repeater project? No
 b this a Transrerred
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The objectives of the Project are to improve the disaster preparedness of Ulaanbaatar and to reduce the
 impact of "dzud,. on rural livelihoods.

 3. Project Description
 The project consists of the following parts: Managing Urban Disaster Risk in Mongolia (Part A) and
Managing Climatic Risk in Rural Mongolia (Part B).

Part A: Managing Urban Disaster Risk in Mongolia (USS 1,365,000)

Component A. I Disaster Risk Management and Preparedness in UB (USS 1.227.600) This
component will include the following 3 subcomponents.

Sub-component A. I. I: UB Flood Risk Assessment: a detailed flood risk assessment for UB will be
conducted. Flood risks will be mapped by "microzone11 in order to detennine the exact nature and
level of risk in different parts of the city: The risk analysis will also be "ground-truthed" through
community level infonnation gathering/research to verify and cross check. The infonnation would be
used to review the existing zoning regulations, land use plans and building by-laws and modify/update
as required. The assessment will be carried out by the Municipality ofUB with technical support
from international experts. (Expected Outputs: UB Flood Risk Assessment Report)

Sub-component A.1.2: Design and Development of Database on Hazards and Vulnerabilities:
Activities under this subcomponent would enable UB to quantify the total risks it faces and
subsequently prepare a cost-benefit analysis for prevention and mitigation of risks. UB will hire
specialized consultants to carry out this task, drawing on similar databases in other countries. The
database will be in both Mongolian and English. The target audience (potential users) for the database
will be city level d~cision makers, insurers, residents, civil society organiz.ations etc. A series of
demonstration workshops and training sessions will be held for the potential users of the database.
(Expected Outputs: Hazard and Vulnerability Database)

Subcomponent A.1. 3: Design UB City Flood Risk Management Plan and Capacity Building. The
current UB City ORM Plan will be updated using the flood risk assessment findings. A pre-disaster
response plan will focus on enabling the city to respond effectively and thereby reduce the loss of lives
and assets. The updated City Plan will complement the national plan already prepared by NEMA,
clarifying the roles and reSponsibilities of the principle stakeholders. The preparation will be
participatory, bringing in all the main stakeholders under the coordination of the UB Emergency
Management Office with significant contribution from the Municipality, NEMA and civil society
organizations, among other stakeholders. The focus of the plan would be on:
    • Fonnulating proposals for a prioritized list of structural and non-structural investments for
         flood risk management;          .
    • Developing proposals for the institutional structure for flood risk management and for the lead
         agency or organization for flood risk management;          ·
    • Developing proposals for community engagement in flood risk management;
    • Developing proposals for adequate flood warning and emergency response systems,
         communication and public information management;
    • Developing a results framework for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of $e
         Strategy; and
    • Associated training and capacity building.
Some equipment that enables MUB to respond during emergencies may also be purchased, as
identified in the Flood Risk Management Plan. (Expected Outputs: MUB ORM Plan, training course
developed and delivered) .

Component A.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2S,SOO). An external/independent evaluator will be
recruited to review progress in implem~ntation of the various activities of the project. The evaluator
will review the quality of the work carried out, such as the training and Flood Risk Management Plan
developed under the project with a view of providing tangible recommendations for the city and
project management unit to follow and thereby improve project outcomes. This will be reflected in
annual, mid-term and final reports. The evaluation will also include feedback from community
members and key stakeholders.
      .                                                                    .
Component A.3: Project Management (USS l I l ,900). This component will finance (i) staff costs of
the project management unit which will include Project Director, Project Coordinator, accountant,
procurement specialist, ORM/engineer (ii) operating expenditures such as communications costs,
office supply, office space etc., and (iii) annual financial audits. The project management costs are
shared across several different projects managed by the Bank commensurate with the staff time and
resources required to implement this grant. The financial audit will be stand:-alone.

Part B: Managing Climatic Risk in Rural Mongolia (USSl,365,000)

Component B.l Dzud Management System CUSS US$ 1.227.000)

Sub-component B.1.1: Information System for Dzud Forecasting and Monitoring. This
sub-component will support institutionalization of the Livestock Early Warning System (LEWS)
within the National Agency for Meteorology, Hydrology and Environmental Monitoring (NAMHEM).
The LEWS was developed under the World Bank -financed Sustainable Livelihoods Program, and is
currently being scaled up nationwide. This system provides real time information and forecasts on
pasture conditions. Currently this information is not linked into NAMHEM. This component would
help to merge this database with NAMHEM systems (at UB, province and. rural district levels) to
provide information for the strategic distribution of feed and fodder. Activities would include
training on operation and maintenance of LEWS, covering topics o~ data collection (maximizing the
use ofICTs), data sharing and consolidation. (Expected Outputs: Training on LEWS provided)

Sub-component B.1.2: Designing and Piloting a New Feed and Fodder Supply System. Under this
sub-component, a new emergency feed and fodder supply system will be designed and piloted. The
activity includes simple fencing of smal I portions of herder household pasture land in order to protect
naturally-growing hay from overgrazing by livestock. This allows the vegetation to grow to full
maturity and be harvested, packed and stored for the winter, ensuring readily avail~ble emergency feed
supply for the beneficiary herder households. These improvements would be based on
recommendations that are being drafted under the ongoing analytical work on the system, including
defining the appropriate private and public sector roles. Local capacity build\ng and technology
transfer would also be carried out. The beneficiaries of the capacity building activities will be local
communities, especially herders and agricultural/pastoral extension workers. The training will be
carried out on the soum (local) level. (Expected Outputs: Herders produce and store hay)

Component B.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$25,500). An extemaViridependent evaluator will be
recruited to review progress in implementation of the various activities of the project. The evaluator
will review the quality of the work carried out, such as the training and ORM plans developed under
the project with a view of providing tangible recommendations for the city and project management
unit to follow and thereby improve project outcomes. This will be reflected in annual, mid-tenn and
final reports. The evaluation will also include feedback from community members and key
stakeholders.

Component B.3: Project Management and Administration (US$1t1,900) . . This component will
finance (i) staff costs of the project management unit which will include Project Director, Project
Coordinator, accountant, procurement specialist and livestock specialists (including fodder/forage
specialist to be located within the implementing agency); (ii) operating expenditures such as
communications costs, office supply, office space etc., and (iii) annua.l financial audits. The project
management costs are shared across several different projects managed by the Bank commensurate
with the staff time and resources required to implement this grant. The financial audit will be
stand-alone.                                          ·

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Activities under Part A are concentrated in Ulaanbaatar City. This will be based on a flood risk
mapping, and will provide options for both structural and non-structural measures for flood risk
management.

Part B involves the design and piloting of a herder household emergency feed and fodder supply
system. The investment support would be at the soum level, and the predominant resource base is
grassland supporting semi-nomadic herding.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Viren Feng ( EASCS )
Songling Yao ( EASCS )

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?      Expla~ation     (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes             The project does not involve any physical
                                                           construction. However, the UB City Flood
                                                           Risk Management Plan, designed under
                                                           Sub-component A.1.3, may in future result
                                                           in investments that have implications on the
                                                           environment. Therefore, OP4.01 is
                                                           triggered. Environmental and Social
                                                           Safeguards Guidelines have been prepared,
                                                           and environmental and social objectives and
                                                           elements will be part of the planning
                                                           process, tenns of referenee for the plan and
                                                           the capacity building grant activities to the
                                                           relevant line ministries and Ulaanbaatar
                                                           City.
Natural Hitbitats OP/BP 4.04               No              The project area has been subject to
                                                           long-term and intensive human activities
                                                           and does not meet the definition of natural
                                                           habitats by OP/BP 4.04.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No              The Project would not finance any activity
                                                           that may involve a major change or
                                                           degradation of the important forest area or
                                                           related major natural habitat as defined in
                                                           the Policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No              The Project will not require the purchase or
                                                           additional application of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No   No physical or cultural resources have been
                                            identified in the project site.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    Under Part A, all the activities are
                                            concentrated in Ulaanbaatar City. The
                                            Social Assessment for an IDA-funded
        '                                   project (USIP2) provided a thorough
                                            screening oflndigenous People (IP), and it
                                            concluded that there are no IP communities
                                            within Ulaanbaatar.

                                            Under Sub-component B.1.2, there are five
                                            soums selected for the pilot scheme in the
                                            south and southwest parts of the country, as
                                            these areas have (i) more likelihood of the
                                            occurrence of extreme weather conditions
                                            (such as dzud), (ii) higher than average
                                            carrying capacity of livestock where feeding
                                            could be a challenge in case of an extreme
                                            weather condition, and (iii) limited access to
                                            NEMA 's reserve in case of emergency.
                                            Based on the above mentioned criteria, the
                                            selected pilot locations are Khoton Soum in
                                            Arkhangai Aimag, Bayan-Undur Soum in
                                            Uvurkhangai Aimag, Dashinchilen Soum in
                                            Bulgan Aimag, Ulziit Soum in
                                            Bayankhongor Aimag, and Bayan-Ovoo
                                            Soum in Bayankhongor Aimag.

                                            The Bank team social development
                                            specialist conducted a screening for these
                                            five pilot areas and confirmed that OP4. I0
                                            was not triggered for this project because
                                            there were no ethnic minorities that live in
                                            these five locations.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The activities under Part A ~d B are mostly
                                            technical assistance and training, and there
                                            is no land taking under the project.

                                            Under the pilot feed and fodder system of
                                            Sub-component B.1.2, the lands that will be
                                            fenced belong to herder households, using
                                            their own lands .that have been abandoned
                                            or not used for other purposes.

                                            Under Sub-component A.1.3, the proposed
                                            UB City Flood Risk Management Plan may
                                            result in investments that have land
                                            acquisition implications. And therefore,
                                            OP4. I2 is triggered. Environmental and
                                                            Social Guidelines have been prepared, and
                                                            social objectives and elements of land
                                                            acquisition or resettlement plan (RP) will be
                                                            part of the planning process, tenns of
                                                            reference for the City Flood and Risk
                                                            Management plan and the capacity building
                                                            grant activities to the relevant line ministries
                                                            and Ulaanbaatar City.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No              The project will not fund any dams and
                                                            there are no existing dams in the project
                                                            area. However future investments resulting
                                                            out of the City Flood Risk Management
                                                            Plan may trigger the policy and prepare the
                                                            relevant instruments.
 Projects on International Waterways        No              The project will not involve activities on
 OP/BP 7.50                                                 international waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No              The project is not located in Disputed
                                                            Areas.

 II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
 and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irrevenible impacts:
 The project is a Technical Assistance and does not have direct impact on environmental or social
 safeguard issues. However, the UB City Flood Risk Management Plan, designed under
 Sub-component A.1.3, may in future result into investments that have implications on the
 environment. Therefore, OP4.0l and OP 4.12 are triggered, and the Environmental and Social
 Safeguards Guidelines have been prepared. Environmental and social objectives and elements will be
 part of the planning process, tenns of reference for the plan and the capacity building grant activities
 to the relevant line ministries and Ulaanbaatar City.
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
 the project area:
  The proposed UB City Flood Risk Management Plan, designed under Sub-component A.1.3, may
· result into investments that have implications on the·environment, land acquisition, or resettlement.
 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
 impacts.
 NIA
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                                           d implement the measures described.
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan an_
 The Tenns of Reference tor the plan instruct that each proposal for infrastructure (either upgrading or
 reconstruction) should be reviewed against the environmental and social aspects, land acquisition and
 resettlement.
 5. ldendfy the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
 safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stake holders would be residents of ger areas in UB city, NEMA, the UB Emergency
Management Office, the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, including the Governor's Office, Department of
Strategic Policy and Planning, Department Engineering Facilities, and Master Planning Agency.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  July I, 2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               July I, 2014
                  I

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" DisClosure
Mongolia                                                                     July 7, 2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  July 1, 2014
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               July I, 2014
"In country" Disclosure
Mongolia                                                                     July 7, 2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respectiv~ issu~ are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessinent/Auditlor EMP.                             ·
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes l X 1      Nol 1 NA l J
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager    Yes l X 1    Nol 1 NA l 1
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in   Yes [ J      Nol J NA     (X)
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [XJ        No[ J NA { J
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes   ~XJ    Nol J NA [ J
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X l      No [ ]     NA [ ]
Bank's lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public        Yes [X]    No[    )   NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessibl.e
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar1 budget and clear institutional           Yes [ ]    No [ J NA [XJ
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ ]    Nol 1 NA      [X]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluati.on system of the project include    Yes ( Xl   No [   )   NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [Xl    No[    )   NA ( 1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


HI.APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Artessa Saldivar-Sali
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards                                                      Date: 0 =t-oJ_· J.C>!j
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:
