                                                                      83021
                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/14/2013                                     Report No.:
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mongolia                             Project ID: P145439, (P118109)
Project Name: MN-Mining Infrastructure Investment Support – Additional Financing
and Restructuring
Task Team Leader: Khairy Al-Jamal
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30,         Estimated Board Date: N/A
2013
Managing Unit: EASCS                          Lending Instrument: AusAID TF Grant
Sector: General transportation sector (10%); General energy sector (35%); Water supply
(45%), Other Mining and Extractive Industry (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%); Regulation and
competition policy (10%), Water resource management (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         AusAID TF Grant                                                4.20
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        4.20
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The proposed scaling-up activities are consistent with the current MINIS project
development objectives (PDOs) and description which are to facilitate investments in
infrastructure to support mining and downstream processing activities, regardless of
funding source, and to build local capacity to prepare and transact infrastructure projects.

3. Project Description

The MINIS focuses on technical assistance activities for general infrastructure that will
support the mining sector and local communities within an investment’s area of influence.
While many of the projects are expected to be in the Southern Mongolia Region, projects
in other locations throughout the country will also be eligible for financing under the
MINIS. The project consists of the following four components:
  i.   Component 1 - Support for Infrastructure Investments (US$19.69 million).
       This component will provide financing to prepare regional infrastructure
       investment plans, conduct feasibility studies to assess technical options and
       determine economic and financial implications of proposed projects, and address
       emerging priority issues as a result of the country’s nascent enabling environment
       governing private participation in infrastructure.

       The types of feasibility studies that are eligible for financing under the MINIS
       include technical assessments, such as engineering designs, geotechnical surveys,
       economic and financial analyses, environmental and social impact evaluations,
       and reviews of specific aspects of the country’s legal, regulatory and institutional
       frameworks. Funds could be used to prepare mining-related infrastructure
       projects whether financed from the government budget or the private sector.

       Projects in the energy (power plants, transmission and distribution networks),
       transport (railways and roads), IT and communications, water (water supply and
       waste water systems), housing and social sectors (schools, hospitals and clinics)
       would be eligible, as would logistics and border crossing facilities. In addition,
       the evaluation and structuring (for private investment) of downstream, value-
       added activities, such as copper smelters, coal processing facilities and iron
       pellets plants, would also be eligible for funding. If funding is used to prepare a
       power plant, then the March 2010 Operation Guidelines on Criteria for Screening
       Coal Projects under the Strategic Framework for Development and Climate
       Change would be followed.

       It is possible that one or two (at most) infrastructure projects will be prepared as
       PPPs with some support from the MINIS.

ii.    Component 2 - Capacity Building and Knowledge Transfer (US$1.45
       million). This component is devoted towards the development of local skills. The
       emphasis would be on learning by doing but with sufficient support from
       qualified consultants. This support will be extended to line ministries and
       agencies charged with preparing government-funded projects, as well as
       transactions with investors

iii.   Component 3 - Strengthening Groundwater Management (US$7.43 million).
       This component will focus on strengthening the capacity of local authorities to
       manage groundwater resources in the Southern Mongolia. The government has
       established a framework of 29 water basins for the entire country. For Southern
       Mongolia, these basins are centered on groundwater, as surface water is of minor
       importance in the southern part of the country.

       In 2011, AusAID approved a proposal to provide additional financing of US$4.2
       million to this component to strengthen groundwater management in Mongolia
       after two years discussion with the Bank. This additional financing increased the
       budget of Component 3 from original US$3.23 million to US$7.43 million. With
       additional financing, this component will mainly support: a) Establishment of

                                                                                         2
       Ground Water Management and Information Unit (GWMIU); b) Establishment of
       River Basin Council (RBC); c) Establishment of 3 River Basin Administrations
       (RBA); d) Consultancy service such as assessing legal/institutional framework;
       preparing and implement groundwater management plans and conduction
       groundwater investigation; e) Capacity building activities for established RBC
       and RBAs; f) groundwater assessment and management studies.

 iv.   Component 4 - Project Management (US$0.63 million). This component will
       finance the staffing, operation and support of the Project Management Unit
       (PMU) at the Ministry of Finance. The PMU oversees the implementation of
       MINIS and will reports to the State Secretary for Finance. The PMU Director has
       the overall responsibility for managing the MINIS, including: (i) implementing
       project activities per the Project Implementation Manual, within budget and
       according to schedule; (ii) all procurement activities, including contracting
       consultants, and purchasing goods and equipment; (iii) maintaining financial
       records, making disbursements, managing the Designated Account, and financial
       reporting; (iv) monitoring the performance of consultants to ensure that
       contractual obligations are fulfilled; (v) reviewing and approving all reports and
       outputs issued by consultants; (vi) evaluating project activities and reporting on
       implementation progress; and (vii) ensuring that the environmental and social
       safeguards framework is effectively implemented. A Procurement Specialist and
       Financial Management Specialist will be hired to manage the fiduciary
       requirements of the project. Proceeds under the project will be used to hire a
       PMU Director and technical staff, as needed.

       This component would also finance the services of domestic and international
       consultants to help monitor progress and assist in implementation, including
       financial audits for the project, and to acquire office equipment, pay PMU
       operating costs, and purchase one vehicle for the PMU. Incremental operating
       costs will also be financed through the Credit and include, inter alia, office rent,
       office consumables, communications, vehicle operating and repairs, and salaries
       of contractual staff (other than consultants)

The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is providing transaction advice to the
Government to identify, develop, market and competitively select private
developers/investors for up to three pilot projects. This support is expected to
complement some of the activities of the MINIS. It has been agreed with the IFC that the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was prepared for the
MINIS will be considered to apply to both World Bank and IFC in line with the
Environmental and Social Policy and Procedural Guidelines for Projects in IDA
Countries that are financed jointly by the World Bank, IFC and Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis



                                                                                         3
The project will provide upstream technical support to prepare infrastructure to support
mining activities, regardless of source of funding. The majority of the projects are
expected to involve infrastructure that will be located in the three principal Aimags
(provinces) of the Southern Gobi Region (SGR), which consist of Umnogovi, Dornogovi
and Dundgovi Aimags. It is possible that proceeds from the MINIS would be used to
help prepare investments outside of these Aimags.

In general, The SGR is characterized as having low precipitation that is seasonal, an
absence of perennial surface water bodies, and high evaporation rates. Soils are thin and
not readily arable. While pasturelands are plentiful, they are low in plant productivity.
The primary vegetation in SGR is desert steppe and desert, which is extremely sparsely
populated. The combination of scarce water resources and poor soil make it necessary to
regularly rotate herds from one location to another.

The presence of animal species in SGR is important in the regional ecosystem. They also
have immediate economic value for Mongolia, and wildlife is a primary attraction for
tourism in the SGR. There are seven Special Protected Areas and about 242 locally
protected areas in the SGR, representing a large area of critical and non-critical natural
habitats. Initial baseline information also indicates presence of a number of physical
cultural resources, including archeological, paleontological and sacred sites.

While most of the projects to be financed under the MINIS are expected to be in the
Southern Mongolia Region, projects in other locations throughout the country would also
be eligible for financing under MINIS. The priority identified projects would trigger 4
safeguards policies including OP 4.01, OP4.04, OP 4.12, OP 4.37 and OP 7.50. Based on
the Bank’s understanding of safeguards issues in Southern Mongolia, there is potential
for other World Bank policies to be triggered as further projects would be identified,
screening for Bank safeguard policies will be undertaken and determined for each project
activity with potential safeguards requirements during project implementation and the
ISDS will be updated accordingly.

Under the proposed Additional Financing and restructuring, the project area will be
expanded to also cover 3 River basins in southern Mongolia, i.e. North Gobi hills –
Khalkh mid steppe (basin 17); Galba-Uush-Dolood Gobi (basin 18); and Altai south Gobi
(basin 20).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Yiren Feng (Sr. Environmental Specialist, EASCS)
Peishen Wang (Environmental Consultant, EASCS)
Jun Zeng (Social Development Specialist, EASCS)
Youxuan Zhu (Social Consultant, EASCS)




                                                                                        4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                            Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                            X
The MINIS project is classified as Category A project as per OP4.01, due to potentially significant
environmental and social impacts from the downstream implementation of the infrastructure projects that
are prepared by this project, even though this project only supports technical studies and institutional
strengthening activities.

Currently, six sub-projects have been identified, including: (i) Flow regulation of the Orkhon river
and construction of water reservoir complex scheme (900 km diversion scheme impacting a river
that connects to Russia); (ii) Shuren Hydropower plant (on the Selenge river that connects to Russia); (iii)
Integrated Steel Complex with Infrastructure in the central region of Darkhan-Selenge; (iv) Expansion of
Tavan Tolgoi Thermal Power Station; (v) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for Darkhan Oil
Refinery Plant; and (vi) Extension of Coal Mine "Baganuur" LLC.

Project-specific TORs for EIA shall be developed for each sub-project by PMU/Ministry of Environment
and Green Development, and approved by the World Bank. The PMU will be responsible for ensuring
that the project-specific TORs for EIA are incorporated into the contractual documents, which will
contractually obligate the entities involved in a transaction to prepare safeguards documents and
implement them according to the prepared and disclosed project ESMF.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                          X
The presence of animal species in SGR is important in the regional ecosystem. They also have immediate
economic value for Mongolia, and wildlife is a primary attraction for tourism in the SGR. There are
seven Special Protected Areas and about 242 locally protected areas in the SGR, representing a large area
of critical and non-critical natural habitats. Especially the presence of critical natural habitat of Ramsar
site at Selenga Delta and Lake Baikal that are potentially would be impacted by the possible
implementation of Shuren Hydropower and Orkhon Gobi Water Supply projects will be a key natural
habitat concern. Therefore, this policy is triggered.

Detailed natural habitat study and impact assessment requirements will be adequately included in the
project-specific EIA TORs as mentioned above, which will guide the preparation of EIA and EMP during
the project feasibility study and future implementation as per guidance provided by the ESMF.

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                     X
Based on initial screening of the sites of currently identified sub-projects, it is concluded that these
candidate sub-projects will not affect forests as defined under this policy. Therefore, this policy is not
triggered. Further screening using the ESMF will be conducted for later sub-projects when they are
proposed to determine whether this policy is triggered for future sub-projects.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                               X
No chemical pesticides l are expected to be procured and/ used under the project.




                                                                                                    5
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
Initial baseline information also indicates presence of a number of physical cultural resources, including
archeological, paleontological and sacred sites, including the World Heritage Site – Lake Baikal.

Detailed physical cultural resources survey, consultation, impact assessment and protection/mitigation
measures requirements will be adequately included in the project-specific EIA TORs as mentioned above,
which will guide the preparation of EIA and EMP during the project feasibility study and future
implementation as per guidance given in the ESMF.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                    X
According to screening by PMU staff, neither MINIS nor its AF activities are expected to affect IP, and
therefore the proposed MINIS-AF does not trigger the IP policy. Preliminary screening was conducted for
the identified projects as part of the project identification and information gathering in phase 1 of the
implementation by hired consultants. For future projects, similar screening will be conducted based on the
ESMF. If IPs are present in those projects, IP policy will be triggered and ISDS will be updated, and
relevant social assessment and EMDP will be prepared for those projects.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
Based on the priority projects identified for the development of their feasibility study, it is clear that
Involuntary resettlement is triggered even without reference to MINIS-AF. This is clear in the case of
Shuren Hydropower and Orkhon Gobi Water supply projects. In cases where land acquisition is implied,
resettlement action plans will be prepared as per OP4.12 and the guidance given in the Resettlement
Policy Framework part of the ESMF.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                            X
This policy is triggered due to the nature of the identified priority projects under MINIS but not the
proposed MINIS-AF. The proposed study of Shuren hydropower and Orkhon Gobi water supply would
entail the construction of dams. More details are to be further studied in the feasibility study stage.

Detailed requirement on the preparation of dam safety plan will be included in the project-specific TORs
for feasibility study, which will guide the preparation of Dam Safety Plan during the project feasibility
study and future implementation.

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
This policy is triggered due to the nature of the identified priority projects under MINIS. The proposed
study of Shuren hydropower and Orkhon Gobi water supply would be developed on international water
ways and would impact the upper water system of Lake Baikal in Russia.. The Project will not finance
any physical infrastructure activities. Given the scope of these activities, it is the assessment of
the Task Team that the project falls within the riparian notification exception provisions under
paragraph 7(b) of OP 7.50 and that no riparian notification is therefore required.

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                               X
Neither MINIS nor its AF are expected to develop feasibility studies for
projects in disputed areas.




                                                                                                  6
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

MINIS project will finance feasibility studies for potential infrastructure projects,
capacity building activities, and a pilot institutional structure to strengthen groundwater
management in Southern Mongolia. The project will not finance any physical activities
or works that pose direct environmental and social impacts. However, should the MINIS
support the development of projects involving investors that are subsequently transacted,
there is a potential for moderate to significant environmental and social impacts.

Projects that could have moderate to significant impacts include, thermal power plants,
hydropower plants, transmission networks, waste water treatment plants and other
downstream value-added activities. Potential adverse impacts resulting from projects that
could be prepared under the MINIS include impacts on critical/non-critical natural
habitats wildlife and biodiversity, fragmentation of natural habitats, blocking of wildlife
migratory routes, loss of surface vegetation, land degradation, groundwater pollution and
depletion, noise and air pollution, changes in land use and access to resources, loss or
damage of physical cultural resources, public health and safety, and social and cultural
disturbance on local communities or herders and other social issues from both planned
and unplanned developments. In particular, the proposed Shuren Hydropower and
Orkhon Gobi Water Supply project may have potential adverse impacts on the Selenga
Delta wetland, a Ramsar site, and Lake Baikal, a World Heritage site (both a critical
natural habitat and a physical cultural resources).

Given its potential for environmental and social impacts during implementation, the
project triggers the World Bank safeguards policies, and is classified as a Category A
project as per World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 Environmental Assessment.

 To help manage these potential impacts, and since additional projects to be prepared
under the MINIS are being identified, an ESMF has been prepared. During preparation,
feasibility studies would identify potential environmental and social impacts and
mitigating measures, which would be incorporated in project documents during
implementation. The ESMF will apply to each sub-project and activities with potential
safeguards requirements during preparation and implementation. EA will be prepared for
each sub-project according to the ESMF.

Based on current priority list of project activities, the project will trigger OP4.01
Environmental Assessment, OP4.04 Natural Habitats, OP4.11 Physical Cultural
Resources, OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.37 Safety of Dams and OP 7.50
Projects on International Waters.

While, it should be noted that the proposed Additional Financing activities does not
trigger any additional policy other than OP 4.01, as its activities would scale up those


                                                                                         7
related to groundwater management under component 3 of MINIS which do not lead to
any direct physical investment on infrastructures.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The Government of Mongolia is poised to develop several major mineral deposits in
Southern Mongolia. It is widely recognized that the country’s wealth of mineral resources
offers perhaps the greatest potential for economic growth and development in the long-
term. Based on the Regional Environmental Assessment for South Gobi (prepared by the
World Bank in January 2010) , the future development of mining resources in the region
presents potentially significant environmental and social impacts resulting from traffic
and transport, mining operation, water resources consumption, power generation and
transmission, as well as planned and unplanned urban development.

During MINIS project preparation, a summary of previous safeguard-related studies that
were carried out in the project area was prepared. Priority recommendations include the
need to: (i) improve the capacity of government agencies at the local and national levels
to manage the environmental review process and ensure environmental assessments are
properly carried out; and (ii) strengthen abilities to better manage and monitor the use of
groundwater in Southern Mongolia. Appropriate capacity building activities, including
separate components to strengthen safeguards and groundwater management, have been
incorporated into the project’s design and ESMF.

The proposed MINIS-AF aims to strengthen institutional capacity of Mongolian
government in managing groundwater resources, which will help further contribute to
achieving the above mentioned recommendations.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

Mongolia’s mining sector is the major contributor to the economy. It accounts for about
one-third of the country’s economic activity, some 70 percent of exports, and generates
nearly 40 percent of government revenue. Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the sector
currently accounts for nearly 80 percent of total FDI, and this is expected to climb in the
coming years. The development of the sector, which offers the greatest potential for
economic development, is the government’s top priority. A number of mines in Southern
Mongolia are currently being developed.

Within this larger context during feasibility studies sub-projects will take into account
when relevant alternative analysis of options, assess various scenarios and possible site
locations, etc, that will include financial, technical, environmental and social
considerations.

Tourism is a fast growing industry in Mongolia, accounting for about five percent of
GDP countrywide. While there are no accurate estimates of visitor numbers to Southern

                                                                                          8
Mongolia, most clientele go to Southern Mongolia for the open spaces and living
nomadic culture. They tend to prefer the existing small hotels and ger camps, which are
located in and around provincial centers, and engage in activities that have limited
environmental impact. Although current industry requirements for infrastructure are
minimal, tourism in the region would benefit from infrastructure development for other
industries.

The proposed Additional Financing will lead to a better assessment of the available
precious groundwater in the Southern Gobi. This will lead to optimal utilization and
management of such scarce resource to maximize its benefit in conjunction with other
alternatives.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

To address potential environmental and social issues resulting from the future
implementation of the projects prepared under MINIS, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared as an instrument to ensure the proper
management of environmental and social safeguards throughout the preparation and
implementation of projects supported under the MINIS.

The ESMF is designed to operationalize the Mongolian national environmental and social
safeguards policies and procedures, and the requirements of the World Bank’s safeguards
policies. It identifies the legal framework, specifies the responsibilities of project
stakeholders, and details the procedures and requirements for environmental and social
safeguards screening, reviewing and approval, monitoring and reporting. The screening
process and other procedures specified in the ESMF will apply to all activities under the
project that have potential safeguards requirements.

At the project Restructuring with inclusion of Additional Financing, it is confirmed
that the existing ESMF still remains relevant and effective to the restructured project, and
can ensure any potential environmental and social impacts be sufficiently identified and
adequately addressed. The following procedures are established as a framework to ensure
compliance with safeguards throughout project identification, preparation and
implementation:

   Step 1: Initial Screening for Potential Environmental and Social Safeguards Issues.
    To be carried out by the Ministry of Environment and Green Development (MEGD),
    which will conduct the initial screenings for potential environmental and social
    safeguards issues using the ESMF’s screening tool. The six-step screening tool will
    categorize projects according to their expected environmental and social impacts and
    identify the types of reviews and assessments required to prepare them for
    implementation. All projects that were prepared using MINIS funding and which are
    subsequently implemented under separate financing arrangements will be subject to
    the screening tool.



                                                                                          9
   Step 2: Review and Approval of Initial Screening by the World Bank Task Team.
    After the initial screening, the environmental and social specialists on the World
    Bank task team will review, comment and finally confirm the conclusion of project
    categorization and necessary safeguards instruments.

   Step 3: Incorporation of Detailed Safeguards Requirements into Specific Projects.
    With Bank approval, project specific terms of reference for EIAs and other Bank
    policy instruments will be developed for each project as part of the EIA screening
    process.

   Step 4: Incorporating ESMF into Contractual Documents. The Project Management
    Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for ensuring that the
    full ESMF, including project-specific TORs for EIAs, are incorporated into the
    relevant contractual documents, which will contractually obligate the entities
    involved in a transaction to prepare safeguards documents and implement them
    according to the ESMF. It should be noted that Steps 4, 5 and 6 will apply only to
    those projects that are subsequently implemented, regardless of funding source.

   Step 5: Review and Approval of Safeguards Documents. This will be the primary
    responsibility of the MEGD (for EIAs and/or EMPs), and Land Departments of local
    government (for RAPs). The Bank will provide input and guidance in the approval
    of safeguards documents.

   Step 6: Implementation, Supervision and Reporting. During implementation, the
    PMU, with support from the Bank, will be responsible for ensuring that the
    safeguards requirements are properly implemented as approved by MEGD, and
    annual reports are provided to MEGD. Local branches of the Environmental
    Protection Unit of the State Professional Inspection Agency (SPIA) will carry out
    periodic supervision, and provide reports to MEGD.

The capacity of the PMU, MEGD, EIA experts panel (for projects requiring EIAs) and
local branch staff of MEGD and SPIA, as well as the Ministry of Road, Transportation,
Construction and Urban Development, Government Agency of Land Affairs, Geodesy
and Cartography, Aimag and UB city land departments, will be critical to effectively
implement environmental and social safeguards requirement under Mongolian legislation
and World Bank policies. Capacity building activities are designed in the MINIS to
provide adequate training to strengthen the technical capacity of these agencies to
manage the project, which will be responsible for ensuring that safeguards requirements
are enforced after the MINIS has closed. A component to build capacity and transfer
knowledge (US$1.60 million) is included under the original MINIS project. As part of
this component, environmental and social safeguards training will be conducted for the
environmental staff of the MEGD, local branch staff, environmental officers from line
ministries, and land departments at the aimag level. Potential training would focus on
environmental and social safeguards policies and practices of the World Bank and
international best practice in safeguards screening, environmental assessment techniques



                                                                                     10
(including cumulative impacts, REA, SEA) and good practices (infrastructure and mining
sectors), social assessments, and implementation supervision and monitoring.

Training would be delivered by World Bank environmental and social specialists and
international consultants. Key staff will be invited to World Bank safeguards training
activities, and overseas study tours could be organized to expose counterparts to good
environmental and social safeguards practices in other countries. A detailed training plan
will be developed at the start of the project in consultation with relevant agencies.

There is no environmental and social safeguards issue that requires particular action for
the activities under the MINIS-Additional Financing project.

At the time of project restructuring and inclusion of Additional Financing as of
September 2013, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) will remain the implementing agency for
the revised MINIS project including the AusAID scaling up additional financing. A
Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established to manage MINIS and the
AusAID Program on behalf of project beneficiaries from other ministries and agencies.
The PMU will be responsible for: (i) procurement of all services, goods and equipment;
(ii) financial record keeping, reporting and disbursements; and (iii) project monitoring
and reporting.

For the Additional Financing, the Ministry of Environment and Green Development
(MEGD) took over the tasks of the former Water Authority related to the Groundwater
Management Project for South Gobi. The Department and Divisions involved in the
execution of the project have been identified and staff appointed. Modalities to set up the
AusAID Trust Fund and financial agreements have been discussed with AusAID.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Economic Development (MED), Ministry of
Finance (MoF), MEGD, relevant line ministries, National Development and Innovation
Committee (NDIC), State Property Committee, local governments, and local
communities and herders that will be affected during project implementation. The MoF,
Water Authority (lately took over by MEGD), NDIC and SPC were consulted on the
draft ESMF during project preparation. The ESMF states that feasibility studies financed
under the MINIS will comply with environmental and social safeguards requirements of
the Mongolian national legislations, as well as the World Bank safeguards policies. As
such, public consultations and disclosure of information as required when preparing EIAs
and RAPs (if necessary) have been built into the ESMF. Furthermore, in December 2010
the ESMF was put on the MoF’s website (in the Mongolian language) for public
consultation. EIAs and RAPs will be incorporated into contractual documents for
investments to be developed by the private sector.

To reflect the concerns of the local communities regarding the use of water resources and
the potential impacts on local economics, the Government of Mongolia and the World

                                                                                        11
Bank co-hosted two workshops in Dalanzadgad and Ulaanbaatar on April 26 and 28,
respectively, and in October 2010 at Dalanzadgad, Sainshand and Ulaanbaatar. All of
these events stressed the critical importance of managing groundwater in Southern
Mongolia so that long-term development of mining activities can occur without
endangering the supply to local communities and herders.

The draft ESMF developed under the project was locally disclosed in the Mongolian
language at (MoF/MNET, internet, or public places) on December 20, 2010, as per
OP4.01, and is available on the World Bank’s website. It was also disclosed at the World
Bank’s InfoShop on November 17, 2010.

On the other hand, the ESMF was revised and was locally disclosed in the Mongolian
language at MoF/MNET, internet (http://www.minis.mn/eng/), or public places on
November 13, 2013, as per OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP4.04 Natural Habitats,
OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.37 Safety
of Dams and OP 7.50 Projects on International Waters and is available on the World
Bank’s website. It was also disclosed at the World Bank’s InfoShop on November 13,
2013.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/20/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/13/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/13/2013
                                                               N/A, The
                                                                revised
                                                              ESMF will
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   be
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                                                               submitted
                                                               in lieu of
                                                                the EA
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/20/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/13/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/13/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A

                                                                                     12
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




                                                                                     13
Task Team Leader: Khairy Al-Jamal
             ext: 35086
           email: kaljamal@worldbank.org
