                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                  Report No.: 91138

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        26-Sept-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Montenegro          Project ID:               P144994
 Project Name:                EU/IPA AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
                              INSTITUTION BUILDING PROJECT (P144994)
 Task Team Leader:            Maurizio Guadagni
 Estimated Board Date:        21-Sep-2014
 Managing Unit:               GAGDR
 Sector(s):                   Agricultural extension and research (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Other rural development (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                             Project Financing Data (in Euros Million)
 Total Project Cost:       4.55                    Total Bank Financing:     4.55
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     Borrower/Recipient                                                                           1.16
     Trust Funds                                                                                  3.39
     Total                                                                                        4.55
 Environmental Category: B – Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The Project development objective is to increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in
 administering rural development grants in accordance with the core rules of the European Union
 Instrument of Pre-accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) and to improve the
 productivity of a targeted number of agriculture holdings.
3. Project Description
The activities to be financed are as follows:

A.       Recipient-executed activities

Component 1. Implementation of a grant scheme based on core IPARD rules

     (a) Implementing a grant scheme, based on IPARD rules, to strengthen MARD’s Sector for Rural
         Development and Sector for Payment through the carrying out of the following activities: (i)
         drafting the Grant Operational Manual (GOM) including, inter alia, rules and procedures of the
         grant scheme; (ii) preparing and issuing calls for applications; (iii) selecting applications; (iv)
         signing of grant contracts between MARD and the final beneficiaries; (v) authorizing and
         controlling commitments and payments; (vi) carrying out on-the-spot checks; (vii) accounting
         for commitments and payments; and (viii) monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of
         the grants investments.

The grant scheme will provide IPARD-like demand-driven grants to beneficiaries to finance
investments in agricultural holdings in accordance with the criteria set forth in the GOM.

As a general rule, the Project will co-finance 50% of total eligible cost - the Eligible Public Expenditure
- of each eligible investment, with the following exceptions:

(A)     up to 55% of eligible expenditure for investments implemented by young farmers (under 40
years of age at the time the decision to grant support is taken);

(B)     up to 60% of eligible expenditure for investments implemented by agricultural holdings in the
mountainous areas;
(C)     up to 65% of eligible expenditure for investments in agricultural holdings located in
mountainous areas made by young farmers (under 40 years of age at the time the decision to grant
support is taken).

The EU’s contribution will make up to 75% of the total Eligible Public Expenditure, while the
Montenegro committed contribution will cover the remaining 25% of the eligible public expenditure
from the national budget for agriculture (pursuant to the Grant Agreement). The remaining 50% of the
total eligible costs of the investments are expected to be financed by private beneficiaries.

     (b) Strengthening the capacity of MARD and the government’s Technical Bodies (as defined in the
         Government Conclusion No. 06-336/3 of February 21, 2013), through the implementation of
         procedures introduced in the national accreditation package.

     (c) Implementing a grievance redress and complaints mechanism building on the existing MIDAS
         Project.

Component 2. Technical Assistance to support implementation and monitoring

(a)     Supporting the implementation and monitoring of the grant scheme including: (i) implementing
a monitoring support system to measure results achieved by the grant scheme; (ii) providing support to
the Sector Monitoring Committee (SMC) for Rural Development responsible for implementation of the
monitoring arrangements including the monitoring indicators; and (iii) enhancing the knowledge in
implementing the tasks foreseen under the future IPARD for the relevant staff of MARD’s Sectors for
Rural Development and for Payments, as well as members of the Sector Monitoring Committee, in
particular through financing their participation in study tours.

(b)     Carrying out a baseline survey in the first year of Project implementation and a final survey; (ii)
carrying out public awareness of the Project including dissemination of promotional material; (iii)
providing support for the coordination, monitoring and implementation of environmental and social
safeguards, (iv) carrying audits of grant beneficiaries; and (v) providing operational support for the
implementation of the Project.

B.      Bank-executed activities

         Financing Bank-executed activities including supporting the implementation and supervision of
the trust fund and drafting a final implementation completion report to evaluate the trust fund.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented throughout Montenegro, and the recipients of the grants program will
be farmer beneficiaries located throughout the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Vera Dugandzic ( GURDR )
Esma Kreso ( GENDR )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              The activities supported under the Grants
                                                                program may include a number of varied
                                                                activities, from support to the dairy and
                                                                food processing, to small-scale
                                                                construction to reconstruction of farming
                                                                huts. All grant applications should be
                                                                screened as per the EMF prepared for the
                                                                MIDAS project (and as part of each of the
                                                                MIDAS rounds Grant Operational
                                                                Manuals), and if determined based on the
                                                                screening, have an EMP prepared for
                                                                each site. The EMF/Screening Procedure
                                                                is established in order to be able to screen
                                                                out from financing activities that are
                                                                equivalent to a World Bank Category A.
                                                                The MIDAS EMF has been updated to
                                                                reflect its applicability to this EU Grant
                                                                and re-disclosed in country and
                                                                Infoshop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No               All activities within the Grants
                                                                component will be conducted on existing
                                                                agricultural land. Furthermore, the
                                                                EMF/screening procedure within the
                                                                GOM has in place questions to screen out
                                                any degradation or impact to sensitive
                                                natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No     All activities within the Grants
                                                component will be conducted on existing
                                                agricultural land and no deforestation,
                                                activities within forests or conversion of
                                                land is anticipated. Furthermore, the
                                                EMF/screening procedure within the
                                                GOM has in place questions to screen out
                                                any degradation or impact to forested
                                                areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes    The support to agricultural activities may
                                                lead to using pest management products,
                                                which would need to be controlled by the
                                                Integrated Pest Management Plan, as part
                                                of the original EMF.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No     There are no activities envisaged in the
                                                proximity of any cultural heritage.
                                                Specific provisions in the EMF are
                                                included in cases of chance findings.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No     Only the sub-projects that do not trigger
                                                the application of OP 4.12 policy will be
                                                eligible for funding under the grant
                                                program. The EMF environmental and
                                                social screening checklist for the small
                                                grants program as used for the MIDAS
                                                project, clearly states that only the
                                                sub-projects located on the farmer’s own
                                                land, or on the land for which the grant
                                                applicant has a written consent from the
                                                owner to use the land will be eligible for
                                                grant funding. In addition, the
                                                sub-projects that may result in
                                                displacement of any third party, formally
                                                or informally occupying or using the land
                                                on which the sub-project will be
                                                implemented, are also excluded.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes   Most of Montenegro lies either on the
7.50                                            Tara River Basin (Danube Catchment
                                                Area) or the catchment of the Adriatic
                                                Sea. As such, the activities financed by
                                                grants will be located on such waterways.
                                                The original MIDAS project had received
                                                an exemption to notification from ECA
                                                VP on 9/24/2008. The current project has
                                                                also received an exception to notification
                                                                based on a similar rationale dated July 11,
                                                                2014. Grants funded under the project
                                                                will finance small-scale agro-processing
                                                                or fisheries which are part of existing
                                                                schemes and will involve additions or
                                                                alterations that require rehabilitation,
                                                                construction, or other changes that will
                                                                not adversely change the quality or
                                                                quantity of water flows to the other
                                                                riparians; and it will not be adversely
                                                                affected by the other riparians' possible
                                                                water use.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed TF, as a continuation of the MIDAS project which has been ongoing for several grant
cycles, will provide grants and TA to support implementation and monitoring of sub-projects, with the
overall objective of increasing readiness for the IPARD grants. The ESMF, as an integrated part of the
Grant Operational Manual will be used by the Client to screen out Category A activities and to ensure
that adequate due diligence is applied to the grants being financed. The grants cycle will also proactively
promote environmentally sustainable agriculture practices through incorporating the Code of Good
Agricultural Practice which the Government of Montenegro has recently adopted. There will be no
major environmental impacts, no resettlement, and no activities which may cause a large scale,
significant or irreversible impact. Most of the impacts associated with the grants may include proper
waste management, small scale construction works and other impacts which are readily mitigated.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The potential long-term impacts may only be indirectly reflected in the increased environmental
awareness of the participating farmers.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The grant applications are screened upon receipt to ensure no Category A activities are financed. The
grants are then awarded on a competitive basis following criteria defined in the GOM.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Implementing Agency for the recipient executed part of the TF will be Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development, with the same implementation arrangements as established under MIDAS project.
MARD is deemed to have relatively high capacity and is accustomed to the administrative procedures of
the grants foreseen under the proposed project since these would be largely identical to the grants
procedures applied under the MIDAS Grants Program. The MIDAS project has undergone a number of
grant cycles, all of which have undergone proper environmental and social screening and management.
No issues were noted on environmental and social safeguards review process.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ESMF for the original MIDAS project has been prepared with consultations conducted, that
solicited reviews and comments from a group of varied stakeholders, including NGOs, academia and the
agencies and ministries that deal with environmental protection. As such, each of the EMPs prepared, as
per the ESMF, are also subject to disclosure and consultations in the local areas. The revised ESMF for
this TF has been re-disclosed in country on the MIDAS project website, and also through the World
Bank Infoshop.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     05-Dec-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  29-Aug-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Montenegro                                                                      24-Jun-2014
Comments: Disclosed on the MIDAS project website.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]         No [   ]   NA [      ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [      ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [      ]
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [      ]

Is a separate PMP required?                                           Yes [     ]   No [ X ]   NA [      ]

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards        Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X]
specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                Yes [     ]   No [ X ]   NA [      ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]        No [   ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ]      No [   ]    NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]     No [   ]    NA [   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with         Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Maurizio Guadagni
Approved By:
Practice Manager:               Name: Dina Umali-Deininger                  Date: 09/19/2014
