                                                                                        89399
                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUA RDSDATASHEET


 Date prepared/updated: May 29,2014

 I. Basic Information

 1 B asic
       . PrO.JeC
             . tD ata
 Country: Morocco                                  Project ID: PJ50875
 Organization: CARE International Maroc

                                              Additional Project ID (if any): nla
Project Name: Lead Project Linking Education and Accountability for Development

Task Team Leader: Luis Esquivel                         .


Appraisal Date: 5/12/2014                     Estimated Board Date: nla
Managing Unit: WBIGA                          Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sector: Education, 100%
Theme: Social Development/Gender/Inclusion
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: GPSA Grant US$720,000

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X]                    No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ 1                 Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises           Yes []      No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The Project's overarching objectives are to develop a transparent and accountable resource
management model for primary education, while strengthening Parents Associations capacity,
representation and voice at local, regional and national levels in the education sector.

3. Project Description:

The approach that followed by this project is two-fold and sequential. First, the project will equip
the recipient, its partners, and PAs from the two selected regions with tools to gather and process
information regarding specific topics in the education sector such as student/teacher ratio,
teacher attendance, procurement of education materials, and maintenance of schools. The project
will also entail the monitoring resource flows to schools in their delegations. This will enable
them to generate feedback regarding perfmmance in the education sector and recommendations
for improvements. In order to do so, the project will develop and deploy a Participatory
Assessment and Monitoring Tool (PAMT) in the selected delegations. Focusing in those topics
and others that might emerge, the recipient, its partners and PAs will identity which of those
areas can be addressed at the school/delegation level, which at the AREF level and which at the
national level. With this information, stakeholders' engagement with education authorities at
these levels will be strategic, approaching each level of authority only with suggestions for
improvements that fall under their mandate.

Second, the project will strengthen the capacity of demand side stakeholders to engage
constructively with education authorities at the delegation, AREF and national levels, regarding
their recommendations. In parallel, the project will build the capacity of delegation and AREF
level authorities to incorporate feedback. Finally, the project will capitalize on existing
mechanisms for dialogue such as the AREF Boards to facilitate constructive collaboration. Thus,
the project will generate information regarding performance in the education sector and feedback
from PAs, while ensuring that such information is used by public authorities to enhance decision
making and service delivery in the education sector.

In addition to deploying the PAMT in 50 primary schools and fostering collaboration between
PAs and education authorities at the delegation, AREF and national level on issues
corresponding to each level, this project also entails engagement with stakeholders at the national
level from both the supply and demand side, such as the National Federation of PAs and the
Ministry of Education to mainstream the P AMT in other regions. Through this engagement, the
recipient, partners and other stakeholders will showcase results and lessons from the project in
order to elaborate the mainstreaming plan for the PAMT and the interaction between PAs and
education authorities in other delegations and regions. The documented experiences will also be
disseminated widely in Morocco and beyond to contribute to expand the knowledge base on
social accountability.

The project is structured around four components as follows:

Component 1: Monitoring and Feedback

This component includes the development and deployment of the Participatory Assessment and
Monitoring Tool (PAMT) in 50 schools targeted by the project. The PAMT comprises of: (I)
gathering of information on resource flows, school materials, etc.; and (2) generating user
feedback. Through the PAMT, stakeholders will identify rights and resources recognized by law
for primary education and will track the use and allocation of resources from the national level
downwards. Furthermore, this information will be disseminated to PAs from schools targeted by
the project. In parallel through the use of accountability tools such as community score cards
(CSCs) or citizen report cards, the recipient and partners will guide PAs to provide feedback on
key performance indicators from their schools.

Activities under this component will include:
I. Design of Participatory Assessment and Monitoring and Tool (PAMT), taking into
consideration the local context.
2. Deployment ofPAMT in 50 primary schools targeted by the project.




                                                 2
3. Independent budget analysis by the recipient and partners on resource flows to delegations and
schools.
4. Social audits by the recipient and partners on materials and resources purchased by schools.
5. Mobilization of PAs to increase membership and involvement in the project.
4. Social Accountability training for PAs on using information regarding resources allocated to
the primary schools.
5. Public awareness, dissemination of results of independent budget analysis and social audits to
PAs.
6. Develop participatory recommendation notes based on the PAMT for education authorities to
integrate in their action plans.

Component 2: Government Responsiveness

The information emerging from Component 1 will be shared with national/local govemment
agencies responsible for improvements in the selected areas-student/teacher ratio, teachers'
attendance, procurement, maintenance, and other emerging ones. In this context, this component
will include capacity building activities for: (1) PAs on how to use this information to engage
constructively with AREFs and Delegations; (2) officials from AREFs and delegations to
incorporate information from PAs into their policy making process, and strategic policy
dialogues, through already existing mechanisms such as the AREFs boards. Furthermore, as part
of the PAMT, PAs will monitor the impact of the recommendations from the action plans and
community score cards in policy making in the education sector.

Activities under this component will include:
I. Strategic networking between PAs and authorities in the Education sector to increase the voice
and representation of Parents Associations.   ·
2. Training AREF staff on monitoring and using social accountability information emerging
from the PAMT.
3. Round tables between PAs and local and regional education authorities to create spaces of
dialogue around data collected through the PAMT and integrating of recommendations.


Component 3: Scaling up and Knowledge

Feedback and data on the Government Responsiveness component will constitute evidence to
showcase at the national level the results and impact of this kind of initiatives and work together
with the Ministry of Education to develop the required steps to mainstream the use of the PAMT
across the country. This will require that the experiences are documented, and disseminated
among key stakeholders as well as strategic partnerships with the National Association of PAs.

In addition, the project puts emphasis in the generation and dissemination of knowledge. The
recipient and pmtners will document these experiences with PAs and AREFs during all the
stages of this process. This will contribute to expand the knowledge base around social
accountability in the education sector. These experiences will also be disseminated through the
media, the GPSA Knowledge Platform and the Affiliated Network for Social Accountability.




                                                3
Activities under this component will include:

1. Documentation and dissemination of case studies and lessons learnt, including through
GPSA's Knowledge Learning platform and presentations to additional AREFs, the Ministry of
Education at the national level, and other strategic actors.
2. Preparation of a roadmap for potential national scaling-up by the Ministry of Education, in
collaboration with education authorities.
3. Strengthening of CARE's, NEF's and PA's Monitoring and Evaluation capacities
4. Facilitate effective coordination of Federations of Parents Associations (local, regional and
national)

Component 4: Evaluation and Audit

This component includes the final evaluation and audit of the project at the end of the four years.
At the end of the project the recipient will evaluate the whole project, taking into consideration
information and documents generated throughout implementation. Documents prepared for
showcasing results and impact at the national level during component 3 will inform this
evaluation. In addition there will be a financial audit to ensure proper use of resources.

Activities under this component will include:
1. Final evaluation of the project
2. Final audit of the project

5. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                         Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                            X
Pro.iects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or iJTeversible impacts:
The project will not finance any physical activities, no risks related to environmental or social
safeguards policies are anticipated during implementation of project activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A


                                                 4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
This project is not expected to trigger any safeguards policies as the project screening identified
minimal environmental or social risks related to project activities. The project does not anticipate
any civil works to be financed under this Grant. The project is assigned the Environmental
Category C, requiring no further environmental and social assessment.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
Direct beneficiaries include: at least 5,000 students from 50 primary schools and their families
in the regions of Grand Casablanca and Marrakech-Tensift-AI Hauz. In addition, the project will
directly bene1it 1,000 members of Parent Associations (Pas); 20 pedagogical and administrative
staff from the Ministry of Education (provincial and regional levels). The regions targeted by the
project present high vulnerability rates (13% and 30% in targeted areas of Grand Casablanca and
Marrakech-Tensift-Al Hauz) and the highest concentrations of population in Morocco (12.1% of
national population in Grand Casablanca and 10.3% in Marrakech-Tensift-AI Hauz).

Demand side stakeholders such as the PAs will benefit from capacity building to obtain and use
information through a new social accountability tool, the Participatory Assessment and
Monitoring Tool (PAMT). This will enable them to issue informed recommendations and to
amplify their voices and oversight. Furthermore, supply side stakeholders will benefit directly by
improving collaboration with PAs and other key stakeholders. This in turn will lead to better
informed policy decisions, responsible management and leadership, more ellicient investment
decisions and more inclusive and responsive services.

Indirect beneficiaries include: students and PAs across Morocco that will benefit from enhanced
policy making at the national level. Furthermore, by identifying areas for improvement at the
national level, the Ministry of Education and the National Federation of Pas will also beneJit
from project outcomes. The documentation and dissemination of lessons learned from this
project will ultimately benefit stakeholders in Morocco and beyond working on similar issues.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Mana!!:ement Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to avvraisal?                                     N/A
 Date of receipt bv the Bank                                                        N/A
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                    N/A
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     NIA
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policv Process:



                                                5
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               N/A
lndi2enous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)


OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ 1   No [ 1      N/A [X 1
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 -Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ 1   No [ 1      N/A [X 1
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Mana2ement
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ 1   No [ 1      N/A [X 1
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ 1   No [ 1      N/A[X1




                                                 6
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
 project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OP/BP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
 cultural property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
 the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
 resonrces?
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes f 1   No f 1   N/A [X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]




                                                 7
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safe(!uard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                8
D. Approvals

 Sir:ned and submitted by:                                 Name                                             Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Luis F. Esquivel                                                  . 5/29/2014
 Environmental Specialist:                                               ..........
 Social Development Specialist
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:                                                            t                 I'\
                                                       " 't-..
                                                          . ,..
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
 Comments:
                                     Maged Hamed \             ..   ..Ll-ot..J(
                                                                     '
                                                                                             -           5/29/2014


 Sector Manager:                     Roby Send rowitsch                                                  5/29/2014
   Comments:                                  I         --:         >
                                                  r-
                                           ~




                                                                                      (Template Version November 2007)




                                                  9
