                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA5830

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Oct-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Morocco                           Project ID:    P145649
                                                       Parent         P104265
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     ONEE Support Project Additional Financing (P145649)
   Parent Project    MA-Support to ONE (Office National de l'Electricité) (P104265)
   Name:
   Task Team         Daniel Camos Daurella
   Leader:
   Estimated         01-Oct-2013                       Estimated   26-Nov-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    MNSEE                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (90%), General energy sector (10%)
   Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          39.86                 Total Bank Financing:       39.86
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   39.86
     Total                                                                                   39.86
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                             Page 1 of 9
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The proposed project encompasses the following parts :
1)      Strengthening the electricity transmission network to reduce bottlenecks and improve
system’s reliability, and construction of three high to medium voltage stations;
2)      Acquisition of CFLs for distributionto support the Office National de de l’Electricité et de
l’Eau Potable (ONEE)’s demand-side management program;
3)      Technical assistance.

Part 1. Transmission and distribution network

ONEE’s transmission network is overloaded and operating at the limit of its capacity. ONEE is
experiencing operational problems such as stability problems, voltage and frequency drops and high
transmission losses. As a result, the security and quality of supply are inadequate. With fast growing
demand, the situation is expected to deteriorate even further, unless the network is reinforced before
the commissioning of several power plants under construction or planned. ONEE has already
conducted studies of the network expansion required to meet quality and security requirements,
considering two options: either connecting the new production capacities to 400 kV or to 225 kV
lines. The existing studies indicate that both options will deliver the required quality and security of
supply but that the 400 kV option would be more cost effective. At project preparation, ONEE
estimated the level of investment required at 7567 MDH (equivalent to US$ 1,023 million) over the
period 2008-2013. With this project, the Bank is financing a well-defined part of this program, not
dependent on any related components financed by other donors and ONEE. This part is divided into
the following three sub-parts.

1.1 Construction of 392km of 400 kV lines and 76 km of 225 kV lines

The project includes the construction of the following transmission lines:
•      Two 400 kV simple circuit lines: Safi/Essouira - Chamaia ( 2 x 55 km)
•      One double circuit 400 kV Mediouna - Ghanem (1 x 120 km)
•      One double circuit 400 kV line Chichaoua - Agadir (1 x 16Okm)
•      One double circuit 225 kV line Chamaia - Tensift I1 (70 km)
•      Connection of 400 and 225 kV lines to the 400/225 kV substation in Chamaia

The transmission lines will use two-bundle conductors per phase and an earth wire with fiber cable
for protection and communication. For all lines 570 mm aluminum conductors will be used at the
maximum operating temperature of 70 degrees Celsius, at which there is no risk of loss of strength
due to annealing of the steel core. Each circuit will have thermal rating of about 1300 MVA. All
towers are in galvanized steel (E24 and E36). Composite and glass insulators will be used - the
former especially in polluted areas.

1.2 Construction and expansion of high voltage substations



                                              Page 2 of 9
The project includes the construction or expansion of the following substations :

•       Construction of a 400/225 kV substation at Chamaia ( 6 outgoing lines, 2x450 MVA
transformers, 2x125 WAR reactances)
•       Expansion of the 4001225 kV substation at Mediouna (2 outgoing lines)
•       Expansion of the 225/60 kV substation at Tensift I1 (2 outgoing lines)

1.3. Construction of three substations to improve supply in Casablanca

The project includes expansion or construction of the following substations in Casablanca:

•       60/22 kV substation at Dar Ouled Zidouh (2x20MVA)
•       60/22 kV substation at Tamansourt (2x20 MVA)

Part 2. Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFL)

As part of its demand-side management (DSM) program, ONEE has launched an initiative called
INARA to introduce CFL use. The program started with a small scale pilot and was successful. The
lamps acquired by ONEE under the proposed project will be distributed to customers (through small
local marketing enterprises) with a one year guarantee from ONEE. The marketers are paid a fee per
CFL installed. The customers pay a fixed fee during 12 months deducted from their electricity
monthly bills. This component is already under implementation and will benefit from retroactive
financing.

Part 3. Technical Assistance Component

The technical assistance (TA) includes the following activities:

3.1 Tariff study

The current tariff system was put in place in 1997. The last tariff study was initiated under a Bank
project in 1988 and finalized in 1992. Since then, tariffs have been adjusted on a piecemeal basis and
have not been comprehensively reviewed despite the major changes in the sector during the last
decade. The current tariff structure has two major shortcomings: (a) inadequate level to cover supply
costs; and (b) a structure that fails to provide the right incentives for effective use of the installed
capacity, electricity savings and load management. A revision in tariff is also critical to ensure the
financial viability of the company ONEE and adapt the tariff system to the prevailing cost and
demand structure. An inter-ministerial committee led by the Ministry of General Affairs and
Governance (Ministère des affaires générales et de la gouvernance – MAGG) has been created to
supervise the study and agreement has been reached on terms of reference.

3.2 Valorization of the rural electrification program

Access to electricity for rural population is already very high in Morocco, with an estimated 100
percent of the population having access to electricity during project preparation in 2007. However,
the extension of the network is mostly for residential use and is a burden for ONEE finances, as the
cost of connecting rural populations is high while tariffs are not kept in line with costs. The objective
of the TA is to develop new uses which have a higher value added. Several activities have been
already identified by ONEE, such as participation in regional and local development initiatives or

                                              Page 3 of 9
  using the network to provide telecommunication services. The project will finance a study for overall
  project design and development of information systems to support the program.
   4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
  analysis (if known)
  This project’s activities will take place across all of Morocco, with specific interventions for the
  transmission lines and substations listed above.
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Fatou Fall (MNSSU)
  Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)
  Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEE)

   6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
   BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

   Pest Management OP 4.09              No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
      NOTE: The additional financing provided to this project covers cost overruns only. All project
     activities to be conducted under additional financing are included in the original project and have
     been evaluated as part of the ESIAF prepared for the original project. Since there have been no
     significant changes in the considered areas, no new safeguard issues arise as a result of the
     provision of additional financing, and this document remains valid.

    On social safeguards, the activities financed under Part 1(Transmission and distribution networks)


                                                Page 4 of 9
have required some land acquisition and the trigger of the Bank’s policy on involuntary
resettlement (OP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared under the parent project,
describing procedures for resettlement, institutional arrangements, consultation mechanisms,
entitlement and compensation procedures. Subsequent resettlement action plans (RAP) have been
prepared, with compensations being fully disbursed in many cases. The team understands that the
counterpart follows due diligence in terms of consultation, census, public disclosure and
compensations which are provided progressively prior to launch of works. When the compensation
process is still ongoing, this is usually due to two scenari: either the affected people have not yet
compiled the necessary and relevant administrative paperwork or the concerned persons are
overseas and have not yet initiated the process and collected their compensations. In cases of
collective lands, it can occur that all users/owners are not known or cannot document immediately
their rights to the land hence community representatives agree on their behalf and compensation is
provided progressively as relevant documentation is submitted.

For some sub activities (TK02, TK03 (Youssoufia) and TK05 (lot 2), census of the affected people
has been fully completed and the compensation process is ongoing. For TK05 (lot1), census and
compensations have been initiated. As regards to TK07 (Poste Ouled Zidouh), the counterpart has
indicated that this is a collective land. All beneficiaries have not been identified despite censuses
and public disclosure of information. Compensation monies have been set aside at the
Departement des Affaires Rurales (DAR) and will be provided as beneficiaries are identified. The
post has been built.

Moving forward, the counterpart has estimated that remaining yet ongoing compensation
processes should be completed within the next 4 months provided the affected persons are able to
provide relevant paperwork. The task team will work closely with ONEE and DAR to ensure that
appropriate measures are taken to expedite this compensation process.

On the environmental side, the transmission lines and sub-stations (400 and 225 kV network)
component entail potential impacts on the natural and human environment of the areas on and
through which these infrastructures will be established.

Considering the fact that the exact lay-out of the proposed transmission lines were not known at
the time of project preparation, an environmental and social impact assessment framework
(ESIAF) was commissioned by ONEE. The ESIAF is comprised of four volumes corresponding to
each component of the main infrastructure part of the project:

 Report #1 :    EIA line 2T 400 kv MEDIOUNA - GHANEM (1x120 km)
 Report #2 :    EIA lines 1T 400 kv BIR LHAR - CHAMAIA (2x55 km)
 Line 2T 225 kv CHAMAIA - TENSIFT II (1x60 km)
 Connection line 225 kv to CHAMAIA (6 km)
 Connection line 400 kv to CHAMAIA (1 km)
 Sub-station 400/225 kv in CHAMAIA (13 hectares)
 Report #3:     EIA line 2T 400 kv CHICHAOUA - AGADIR (1x160 km)
 Report #4:     EIA sub-station DAR BOUAZZA (225/22 kv), de DAR OULED ZIDOUH (60/22
kv), and TAMANSOURT (60/22 kv).

And report # 5: Resettlement Policy Framework: RPF. See social aspects section above.

Some of the corridors proposed by ONEE pass close to areas of ecological and general

                                           Page 5 of 9
 environmental significance. Alternative layout avoiding these sensitive areas has been employed
 and will continue to be taken into consideration in the execution of the additional financing. Thus
 OP 4.04 is indeed triggered and mitigating measures integrated in the ESIAFs.

  The other components of the project have not been found to have significant environmental nor
  social negative impacts. The ESIAF reports include precise recommendations for limiting the
  impacts during execution of the works both for lines and sub-stations, as well as for limiting
  impacts (health) during operation of the lines. The ESIAF also includes environmental
  management plans and monitoring plans indicating the mitigating and monitoring measures,
  responsible parties and timing (project phase for the EMP and frequency for the monitoring plan).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
   With regard to social impacts, the main impacts noted have included land acquisition for the sub
  stations and loss of agricultural revenues or surface damages due to the placement of tower bases.
  The RPF and its associated Resettlement Action Plans address these issues and assign
  compensation.

  The project’s environmental impacts have been found to be related essentially to the issue of the
  layout of the proposed lines and to some impacts during the construction and implementation
  phases as well as to the issues of construction and operation of sub-stations. The ESIAF addresses
  these in great detail and prescribes clear mitigation and/or compensation measures.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
    As mentioned above, some of the corridors proposed by ONEE in the context of the transmission
  lines and sub-stations (400 and 225 kV network) component will entail potential impacts on the
  natural and human environment of the areas as they pass very close to areas of ecological and
  general environmental significance. Alternative routing has been proposed and taken into
  consideration in the execution of the project, hence addressing OP 4.04 requirements.

  In the case of the sub-stations, proper measures for their construction and operations have been
  specified in the ESIAF. Monitoring measures have also been specified in the ESIAF EMP.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
   During project preparation, the Bank reviewed the capacity of ONEE regarding the
  implementation of the environmental and social mitigating and monitoring measures and found it
  satisfactory.

  On the environmental side, the ONEE Environment and Renewable Directorate has a long
  experience in commissioning Environmental Impact Assessments, the last of which is the Solar-
  Thermal Power Plant of Ain Beni Mathar co-financed by a Global Environment Facility (GEF)
  grant implemented by the World Bank. On social safeguards, ONEE has experience and internal
  guidelines with regard to acquisition of land and compensation, and has followed these in the past
  including in the Ain Beni Mathar project, which required a RAP. In addition, ONEE now has five
  years of experience in implementing this project and its ESMP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The Moroccan Legal system includes an Eminent Domain Law that is very precise in the case of


                                            Page 6 of 9
  acquisition of land for Public Use. ONEE is used to follow this regulation which provides fair
  conditions to owners and lawful users. In the case of this operation and consistent with the
  Moroccan Eminent Domain Law the key stakeholders include ONEE, the local authorities
  (communes), local governments units, and local communities. Public consultations are carried out
  at the level of each area to be impacted by the project and include information of the population,
  concerned governmental agencies as well as municipalities. Registers are made available in each
  of the concerned municipalities for collecting comments by the population.

  Once RAPs are completed to determine those eligible for compensation, ONEE has launched a
  process of dissemination of information and consultations with the affected communities through
  their local representatives to ensure that they were both informed and able to provide inputs to the
  compensation process. ONEE communicated the information regarding the passage of the
  transmission lines to the community in question and informed the local authorities, and ensured
  that they were aware of the impacts and risks associated with the project as well as the
  compensation planned.

  General inter-agency consultation was conducted during preparation of ESIAF reports and
  targeted public consultation has been carried out at the level of each area to be impacted by the
  project and includes information of the population, concerned governmental agencies as well as
  municipalities. Registers are available in each of the concerned municipalities for collecting
  comments by the population. During project preparation, ONEE has conducted public information
  through disclosure of the ESIAF on its website and through the Bank Infoshop and also through
  proper communication to the different municipalities affected by the project. In turn the
  municipalities are informing and consulting potentially affected people according to the local
  regulations and practices.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      06-Feb-2008
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Morocco                                                          06-Feb-2008
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2008
"In country" Disclosure
  Morocco                                                          06-Feb-2008
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                             Page 7 of 9
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
    Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    degradation of critical natural habitats?
    If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
    project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Daniel Camos Daurella
   Approved By



                                               Page 8 of 9
Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)     Date: 03-Oct-2013
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)   Date: 03-Oct-2013




                                   Page 9 of 9
