                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1186
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                            Project ID:    P150930
                            Project Name:     MA-Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project (P150930)
                            Task Team         Gabriella Izzi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         23-Mar-2015                        Estimated   27-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (3%), Irrigation and drainage (80%), Public
                                              administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (1 7%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Water resource management (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       150.00           Total Bank Financing:  150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   150.00
                              Total                                                                                   150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are: (i) for targeted ORMVAs, to provide an improved water
                           service to farmers, and (ii) for targeted farmers, to have better access to improved irrigation
                           technologies.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The Large Scale Irrigation Modernization project supports the Regional Agricultural Development
                         Offices (ORMVAs) of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala (in the Oum er Rbia river basin), and of Gharb (in
                         the Sebou river basin) in providing farmers located in the LSI perimeters with an improved water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         service. This means individual access (rather than collective), on-demand (rather than on rotation),
                         reliable (with faster re-establishment of the service in case of shut-downs), and equitable (in terms of
                         flow and pressure across the irrigation network). Targeted farmers in LSI perimeter will be freed up
                         of some structural constraints, e.g. related to collective water management, rigid water distribution
                         rules and frequent shut-downs, and have the opportunity to improve their farming choices, adopting
                         improved irrigation technologies (mainly drip irrigation), which are more efficient in the use of the
                         scarce water resource and better suited for high-value crops.

                         The project includes 3 components: (1) Improving the irrigation network infrastructure; (2)
                         Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies; and (3) Supporting implementing
                         agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and implementation of the project.

                         Component 1: Improving the irrigation network infrastructure

                         Component 1 will construct pressurized irrigation networks to replace existing gravity networks, and
                         renovate existing pressurized irrigation networks. Under adequate management, the networks’ design
                         will allow providing farmers with an improved quality irrigation water service delivery, in line with
                         the technical requirements of improved irrigation technologies. Component 1 activities include: (i)
                         detailed studies including topographic works and laboratory tests; (ii) technical assistance to
                         ORMVAs to monitor and control of works; (iii) upgrading main irrigation canals and constructing
                         reservoirs to install flow-regulation systems necessary for on-demand irrigation; (iv) constructing
                         feeder pipes for areas which benefit from gravity pressurization and rehabilitating pumping stations
                         for those areas that need artificial pressurization; (v) constructing filtration stations; (vi) constructing
                         distribution piped networks to replace existing canals or rehabilitating and extending existing piped
                         networks; (vii) installing outlets and associated devices, including meters, at block and farm levels to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulate, measure, and control water delivered to farmers. This component will be executed by the
                         ORMVAs.

                         Component 2: Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies

                         Component 2 will strengthen farmers’ knowledge of and access to improved irrigation technologies
                         (mainly drip irrigation) and the opportunities linked, to allow them taking advantage of the improved
                         water service provided by the ORMVAs. Farmers will become familiar with the advantages of the
                         improved irrigation technologies, and will have easier access to financing opportunities under the
                         FDA to adopt them. Once the improved irrigation technologies is in place, farmers will receive
                         irrigation advisory services, and their capacity to manage and maintain the irrigation systems will be
                         strengthened. Farmers will also develop better knowledge of their groundwater, where appropriate.
                         Component 2 activities will include: (i) provision of technical assistance to the ORMVAs to support
                         farmers to access and manage improved irrigation technologies; (ii) provision of equipment to the
                         ORMVAs to monitor performance of irrigation systems; (iii) provision of technical assistance and
                         equipment to the ORMVAs to create or strengthen the irrigation information system; and (iv)
                         rehabilitation of buildings and acquisition of equipment for the Water Users Associations (WUAs).
                         This component will be executed by the ORMVAs.

                         Component 3: Supporting implementing agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         implementation of the project

                         Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity of the ORMVAs in operating and maintaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the irrigation networks, to ensure that new and improved networks are managed so to provide
                         farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical requirements of improved
                         irrigation technologies. Component 3 will also support the DIAEA and the ORMVAs implementing
                         the project. Component 3 activities will include: (i) technical assistance to ORMVAs to improve
                         operation and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation network; (ii) training, technical assistance,
                         computer equipment, and associated tools to DIAEA and ORMVAs for project management; (iii)
                         implementation of the EMP (iv) provision of equipment and infrastructure rehabilitation for DIAEA
                         and ORMVAs; and (v) purchase of vehicles. This component will be executed by the ORMVAs and
                         the DIAEA. The DIAEA will be responsible for all the activities that require a coordinated approach
                         across the ORMVAs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in targeted irrigation sectors of the Tadla, Haouz, and Doukkala
                         large scale irrigation perimeters in the Oum Er Rbia basin, and of the Gharb large scale irrigation
                         perimeter in the Sebou basin. The targeted area is approximately 29,000 ha.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         John R. Butler (GSURR)
                         Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     identifies some potential negative impacts which are
                                                                    manageable through the implementation of the
                                                                    Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    identification of a series of mitigations measures, a
                                                                    monitoring and supervision plan to ensure proper
                                                                    implementation of the defined EMP, as well as a training
                                                                    component. These potential impacts include: reduction of
                                                                    aquifer recharge, because a share of the current irrigation
                                                                    losses passes into aquifers; increased salinization of soils
                                                                    near the root zone, because of reduced leaching; and
                                                                    tensions between participating and non-participating
                                                                    farmers.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             The project does not finance any activities in natural
                          4.04                                      habitats and no natural habitats are expected to be
                                                                    impacted.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             The project does not finance any investments in forested
                                                                    areas. No forest land or forest cover is expected to be
                                                                    impacted.




                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The ESIA concludes that agrochemicals are not a major
                                                                      concern. The OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will
                                                                      not finance purchase of pesticides and will not induce the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      increased use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural        No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The project does not expect to cause any involuntary
                            OP/BP 4.12                                displacement. The policy is triggered in case of potential
                                                                      small scale land acquisition, particularly for pipes and
                                                                      basins that might be located on private land. It is expected
                                                                      that most land acquisition will take place through
                                                                      amicable agreements between the land owners / farmers
                                                                      and the Commune. In case of lack of agreement, the
                                                                      Moroccan regulations for expropriation for public utility
                                                                      will apply (law 7-81). A framework approach has been
                                                                      pursued. In places where potential land acquisitions may
                                                                      take place, the sites have not been defined yet due to
                                                                      ongoing technical discussions. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                      Framework (RPF) in line with these regulations and
                                                                      Bank's guidelines was prepared.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes           The project does not invest in dams. Nevertheless, the
                            4.37                                      policy is triggered because the sustainability of the
                                                                      irrigation sectors targeted is dependent on the functioning
                                                                      and safety of existing dams. Triggering the policy helps
                                                                      ensure that the source of water is dependable and safe for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      sustaining the expected results of the project. National
                                                                      legislation for monitoring and management of dams
                                                                      (water law No. 10-95) has been reviewed and found fully
                                                                      in line with the requirements of the policy. The safety
                                                                      inspection and assessment reports for a sample of the
                                                                      dams have been reviewed and compliance with World
                                                                      Bank requirements verified.
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed activities funded under the project is expected to have a larger environmental benefit
                              in terms of promoting sustainable water resources management through improving the practices
                              and application efficiency of water use which could offset aquifer abstraction. These objectives are

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           in line with the Government program on these topics, which is supported through Bank sector
                           dialogue and the Integrated Green Growth DPL series. However, there are possible potential
                           negative impacts of the proposed project which may include: Reduction of aquifer recharge,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           because of reduction in deep percolation consequent to the introduction of drip irrigation;
                           increased salinization of soils near the root zone because of reduced leaching; and potential risk of
                           tensions between participating farmers and non-participating farmers.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No significant indirect or long term environmental impacts are expected. The project will support
                           GOMs efforts in modernizing irrigated agriculture and improving water resources management. It
                           is designed to address hydrological and commercial risks that farmers are facing. These risks have
                           encouraged farmers to grow crops that are tolerant of irregular water supplies and that are not
                           perishable post-harvest, but that get lower than potential returns. The project proposes to mitigate
                           hydrological risk by ensuring that a given quantity of water is continuously available to the farmer
                           whenever he or she wants it. These interventions will ensure participating farmers to overcome
                           current and future water deficits by making their water use more productive and environmentally
                           sustainable. No major negative irreversible environmental impact is foreseen and the project is
                           retained as category B.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower prepared an environmental impact assessment (ESIA) and a comprehensive
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which include the identification of a series of
                           mitigations measures, a monitoring and supervision plan and a training component. This was
                           finalized after thorough consultations with stakeholders. The project will support exploration of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           remote sensing technology to monitor water consumption. To mitigate the potential soil quality
                           problems, and fertilizer problems, project-financed technical assistance will work with farmers to
                           find optimum techniques to manage each individual circumstance. The EMP also stipulates
                           provisions for minimizing health, environmental and nuisance problems during the construction
                           phase. The capacity of the Borrower for the implementation and supervision of the EMP is
                           modest. Training has been undertaken in the original project and the revised EMP also includes a
                           training program (including budget) for building expertise on implementation of ESMP,
                           monitoring the quality of water and soil, control of irrigation techniques as well on her
                           communication skills with farmers. The project finances the implementation of the EMP. During
                           supervision, the team will ensure that this capacity is maintained within each of the implementing
                           agencies and that project progress reports will include proper enough information on the status of
                           EMP implementation as well as actions undertaken to supervise and monitor its implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESIA was discussed during thorough consultations with stakeholders in the irrigation areas in
                           the basin. Key stakeholders includes regional and sub-regional entities involved in the design of
                           the project including the ORMVAs (Office de mise en valeur agricole), Agricultural water user
                           associations, group of farmers. As part of the elaboration of the ESIA and the related EMP, a
                           series of public consultations have been undertaken with farmers. The ESIA captures these
                           consultations and documents the feedback from the consulted stakeholders.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          06-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          06-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gabriella Izzi
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                               Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
