                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/18/2014                                     Report No.: AC7055
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P094007                 Original Project Name: MA-Rural Roads II
Country: Morocco                             Project ID: P148003
Project Name: Morocco Second Rural Roads Project - AF2
Task Team Leader: Vincent Vesin
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2014 Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2014
Managing Unit: MNSTI                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            95
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     36.00
                                                                      36.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Current Project Development Objective – Parent Project

 The parent project's development objective is to increase rural population's access to all-
weather roads in support of the Government's Second National Rural Roads Program
(NRRP2). The main goal of the NRRP2 is to improve the National Rural Road
Accessibility Index from 54% in 2005 to 80% at the end of the program in 2015.

 Proposed Project Development Objective - Additional Financing

  The project development objective remains unchanged under the proposed additional
financing, which is processed to cover a financing gap in the overall NRRP2.

3. Project Description
The Project supports the NRRP2, which has two components, according to the source of
financing:
 Component A (financed by the Caisse pour le Financement Routier (CFR)): the
rehabilitation or the upgrade of 12,560 km of rural roads (including small,
complementary road-related infrastructure), for an estimated cost of MAD 12,003 million
(equivalent to US$1,450 million). The CFR falls under the Ministry of Equipment and
Transport and was established in 2004 as a public entity with administrative and financial
autonomy (law 57-03) to mobilize financial resources for investments in the road sector.
Under the NRRP2 the CFR manages both loans and grants from several international
donors (including the Bank) and contributions from local authorities (regions, provinces,
and communes).

 Component B (financed by the General Budget and the Road Fund): the rehabilitation or
the upgrade of 3,000 km of rural roads (including small, complementary road-related
infrastructure), for an estimated cost of MAD 3,520 million (equivalent to US$425
million).

 The Borrower for the proposed additional financing is the CFR. Such proposed
additional financing of US$95 million equivalent is needed to cover a financing gap in
the overall NRRP2. It, alongside the US$36 million contribution of the Borrower
(obtained from local authorities), will finance around 1,300 km of rehabilitation or
upgrade of rural roads (including small, complementary road-related infrastructure),
which were already selected in 2005 as part of the NRRP2, whose detailed design is
ready, but for which no other financier could be identified. These 1,300 km are part of
2,000 km still to be financed under component A of NPRR2. The Borrower is still
waiting for the contribution from the local authorities to fund the remaining 700 km
under component A.

 The proposed additional financing is expected to close on November 30, 2016

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will cover the regions of Tanger-Tetouan, Taza-Al-Hoceima-Taounate, Fès-
Boulmane, Meknès-Tafilalet, Tadla-Azilal, Doukkala-Abda, Rabat-Sale-Zemmour-Zaer,
Casablanca, Oriental, Marrakech-Tensift-El Haouz, Chaouia-Ourdigha, Gharb-Chrarda-
Beni Hsen, Souss-Massa-Drâa as well as the province of Guelmin.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSU)
   Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The additional financing for this project covers a financing gap only. There are no
changes to project scope, activity or design from the parent project, thus no new/different
environment and social safeguards related risks are anticipated under the additional
financing.

  Rural roads to be upgraded or rehabilitated under the Second National Rural Roads
Program (NRRP2) have a wide range of positive impacts. Positive impacts stemming
from the project are numerous. The rehabilitation or the upgrade of all-weather rural
roads will give isolated populations year-round access to basic social and economic
services (health, education and markets). These roads will have a significant impact more
specifically in the agricultural sector, by facilitating the distribution and marketing of
agricultural products, thereby increasing the sector's productivity. The rehabilitation or
the upgrade of rural roads should also lead to significant improvement in both transport
services' quality and competitiveness, and to a large drop in transport cost. Finally, the
use of labor-intensive techniques, which will be encouraged under the project, will
provide local population with opportunities for temporary work.

 There are some potential adverse environmental and social impacts however. Roads
located in the escarpments are characterized by hairpin bends, whereas in flat areas they
follow straight alignments. These geometric features affect the volumes of earthworks to
be carried out and consequent impacts on the environment. Disruption of drainage is a
major consideration in road design as it may hamper free drainage, it may cause stagnant
pools of water and may lead to increased sediments into ponds, streams and rivers due to
erosion from road tops and sides, as well as increased run-off and flooding. In the case of
mountain roads, borrow excavation into the mountainside to achieve the planned design
width of the roadbed may lead to the erosion of exposed slope surfaces and possibly to
slides of slopes onto the road. Slope stabilization is therefore a key design issue in
mountainous areas. Loss of natural vegetation may also occur during construction,
especially when widening is planned. In that case, revegetation and replanting will be
envisioned to protect susceptible soil surfaces. Loss of access is possible in case roadbeds
are raised or villages bisected by road widening. During construction, inadequate disposal
of oil and bitumen, as well as the introduction of work camp or hazardous wastes, may
lead to soil and groundwater contamination. Environmental impacts resulting from road
works are expected to be localized and it is therefore reasonable to assume a negligible
risk of cumulative negative impacts.

  On the environmental side, the project activities entail potential impacts on the natural
and human environment of the areas on and through which the road infrastructures will
be established. Considering the fact that the exact project locations were not known at the
time of project preparation, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was
commissioned by the Government in 2006. The EMP report remains valid for the
proposed additional financing, it includes precise recommendations for limiting the
impacts during execution of the works. It also includes specific environmental
management plans and monitoring plans indicating the mitigation and monitoring
measures, responsible parties and timing.

  For social safeguards, the Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12) is
triggered as was the case for the parent project and for which a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) was prepared. The experience for social safeguards related issues and
risks have been modest in scope. Almost all of the road works (rehabilitation or
upgrading) has been along existing alignments and within the right-of-way. Modest
amounts of lands, when required, have been obtained through amicable agreements, land
donations, or limited acquisition using eminent domain principle. The Borrower's
approach is to try to avoid expropriation whenever possible.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Indirect impacts include induced commercial and business developments along the
rehabilitated or upgraded rural roads. An increased risk of road accidents due to higher
speeds could also occur. Such risk is however limited, considering that most of these
roads handle a very low volume of traffic (less than 30-50 vehicles per day).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Analysis of alternatives for each rural road project will be carried out during project
preparation, in case adverse impacts are identified. Alternatives considered will include
design (especially earth works and drainage structures), technology, construction
techniques and phasing, as well as operation and maintenance procedures.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) were developed under the first Rural Roads Project (adopted in June 2004) and
were subsequently modified for the parent project in 2006 with a view to limiting the
negative impacts of road projects on the environment, and to evaluate and address the
socioeconomic impacts of projects on the population.

  The main mitigation measures that will be implemented under the EMP and RPF
include, among others:
  •     Improved and environmentally-sound road standards, especially: (i) use of surface
drainage controls on vulnerable surfaces and slopes; (ii) size and location of roadside
drainage and culverts to handle maximum anticipated flows; (iii) line receiving surfaces
with stones or concrete; and (iv) location and design of borrow/quarry sites for erosion
control during road construction and future maintenance operations.
  •     Adequate measures during construction, such as: (i) collecting and recycling used
lubricants; (ii) minimizing wastes generated during construction and reusing construction
wastes where practicable; (iii) managing construction period worker health and safety;
(iv) using archeological chance find procedures and coordination with appropriate
government agencies; and (v) ensuring adequate maintenance of culverts, roadside
slopes, drainage control measures, road surface and vegetation.
  •     Systematic public consultations with project stakeholders including people
adversely affected by the NRRP2.

 Although the CFR is the project's implementing agency, it has delegated the
implementation of the road projects it finances to the Directorate of Roads (DR) of the
Ministry of Equipment and Transport. In that context, the DR has appointed an
environmental specialist and a social specialist to ensure that all roads improved under
the NRRP2 comply with the standards set for social and environmental safeguards.

 At the local level, the Regional Offices (DREs) and Provincial Offices (DPEs) of the
Ministry of Equipment and Transport, which will carry out the rural road projects and
assume responsibility for their operation and maintenance, are currently designating one
of their existent staff to take on responsibilities in terms of monitoring and reporting on
environmental and social safeguards in order to ensure that safeguards procedures are
thoroughly applied throughout the NRRP2 and report to the DR on progress achieved.
The DR, DREs and DPEs should therefore be adequately capacitated to implement the
EMP, the RPF and relevant procedures in the Project Implementation Plan. During
project implementation, training activities will be regularly carried out to build capacity
and further strengthen those institutions.

  In terms of land acquisition on classified roads, the DR has a department (Service du
Domaine Public) staffed by competent personnel with in-depth knowledge of Moroccan
legislation as well as on Bank safeguards on expropriation.

 Lessons learned during the implementation of the parent project have been shared with
the Borrower on a regular basis, especially those relating to the provisions of the Bank's
policy on OP 4.12. Recognizing some systematic bottlenecks in payment of
compensation, the Borrower has sought to augment its capacity to manage safeguards and
to address social issues as they arise. Social safeguards trainings for the Borrower have
been carried out and a social consultant hired to carry out extensive due diligence on
social safeguards. Under the proposed Additional Financing, the Borrower will follow
defined procedures in their revised Project Implementation Plan which has been
strengthened to ensure that the project captures clearly necessary information related to:
(i) eligibility criteria of affected people as defined by OP 4.12, including those who have
no recognizable legal right or claim to the land they are occupying, (ii) the grievance
redress mechanisms in place, and (iii) clear identified procedures for compensation of
affected people prior to affecting their assets/livelihoods, including any land take. In
addition, the Borrower will continue to ensure that appropriately qualified staff at central
and local levels are available to monitor and report on social safeguards through
appropriate training.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include: all rural population living along or nearby the rehabilitated
or upgraded roads, who will significantly benefit from all-weather roads; local authorities
(collectivités locales); the Caisse pour le Financement Routier (CFR); and the Directorate
of Roads (DR) within the Ministry of Equipment and Transport.

 During the preparation of the NRRP2, all provinces in Morocco, as well as elected
officials and representatives of local authorities, were consulted by the DR (through its
DPEs) on those roads to be included in the program. In a number of provinces, provincial
councils organized pre-consultation meetings on their own, at the commune level, in
order to present projects in greater detail and gather comments prior to the consultations
organized by the DPEs. The consultations led to approval of the majority of roads
selected by the DR (and therefore of the selection methods applied), as well as a few
changes aimed at meeting specific local demands. The objective of consultations was also
to strengthen the impact of road projects for the populations concerned, by enabling local
authorities to match, as much as possible, their own investment programs with the
NRRP2.

 The public will be consulted during subproject level preparation of environmental and
social instruments. The consultation mechanisms will ensure effective outreach to the
stakeholder population using methods that are appropriate/responsive to the local context.
In addition, it should be noted that Moroccan expropriation procedures require the public
announcement of intent to expropriate at least twice in a national newspaper and in the
Bulletin official. The expropriation proposals and plans are also posted in the offices of
the relevant communes. Locally elected representatives will play an active role in
informing their constituents of the expropriation plans.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          02/13/2006
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      02/13/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/13/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/13/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/13/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/27/2006
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Vincent Vesin                             03/17/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Taoufiq Bennouna                          03/17/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Fatou Fall                                03/17/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Patricia Veevers-Carter                   03/17/2014
  Comments:
