                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                     Report No.: 87652

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           April 24, 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                    Mozambique             Project ID:             P149629
    Project Name:               Enhancing Spatial Data for Flood Risk Management Project
    Task Team Leader:           Louise E. M. Croneborg
                                (Water Resources Management Specialist, AFTN2)
    Estimated Board Date:       (RVP Approval) 10- May-2014
    Managing Unit:              AFTN2
    GEF Focal Area:             n/a
    Sector(s):                  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 100%
    Theme(s):                   Natural disaster management 30%, Water resources management 30%,
                                and climate change 40%
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00           No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       4.95 & 4.07              Total Bank Financing:    4.95 & 4.07
    Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                        Amount
      Recipient                                                                                  0.00
      Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)                           4.95
      (Limpopo)
      Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)                           4.07
      (Zambezi)
      Total                                                                                      9.02
    Environmental Category: C
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred       No
    project?
.
    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    1. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the capacity of Mozambique to
    prepare for and manage flood events in the Limpopo and Zambezi River basins.

    C. Project Description
    1. The topographic maps and data currently available for vulnerable areas of the
    Limpopo and Zambezi River basins are inadequate for modern hydraulic and flood risk
    modeling procedures. This lack of adequate maps and terrain models also hinders management
    of shared waters amongst the riparians Mozambique, Malawi, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The
    project will therefore support the acquisition of high-resolution spatial data through airborne
    lidar1 and photography surveys, the associated creation of digital elevation models (DEMs),
    further analysis to create useful information products, and the incorporation of that information
    into policy making and investment planning in priority areas of the Limpopo and Zambezi
    River basins. The integration of more detailed, high-resolution spatial and topographic data into
    tools and models used for planning, monitoring, response, and warnings can translate into
    improved societal and economic benefits (for example: more accurate flood models and
    predictions, flood protection, increased resilience to extreme events and climate change,
    building-back-better of key infrastructure such as bridges and roads, improved design and siting
    of infrastructure, general spatial planning and emergency response).

    2. Understanding the dynamics of high-magnitude floods through computer simulations is
    critical to flood preparedness and planning. High-resolution DEMs are necessary inputs to
    hydraulic models, which simulate the flow of water across the surface of the earth. As a result,
    modelers can see where floodwaters will go, their depth at any given location, the forces they
    will exert there, and their residence time. When combined with historical river discharge
    records, hydrologists can then estimate the frequency with which floods of a given magnitude
    will occur at a given location. The resulting information is then used to improve long-term
    planning, infrastructure siting and design, emergency response measures, and other proactive
    management activities. Aerial photography is often used to create landcover classification
    maps, which in turn are used in hydrologic and hydraulic models to provide better estimates of
    hydrologic parameters such as runoff and infiltration coefficients. Aerial photography
    complements DEMs by allowing accurate identification of specific features, such as road
    crowns, surface water bodies, and other landscape features.

    3. Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) is a remote sensing technology that measures
    distance by bouncing a laser off a target and analyzing the reflected light. When flown in
    an aerial survey, LiDAR can be used to scan large swaths of terrain and create three
    dimensional models of the terrain surface. Following complex prost-processing techniques, the
    raw data are transformed into a digital elevation model at extremely high resolution. With high-
    resolution LiDAR-derived digital elevation models as an input, hydraulic models are expected
    to improve in accuracy by a minimum of 20 percent and in some areas, such as the on the

1
  Lidar is a remote sensing technology that measures distance by illuminating a target with a laser and analyzing the
reflected light. In this context, it will be used to construct three-dimensional terrain model. See Annex X for a
detailed description of the technology and its applications.
Zambezi River delta, which is particularly flat, by a minimum of 35 percent. Classification of
river embankment areas is expected to improve by a minimum of 70 percent. The accuracy
improvements are based on baselines estimates that use global digital elevation models at a 90
meter resolution. The collection of LiDAR-derived DEMs will enable the creation of accurate
hydraulic models for use in planning and investment scenarios.

4. The project will consist of two small recipient-executed grants implemented in parallel by
ARA-Sul and ARA-Zambeze, respectively, with each grant constituting one of the project’s two
components as follow:

5. Component A. Limpopo high-resolution mapping surveys & model development.
Component A will consist of: pre-survey assessment; acquisition and delivery of Light
Detection and Ranging survey (LiDAR) through specialist firm of prioritised areas of the
Limpopo River basin; post-survey processing; intermediate application of survey data; direct
application; and dissemination and data management. Component A will be supported by
training activities, as well as strengthening the Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) necessary to process, analyse, share and disseminate the LiDAR survey data and
associated developed information products.

6. Component B. Zambezi high-resolution mapping surveys & model development.
Component B will consist of: pre-survey assessment; acquisition and delivery of Light
Detection and Ranging survey (LiDAR) through specialist firm of prioritised areas of the
Zambezi River basin; post-survey processing; intermediate application of survey data; direct
application; and dissemination and data management. Component A will be supported by
training activities, as well as strengthening the ICT necessary to process, analyse, share and
disseminate the LiDAR survey data and associated developed information products.

7. As shown, each component will consist of a series of activities, beginning with preliminary
consultations, needs assessments, and survey area prioritization, and culminating with the
incorporation of new information products into decision making processes.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
8. There are no physical interventions related to the two small recipient executed grants. The
activities involve two surveys in the Limpopo and Zambezi River basins, and investment into
technical assistance, training and information and communication technologies.


E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
George Ledec – Environment Specialist
Kristine Schwebach – Social Development Specialist


6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP          No               The policy is not triggered as the
4.01                                                     project envisions no investments or
                                                         works that would require
                                                         environmental assessment.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            No                The policy is not triggered as the
                                                         project envisions no investments that
                                                         would threaten natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                     No                The policy is not triggered as the
                                                         project envisions no investments in
                                                         management or destruction of
                                                         natural forests or plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09                No                The policy is not triggered as the
                                                         project will not procure pesticides
                                                         nor result in their use.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP      No                The policy is not triggered as there
4.11                                                     are no works that would result in the
                                                         known or unknown risk of impacting
                                                         physical cultural heritage.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10          No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in
                                                         the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No                The policy is not triggered as the
                                                         project envisions no investments or
                                                         works that would lead to involuntary
                                                         resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No                No construction/rehabilitation or use
                                                         of waters from a medium or large
                                                         dam is envisioned in this project.
Projects on International Waterways    No                The policy is not triggered because
OP/BP 7.50                                               there are investments that would fall
                                                         under the provisions of the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No                 No project activity will be
                                                         implemented in disputed areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Not applicable.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the recipient to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of recipient capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      None required.
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   None required.
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?         Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
Does the grant incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse   Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
impacts on cultural property?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                    Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-
affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the           Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
recipient and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader:                            Name: Louise E. M. Croneborg
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Alexandra                  Date: April 24, 2014
                                             Bezeredi
Sector Manager:                              Name: Magda Lovei                Date: March 07, 2014
