                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/05/2014                                   Report No.: 84669
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P104566                  Original Project Name: Water Services
                                              and Institutional Support Project
Country: Mozambique                           Project ID: P146938
Project Name: Additional Financing - Water Services and Institutional Support (WASIS)
Project
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,        Estimated Board Date: 03/20/2014
2014
Managing Unit: AFTU1                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: Water supply (100%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                   0.00
         AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development AUD3.80
                                                                              3.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (i) increase water service coverage in
the cities of Beira, Nampula, Quelimane, Pemba, Dondo, Tete, Chimoio, Gondola,
Angoche, Moatize, Ilha de Moçambique, Mocimba da Praia and Nacala under the
delegated management framework; and (ii) establish an institutional and regulatory
framework for water supply in smaller cities and towns.

The second Additional Financing does not change the PDOs.
3. Project Description

The original project includes three components:

 (i)    Component A includes investments and continuing support to expand the water
        supply network in the four cities under the responsibility of FIPAG;
 (ii)   Component B provides capacity building and institutional support to the
        Administração de Infra-estrutura de Abastecimento de Água e Saneamento
        (AIAS); and,

 (iii) Component C provides capacity building and institutional support to the Water
       Regulatory Council (Conselho de Regulação do Abastecimento de Água- CRA)
       with respect to expanding regulatory responsibility for smaller towns and cities.

The first Additional Financing (P120546), approved by the Executive Directors on
September 30, 2010, continued with the original activities, but allowed for scale-up of the
investments in infrastructure in additional cities, and to strengthen the organizational and
operational capability of the local operators for each system, including the establishment
of a revenue stream leading gradually toward financial sustainability. The revised project
components for the first Additional Financing were as follows:

Component A: Investments and continuing support in 11 Cities under the responsibility
of FIPAG. Under the original project, the cities of Pemba, Nampula, Quelimane, and
Beira are supported with improvements of water supply access. With the previous AF,
the revised Component A continued to support the above four cities and scaled-up the
investments to continue the expansion of services in an additional seven of the largest
cities consisting of Tete, Dondo, Chimoio, Gondola, Angoche, Moatize, and Nacala.

Component B: Capacity building, institutional and operational support to the National
Directorate for Water Affairs (Direcção Nacional de Águas-DNA)/AIAS. Component B
of the original project established and is operationalizing the Asset Management Unit for
smaller cities and towns, designated in the law as the AIAS, and the Provincial Water
Boards. This Component intends to: (a) adapt the proven sustainable institutional and
regulatory modalities for secondary cities under the AIAS based on the experience with
the delegated management model from Water Supply Investment Fund (Fundo de
Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água – FIPAG) cities; (b) ensure that the
appropriate regulatory, policy, and institutional framework would be developed and
tested as the delegated management model is scaled up via pilot projects; (c) build the
capacity of the sector players, including DNA, district and local governments,
municipalities, public and private sector, and small scale providers; (d) promote small
scale private sector participation in service delivery; and (e) provide operational subsidies
during the transition period to support O&M. The previous AF provided by Australia
Agency for International Development (AusAid) created a new sub-component B (d) to
support the pilot works in the small cities of Ilha de Moçambique and Mocimboa da Praia
and thereby test the Delegated Management Framework (DMF) at this level. The
objective of the works in these two pilot locations is to support the institutional aspects of
the WASIS and to strengthen the organizational and operational capability of the local
operators for each system, including the establishment of a revenue stream, leading
gradually toward financial sustainability.

Component C: Capacity, Institutional and operational support to CRA
There was no change to this Component which, under the original project, supports the
development of regulatory frameworks to cover the smaller towns and cities as the AIAS
becomes operational expanded via the Provincial Water Boards (PWBs).

The proposed second Additional Financing is required to: (1) address unanticipated
issues which have arisen during the implementation of the infrastructure investment
projects in Ilha de Moçambique and Mocímboa da Praia; (2) meet higher costs than
allocated for consultancy services, and (3) close a financing gap created by the significant
devaluation of the Australian dollar. It is important to note that the project development
objective remains relevant and unchanged from the parent project and the previous
additional financing, along with the key activities to be carried out under each
component.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The proposed second Additional Financing investments will be in the cities of Ilha de
Moçambique and Mocimba da Praia. With regards to the infrastructure works in these
two cities, the project has faced some challenges during implementation that require
additional resources for successful completion. A summary of the main challenges is as
follows.

Ilha de Moçambique: On the island it was originally planned to refurbish and use an old
cistern (900 m3) located in the area of cultural heritage significance. This cistern (with an
adjacent new pump station) was to be part of the water supply system, providing a
significant amount of clean water storage for the island. However, during the detailed
assessment during the design phase of the project it was concluded that this structure may
not be suitable to withstand vibration from the pump station during operations and
construction and, because of its cultural heritage significance, the decision was taken by
the AIAS to instead construct a new water reservoir at another more suitable location on
the Island. This construction of this new reservoir with capacity of 1000 m3 requires
additional costs over that which was previously estimated for the refurbishment of the old
cistern. Other less significant variations which have been issued include: (1) the change
of pipe materials for the water supply pipeline which crosses the bridge to the Island; and
(2) inclusion of a new commercial building for the operator which was omitted during the
bidding documents.

Mocímboa da Praia. In Mocimboa the source of water, the Quinhevo river, has been
affected by the recent installation of a weir by another Government agency, which has
limited the water abstraction capacity and impacted the water quality. Thus, to overcome
this constraint a variation order has been issued to include additional infrastructures
(boreholes and an additional treatment process within the new treatment facility that was
already planned for construction) to improve the availability of water and to improve the
treatment processes. The additional treatment structure includes a new upflow filter
which will be installed in line and before the proposed rapid sand filters that were part of
the original design. This additional treatment process is located within the same project
footprint which has been established for the originally proposed treatment facilities. The
treatment technology is based on the same physical processes (e.g., filtration) and does
not involve additional chemical dosing. The boreholes will be drilled near the existing
water abstraction point and if successful will be equipped and connected through
independent lines which will feed into the treatment works (as a mixed design solution).
Other minor variations which have been required include: (1) an increase in the size of
the transmission main from 200 mm to 300 mm dia (due to lower pressure than originally
designed), but the alignment will stay the same; and (2) an increase in the volume of one
of the elevated storage tanks from 10m3 to 20m3, but the location has stayed as originally
planned.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
   Mr Harvey Van Veldhuizen (OPSOR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The original project was classified as a Category B and triggered two Bank safeguard
policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
4.12). To address the requirements of these two policies, and given the nature of the
investments of the original WASIS project, the Borrower prepared an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Both frameworks were reviewed and approved by the Bank and disclosed in the Bank's
InfoShop as well as in Mozambique through the FIPAG Offices prior to appraisal of the
original project in April 2007. In addition to the safeguard policies triggered by the
original project, the previous AF under AusAid also triggered the Physical Cultural
Resource Policy (OP/BP4.11) because the island part of the Ilha de Moçambique
Municipality is classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site (WHS) and its architectural
features are protected. To address the safeguard implications of the AF investments at
this site, the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists conducted field
assessments of the environmental, social and physical cultural resources (PCRs)
safeguard policy implications associated with the proposed AF investments. The
Specialists recommended adoption of the original WASIS project safeguard policies and
tools (i.e., the ESMF and RPF) as well as preparation of a Physical Cultural Resources
Management Plan (PCRMP) to mitigate any adverse impacts on the PCRs at the Ilha
WHS. The PCRMP is a standalone safeguard tool to be applied during WASIS-AF
activities at the Ilha site alongside the Project’s ESMF and RPF. The PCRMP was
developed to be internally consistent with the ESMF and RPF guidelines and processes.
The PCRMP was disclosed in country and in the Banks InfoShop on June 11, 2010.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

There are no indirect or long term impacts expected from any future activities in the areas
targeted for AF investments.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

The Borrower, AusAID and the Bank considered not investing in the works identified for
the Ilha de Moçambique Municipality site given its UNESCO World Heritage Site
classification. However, it was agreed that, with preparation of the recommended
Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan and implementation of its proposed
mitigation measures, any adverse impacts on the Ilha's PCRs would be appropriately
mitigated in line with Bank policies and the general guidelines of Mozambique Law
10/88 on Cultural Heritage as well as Decrees 27/21006 and 28/2006.

Following initial consultations with the Ilha's WHS Conservation Office (GACIM), it
was agreed that the AF investments on the Ilha remained a high priority for government
and that the PCR issues related to the WHS classification of the Ilha, as well as the
known PCRs in the immediate vicinity of the Ilha, would be protected with the diligent
application and adherence to the PCRMP. The PCRMP guidelines would be applied in
tandem with the implementation of the AF ESMF and RPF tools already in place under
the original WASIS project. The decision since the first AF was approved to not make
use of the old cistern, and instead to build a new water storage reservoir on the Island, has
received the full support of GACIM, and has been closely coordinated with them.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Based on the aforementioned safeguards field assessments conducted in October 2009
and May 2010, it was agreed with the Borrower that the original ESMF and RPF
prepared for the WASIS project would be used for the AF investments as they remain
valid for all of the activities and investments envisioned. As such, both frameworks will
be applied for assessing and mitigating any and all potentially adverse environmental and
social impacts from the physical investments in the water systems to be supported by the
AF. In addition, since OP 4.11 is triggered by the AF investments under AusAid for the
Ilha de Moçambique site, the Borrower prepared a Physical Cultural Resources
Management Plan to mitigate any adverse impacts on the Ilha's PCRs generated by
activities developed under the AF.

The nature, scale and scope of the physical investments envisioned for the second
WASIS-AF now in preparation are similar to the infrastructure investments under the
original project, as are the environmental and social impacts. Based on safeguards field
assessments and project supervision conducted in October 2009, May 2010, June 2011,
and June 2013, it has been found that AIAS has been appropriately using the ESMF and
RPF to manage environmental and social impacts of the project activities, which are
related almost entirely to management of construction activities. The PCRMP has not yet
been implemented, as works have not yet begun on the island, which comprises the
cultural heritage. Based on satisfactory implementation of the existing safeguard tools in
WASIS investments at the local level, the Borrower is considered to have adequate
capacity to apply and supervise implementation of the AF project investments and
associated safeguard tools.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Project stakeholders include the municipal authorities, community leaders and residents
where the AF investments will be made.

Both the ESMF and RPF were publically disclosed in country through the FIPAG Offices
and at the Bank's InfoShop in April 2007 following open and transparent public
consultations with key project stakeholders prior to appraisal of the original project. The
PCRMP prepared to manage potential impacts at Ilha is a stand-alone safeguard tool to be
applied during AF activities at the Ilha site alongside the ESMF and RPF. The PCRMP
was developed to be internally consistent with the ESMF and RPF guidelines and
processes. The PCRMP was disclosed in country and in the InfoShop on June 11, 2010.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/15/2007
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/29/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/23/2010
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/10/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/29/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/23/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan (PCRMP) was disclosed in country
and in the InfoShop on June 11, 2010.

Note, the ESMF and RPF to be used for the AF investments were originally disclosed in
Mozambique through the FIPAG Offices and the Bank's InfoShop on 04/02/2007. The
disclosure dates above reflect the date the original documents were disclosed for this AF
operation in Mozambique and the InfoShop.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
        The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
        Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
        Infoshop?
        Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
        form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
        groups and local NGOs?
        All Safeguard Policies
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
        been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
        policies?
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
        cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
        monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
        borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
        documents?


        D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                         Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                              Mr. Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares              02/05/2014
Environmental Specialist:                      Mr. Harvey Van Veldhuizen                     02/05/2014
Social Development Specialist                  Ms. Kristine Schwebach                        02/05/2014
Additional Environmental and/or Social
Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:

Acting Sector Manager:                         Mr. Alexander Bakalian                        02/05/2014
 Comments:
