                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/31/2014                                    Report No.: 84402
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P123201                  Original Project Name: Cities and Climate
                                              Change
Country: Mozambique                           Project ID: P146059
Project Name: Cities and Climate Change PPCR - AF
Task Team Leader: Paula Dias Pini
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5,         Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: AFTU1                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%); Sub-national
government administration (50%)
Theme: Climate change (40%); Other urban development (10%); Municipal finance
(25%); Municipal governance and institution building (25%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                   6.50
         Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                    9.25
                                                                        15.75
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen municipal capacity for
sustainable urban infrastructure provision and environmental management to enhance
resilience to climate related risks.

The proposed Additional Financing does not change the PDO.

3. Project Description

The Mozambique Cities and Climate Change Project (MCCCP) (P123201) is a US$120
million Investment Project Financing (IPF), approved on April 3, 2012, which became
effective July 18, 2012. The project has the following two components:
Component 1: Strengthening the municipal sector; and
Component 2: Enhance resilience of strategic coastal cities to climate change.

Aligned with the different nature of each component, the project has two implementing
agencies: the Ministry of State Administration (MAE) implements Component 1; and, the
Administration of Water and Sanitation Infrastructure (AIAS), implements Component 2.

The proposed AF will scale-up the development impact of the MCCCP by means of
additional activities under Component 2 - Enhance Resilience of Strategic Municipalities
in Coastal Cities. The AF will scale-up implementation of Component 2 by financing
green infrastructure investments to protect and improve selected natural environment
within the urban area that plays a key role in abating flooding in the city of Beira. These
include: the banks of the Chiveve River, sections of the banks along the open-air canals,
and some low-lying areas identified for flood detention basins.

More specifically, the AF would: (i) map, delineate and improve the planning of green
infrastructure assets in the city; (ii) prepare concept and detailed designs for green
infrastructure investments for selected areas within the city of Beira; (iii) undertake
public works to implement the green infrastructure investment in the selected areas; and
(iv) promote the sharing of knowledge with government and municipalities by supporting
multiple events to disseminate information on the green infrastructure benefits and
detailed technical issues.

The main green infrastructure investment supported by the AF targets the Chiveve River,
which is a natural drainage located in the heart of the older part of the city of Beira. The
Chiveve mouth has been severely restricted by the construction some years ago of a fish
port, and whose drainage channel has been severely degraded by the deposit of solid
waste and sedimentation caused by extremely poor flushing during rains and floods. The
left bank of the downstream portion has a small park with benches and tables that are in
various states of disrepair. KfW is developing a project to clean up and improve flushing
conditions in Rio Chiveve, and the Bank has been asked to help finance a greenbelt zone
on its perimeter to "convert" the image of Rio Chiveve in the eyes of the population from
that of a polluted, smelly, disease-harboring wasteland to one of a desirable urban
amenity that offers recreational opportunities as well as ecosystem services (biodiversity,
drainage and flood mitigation).

In preparation of the Additional Financing, a site visit was made on September 16, 2013,
to review the proposed urban greenbelt's environmental and social setting, identify
potential impacts and risks, and understand how the MCCCP's Safeguards documents,
primarily an ESMF and an RPF, may require updating. The site visit was carried out with
Hassane Abechande, Environmental Specialist with AIAS, the implementing agency for
MCCCP in Beira.

One of the key objectives of the site visit was to determine whether OP 4.12 is triggered
by the AF (it is triggered as part of the original project). The question focuses on a small,
informal settlement called Mangal, and a few households bordering the Rio Chiveve in
the settlement of Goto.

Mangal. A group of 34 households, comprising 44 families, is located in the downstream
section on the right bank of the Chiveve River floodplain, in an informal settlement
called Mangal. They are living in a severely polluted location affected by frequent floods
and highly prone to waterborne diseases. No potable water is available, and the municipal
water supply cannot be extended to this area since residential use is not allowed in the
area given the risks associated with frequent flooding. Water is drawn from a poorly dug
well located in the Chiveve River flood plain, where ground water is saline and almost
certainly highly contaminated with fecal coliforms because the Chiveve River is used as
an open-air toilet. Houses are made of predominantly scavenged materials (wood,
bamboo, plastic sheeting) or wood taken from the mangrove habitat along the lower
Chiveve, and located in an environmental area where settlements cannot be formally
authorized, therefore land title cannot be provided. Although these households will not be
adversely affected by either KfW's project or the proposed investments by the Bank in
urban green space, the Municipality of Beira nevertheless is in the process of resettling
these families to an area safe from floods and appropriate for urban settlements,
irrespective of whether KfW's or the Bank's proposed project proceeds. The resettlement
package offered includes 44 titled urban land plots (one per family) in the area known as
Nhangau, located approximately 11 km from the removal area. Replacement homes made
of sturdy materials will be provided with water supply services and electricity, and is part
of a new neighborhood being developed in this city expansion area. The 44 families have
already chosen their respective urban plots, and preliminary land title documents have
been signed identifying the urban plot in the settlement development plan. The
resettlement is planned to be concluded by February 2014. Their livelihoods, derived
primarily from sales of goods in informal road-side stands or on ground cloths, can
continue in an improved situation at a road-side market located about 3 km from the
resettlement site. The Municipality has agreed to provide means of transport for the
resettled communities for ease of access to schools, clinics, and the road-side market.
Detailed information on the resettlement is provided on the environmental and social
impact study developed as part of the feasibility study prepared for the KfW project, even
though the KFW project does not require resettlement of the families at Mangal.

Goto. Goto is a very large, densely populated informal area located on the southwestern
side of the golf course, which will be the southern-most part of the proposed greenbelt
project. A few households are located on the right (east) bank of the Rio Chiveve in this
area, with latrines and other non-residential structures on the edge of the bank. In this
area of the proposed greenbelt project, the proposed bikeway and pedestrian walkway are
located on the left (opposite) bank of the Rio Chiveve. Relocation of structures or
households, therefore, in the Goto area is not needed to develop the green infrastructure
investments. The Rio Chiveve, however, is used as a deposit for solid waste by the
nearby residents of Goto, and this issue is being addressed under the KFW project to
ensure sustainability of the project. In a similar manner and for similar reasons,
relocation of the Mangal residents by the Municipality for community health and safety
reasons also benefits the sustainability of the proposed Bank-financed green
infrastructure project, particularly because this area of the project (Section 1 in the
preliminary design) has highest potential for significantly improved aesthetic and
biodiversity value.

Following are key findings of the site visit, organized for use in preparing the ISDS for
the Additional Financing (AF). The ESMF for the original project will require minor
modification, to include a short description of the urban green infrastructure.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

A comprehensive urban-environmental initiative which is designed to support
strengthening the Municipality of Beira's resilience to present and future climate-related
impacts has been built by the donors' community. Activities aligned with this initiative
through parallel financing by various donors include improvement of the hydraulic
capacity of the Chiveve River, a project supported by KfW, currently under preparation.
The AF will add to this important KfW-financed drainage improvement project by
building green space park and recreational facilities around its perimeter, increasing
probability of long-term sustainability. An environmental and social impact study has
been prepared for the KFW-financed activities.

With a total 3.5 km length, the Rio Chiveve constitutes a natural river in an urbanized
area, which drainage basin covers approximately 1,320,000 square meters, encompassing
Beira downtown commercial area and low to medium income residential neighborhoods.
A significant expanse of mangrove vegetation is still present in the downstream section
of the Chiveve River, but degradation and sedimentation have prevented recruitment of
new mangrove plants. In the upstream section the most significant natural feature is its
wide flood plain, water-saturated most of the year, where non-native vegetation such as
grasses, reed and some bushes are dominant. Photos from the 1960's show a much wider
Chiveve river and large extensions of mangroves within the urban area. Today, the
Chiveve is much narrower, and its floodplain and mangroves are smaller. The remaining
mangrove stands are covered by excessive sedimentation, ubiquitous garbage, and are
used for open air defecation practices. However the remaining areas, which encompass
the Chiveve river plains and banks that are still free from urban encroachment, continue
to play an important role in draining ground and surface water, thus contributing to
control flood levels in the city of Beira. Under climate change uncertainties, the key role
played by this area to control floods significantly increases.

A preliminary conceptual design for the green infrastructure investments for the Chiveve
River has been prepared. This conceptual design aims at enhancing the environmental
services provided by the Chiveve River to the city of Beira, including flood control while
also unleashing its potential as an urban amenity. In order to achieve this potential, main
green infrastructure investments proposed include: (i) creation of a walking/biking
pathway surrounding the mangrove vegetation along the 3.5 km length of the Chiveve
River – this will clearly define the limits of the environmentally protected area along the
river slopes and waterway, while also creating a recreational facility greatly appreciated
in urban area; (ii) removal of excessive accumulated sedimentation covering the
mangrove trees respiratory roots (pneumatophores) which causes the degraded condition
of this ecosystem, hinders the seedlings to emerge and triggering the visible lack of
biodiversity, while also reducing the flood storage capacity of the river plain – this must
be carried out by hand or by usage of small devices to avoid further damaging the
mangrove trees while also preserving the natural wetland system; (iii) improvements in
the existent secondary drainage system draining to the creek to increase its conveyance
capacity while also adopting technical solutions to lessen urban run-off into the creek in
order to control sedimentation; (iv) improvements in the secondary road systems
surrounding the Chiveve River in order to ensure the roads play the double role of
protecting the river while also unleashing its potential as an urban-environmental asset;
(v) provision of public urban furniture, such as benches, recreational equipment for
children and adults, lavatories, as well some structures to support economic activities
compatible with the protection of the Chiveve River and that have potential to generate
revenues for the maintenance of the improvements financed; and, (vi) landscaping
investments to improve and expand the green coverage, while also use landscaping
solutions to create and urban amenity asset and clearly define limits of the area assigned
to public use and environmental protection purposes.

The proposed AF will also finance green infrastructure investments of similar nature (but
of more simple scope) as described for the Chiveve River in other smaller areas of Beira
that also play important role in draining and storing storm water. A preliminary
identification of these areas was carried out by the ongoing hydraulic assessments being
undertaken for the rehabilitation of Beira drainage canals, financed under the MCCCP.
In addition, the ongoing preparation of the Beira Urban Master Plan, financed by the
Netherlands Government, has also focused on identifying areas for flood detention
basins. These two ongoing studies are being developed in an integrated manner and
adopting consistent approaches. Based on these ongoing studies, areas suggested for the
additional green infrastructure investments under the AF include: (i) Sections of the
banks along the open drainage canal (which rehabilitation is funded under the MCCCP)
free from urban encroachment and offering enough space for some green infrastructure
investments; (ii) Areas surrounding low lying areas where frequently ground water
surfaces and storm water accumulates. The selection of these areas will be made as part
of the ongoing technical studies financed under the MCCCP for the rehabilitation of the
drainage system in Beira. It is expected that green infrastructure investments in these
areas will discourage urban encroachment by offering attractive environment for
community gathering and recreation, while also restraining impulses of irregular
dumping of solid waste.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms. Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
   Mr. Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
   Mr. Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (AFTN3)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The following safeguard policies were triggered in the original project: Environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. Although the AF is
expected to benefit the mangroves, the Natural Habitats Policy has been triggered for the
activities proposed for the AF. No change is anticipated on the original project EA
Category: B – Partial Assessment. The description of the new activities proposed for the
AF are included in both the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the original project, and now
updated. The overall environmental and social impacts of both the original project and
the proposed additional financing are expected to be positive for all the inhabitants of
Beira and especially in low income neighborhoods where recurrent flooding is a serious
health and safety issue, while also triggering loses of limited assets. Negative impacts,
however, may arise during cleaning and improvements of man-made or natural drainage
ways. On the original project, the most sensitive social issue was determined to be the
resettlement of an estimate of fifty households, and compensation for impacts on fences,
latrines, fruit trees and similar structures and assets that may need to be temporarily
removed or relocated in order to rehabilitate the man-made drainage canals. The activities
proposed for the AF does not entail such sensitive social issues because the designs for
the green infrastructure investments can be flexible and will be designed to avoid
involuntary resettlement and limited to the areas free from urban encroachment and
residential occupation.

The proposed green infrastructures investments under the AF may temporarily affect
existing crudely assembled racks consisting of stick, bamboo, wire, string, and in some
cases plastic sheeting, and used for displaying different types of articles sold by street
vendors. Improved displays for these vendors are planned to be built as part of the green
infrastructure investments in the area. These economic activities are compatible with the
green infrastructure investments, provided sanitary facilities are offered as well as
appropriate solid waste collection and disposal services. During the green infrastructure
construction phase, it is envisaged that groups of the street vendors can temporarily move
few meters away while the improvements in this site is underway, with no adverse impact
on their economic activity. The detailed plan to prevent the green infrastructure
investments affecting these street vendors' livelihood (RAP or ARAP) will be prepared in
consultation with the vendors, and integrated with the green infrastructure design phase,
which will provide specific information on the investments to be undertaken as well as on
the new facilities that will be made available to the street vendors.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The primary objective of the AF is to provide long term improvements to the ecosystem
services provided by Rio Chiveve, and to transform it into the core of an urban green
environment and transform it into a recreational asset that will be valued by the
community and discourage its continued use as a receptacle for garbage and human
wastes.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

The only alternative seriously considered is to not develop an urban greenbelt and
recreational resource around Rio Chiveve, in which case the sustainability of KfW's
financing of cleanup and rehabilitation of this natural drainage system is at significant
risk.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The Administration for Water and Sanitation Infrastructure (AIAS), a specialized
semiautonomous agency under the supervision of the Ministry of Works and Public
Services (MOPH), is the implementation agency for Component 2. No significant change
in AIAS implementation capacity in place would be required since the activities proposed
for the AF would be implemented in the city of Beira where the original project already
implements a number of activities. The Project Operational Manual will be updated for
the additional sub-component. AIAS has two full time environmental/social specialists.
Also two full time specialists (one for environment and another for resettlement) are part
of the key staffs under the ongoing consultant contract developing the technical studies in
Beira. Preliminary activities to develop the EIA and RAP have initiated in parallel and
integrated with the technical studies.

The current ESMF and RPF would accommodate the additional activities and safeguard
risks, which have been assessed as Moderate for the original project. The ESMF and RPF
will be updated to clarify that it also is to be used as needed in guiding development of
the urban green space around Rio Chiveve. Given the appropriate capacity the
government agency has demonstrated in implementing the original project, it is expected
that the Moderate safeguard risk is also adequate for the AF.
As the subprojects get identified, the ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared, based on ESMF
and RPF guidance, and publicly disclosed in Mozambique and the Bank InfoShop,
following a set of public consultations and Bank clearance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Primary beneficiaries are the poor who are most affected by floods and the consequent
losses of assets and diseases outbreaks, as well as by the lack of access to urban amenities
such as green and recreational areas. Secondary beneficiaries include businesses,
institutions and residences that are also at risk of flooding as well as all Beira's
inhabitants in general. These interventions will generate multiple benefits for the
population of Beira. They should (i) reduce exposure to floods and increase the city
resilience to cope with the expected scenario of "increased rainfall conditions" caused by
climate change; (ii) create disincentives for irregular urban encroachment on these
sensitive natural environments; (iii) create recreational alternatives in the city; (iv) reduce
malaria, cholera and diarrheic outbreaks associated with each flood event; (v) contribute
to abate the urban phenomena of the 'heat island effect'; and (vi) generate lessons and
experience for other municipalities. The design solutions adopted and the activities
already financed under the original project provide for increasing the overall
sustainability of these interventions. Among the primary beneficiaries, women and
children will benefit the most because they are the most exposed to floods, permanent
humidity in their homes, and water-borne diseases, since they tend to stay longer inside
their home, while men usually spend more time away from home.

Both the ESMF and RPF for the original project were publically disclosed in country and
at the Bank's InfoShop on December 8, 2011, following open and transparent public
consultations with key project stakeholders prior to appraisal of the original project. For
the purposes of this AF, the updated ESMF and RPF will be re-disclosed in Mozambique
and in the Bank InfoShop before AF appraisal.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11/05/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    11/14/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01/16/2014
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11/05/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    11/14/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/16/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms. Paula Dias Pini                          01/23/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr. Sanjay Srivastava                        01/23/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms. Kristine Schwebach                       01/23/2014
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr. Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe                 01/23/2014
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms. Alexandra C. Bezeredi                    01/23/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms. Rosemary Mukami Kariuki                  01/23/2014
  Comments:
