                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                        Report No.: AC7096


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Asia                               Project ID: P149606
Project Name: ROAD SAFETY SUPPORT TO ROAD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT
Task Team Leader: A.K. Farhad Ahmed
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2014      Estimated Board Date: May 2, 2014
Managing Unit: SASDT                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                            Financing
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Regional integration (50%);Other social protection and risk management (50%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       0.00
        Global Road Safety Program                                     0.00
        Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
To improve the safety features of RSDP roads and support implementation of Nepal's Road
Safety Action Plan.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project entails a Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF) grant for GBP 5 million
equivalent to improve road safety features along 700km of strategic roads that are being
upgraded under the IDA-supported RSDP operation. The project will also support the
implementation of Nepal's Road Safety Action Plan which recently obtained GON approval and
has entered implementation. The funding source of this particular grant is the Department of
International Development, UK (DFID, UK).
 DFID will channel the £5m into the Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF) Multi-donor Trust
Fund managed by the World Bank. DFID's £5m will be lodged in the IBRD/IDA concerning the
Global Road Safety Phase 2 Multi Donor Trust Fund (TF No. 071699).
 Specific components of this project would include the following:
 A.    Component A – Procurement and installation of crash barriers on RSDP roads (GBP 4.5
million equivalent) – this component will finance procurement and installation of roughly
7,000m of crash barriers in critical sections of RSDP roads. The RSDP Project Management Unit
(PMU) has initiated a safety audit for roads under the project. Upon completion, this work will
produce detailed drawings to guide design and installation of crash barriers. DOR engineers and
RSDP consultants will supervise installation according to these plans.
 B.    Component B –Institutional strengthening linked to road safety (GBP 0.5 million
equivalent) supports the implementation of the Road Safety Action Plan, which has recently been
approved by the Government. The activities are being identified with MoPIT/DOR.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project activities will be concentrated on the IDA funded 700 Km of RSDP road
corridors located in the eight remote districts in the Mid-Western and Far-Western region of
Nepal.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project will be executed by the RSDP PMU within the Department of Roads (DOR) under
the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport (MoPIT). DOR is considered to be one of
the most technically competent agencies of the GON. The Bank has been working with this
agency in implementing transport projects for the last three decades. During the time of
engagements with Banks DOR has established itself as a reliable agency in the implementation
of Bank financed projects. The ongoing RSDP and BIMP are also supporting various measures
to strengthen DOR's institutional capacity across technical, social, environmental, and fiduciary
related functions.
 The DOR is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements, as the country has
been engaged with the Bank funded projects such as ongoing RSDP and BIMP. The department
has established a Geo-Environmental and Social Unit (GESU) to deal with environmental and
social aspects of roads: it has played an important role in mainstreaming environmental
consideration in road planning and development. DOR has prepared an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) in 2007, which was recently revised by DOR. The
revised ESMF is acceptable to the Bank and is being applied to the ongoing RSDP. Social and
environmental issues under the proposed project will broadly be governed by the already agreed
road sector ESMF.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The potential environmental impacts are expected to be relatively minor, as civil works
(mainly limited to safety improvements at high risk locations) would take place within the
existing right of way of roads. For any works that are identified during project preparation,
Environment Management Plan in accordance with the Environmental Social Management
Framework prepared by the DOR will be prepared by Appraisal.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes         No          TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
    It is unlikely that Natural Habitats will be impacted; the preparation phase will include
screening to confirm.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    It is unlikely that forests and forest resources will be impacted; the preparation phase will
include screening to confirm.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    Procurement of pesticide or use of pesticide is not envisaged in this project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    It is not likely there will be an impact on PCR; however the preparation phase will include a
screening to confirm.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
    Indigenous population constitute about one third of the population in Nepal. As per the
RSDP social screening it is evident, that the project sites are located in the area inhabited by one
of the other ethnic group. For any works that are identified during project preparation in area
inhabited by indigenous people, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared before
appraisal in accordance with the Environmental Social Management Framework prepared by the
DOR for RSDP.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                               X
    It is unlikely that there will be any land acquisition as a result of proposed project activities.
However this will be confirmed during appraisal stage once social screening is completed.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
    Dam related activity is not part of the project scope.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
    The project scope does not include any activity over or around an international waterway that
could cause potential conflict.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X
    No disputed area in the proposed project area.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   02/25/2014
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   No studies contemplated.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                   Mr A.K. Farhad Ahmed                                                      05/15/2014
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano                                                     05/16/2014
      Comments: Cleared. Please proceed with disclosure.
    Sector Manager:                     Ms Karla Gonzalez Carvajal
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
