                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/30/2013                                  Report No.: AC6882
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P099296                 Original Project Name: Irrigation & Water
                                             Resources Management Project
Country: Nepal                               Project ID: P144474
Project Name: Additional Financing for IWRMP
Task Team Leader: Purna Bahadur Chhetri
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 23,        Estimated Board Date: December 23, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);Agricultural extension and research (20%);Crops
(20%)
Theme: Other rural development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             50
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigated agriculture
productivity and management of selected irrigation schemes, and enhance institutional
capacity for integrated water resource management.

3. Project Description
The Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project (IWRMP) was initiated in
March 2008 with a total financing of US$65 million. The project covers 40 districts of
Western, Mid-western, and Far Western Nepal providing assistance to farmer managed
irrigation systems (FMIS) covering the southern plains (the Terai), mid hills, and high
mountains and to agency managed irrigation systems (AMIS) for irrigation management
transfer. The project has four components: Component A: Irrigation Infrastructure
Development and Improvement; Component B: Irrigation Management Transfer;
Component C: Institutional and Policy Support for Improved Water Management; and
Component D: Integrated Crop and Water Management.
 This Project Development Objective for the additional financing will largely remain the
same as the original IWRMP project. The additional financing phase in essence will
support: 1) original commitment of rehabilitating 193 schemes (which had to be revised
downward to 103 due to significant surge in construction materials and labor), 2)
internalize, institutionalize and replicate the gains made in both irrigation water
management and agricultural practices. All the four components are to be retained but
with improvements in Component C and Component D.

 Component A: Irrigation Infrastructure Development and Improvement (USD 26.419
Million)

  The objective of this component is to improve irrigation water service delivery in
selected schemes in Mountain, Hill and the Terai areas and expand groundwater
irrigation in the Terai. The component is designed to address the following issues: i)
structural and operational weaknesses in the traditional FMIS, with consequent low water
use efficiency and low agricultural productivity; ii) low exploitation of the excellent
groundwater potential of the Terai and iii) lack of appropriate plan for systematic
development of groundwater irrigation.

 5.     This component will support the completion of outstanding rehabilitation works
and rehabilitate and modernize an additional 80 schemes, with an estimated command
area of 13,300 ha. All the schemes to be supported have already been identified of which
-28 have already been approved by the Regional Appraisal and Approval Committee.
This means that works could start soon after the approval of the additional financing. The
additional financing will focus on issues raised by the independent assessment to improve
the quality of work through institution of robust supervision and monitoring system and
engagement of independent consultants. Effort will be placed to continue the
strengthening of organizational and management capacity of the WUAs. This component
will focus on successful completion of 103 schemes and the additional 31 schemes
initiated with savings from contingencies. Some additional schemes about 15 to 20
schemes, already appraised by the Regional Appraisal and Approval Committee will be
considered. Effort to strengthen organizational and management capacity of WUAs will
be continued. Sub projects that are likely to trigger negative environmental and social
impacts have been screened out by the Department of Irrigation using the ESMF. Further,
during implementation extra effort will be placed to ensure that social and environmental
safeguards are not threatened.
 Component B: Irrigation Management Transfer (USD 10.914 Million)

  The main purpose of this component is to improve performance and delivery of four
large Agency Managed Irrigation Systems (AMISs) in the country, through support and
training of WUAs and rehabilitation of main canals and essential structural improvement
of lower order canals. It is intended to continue the support to the four WUAs and start
the support and training of an additional two WUAs that would manage an estimated
command area of 16,500 ha.
  Management transfer is a time consuming process. In accordance with the
recommendation of the independent assessment team and projects own experience, the
Additional Financing phase will endeavor to institutionalize management transfer within
the Department of Irrigation. This will call for increased role and engagement of the
Irrigation Water Management Division which has been mandated with the task of
transferring management transfer to users, particularly of the Agency Managed Systems,
and strengthening the organization and institutional capacity of the Water Users
Association. Management transfer depends on the proper functioning of higher order
canals. However, inherent paucity of funds at DoI for works on the higher-order canal
systems has resulted in the lack of interest among the users to take over the management
functions. Given uncertainties associated with government funding for maintenance of
higher order canals in the near future, the additional financing phase will finance the
rehabilitation and modernization of higher-order systems of IWRMP supported schemes.
Greater engagement of IMD in AF will also provide an opportunity to place the task of
on-farm water management from Component D to B. This change will allow better
planning and implementation of on-farm water management activities through
introduction of crop water planning and water management.

 Also, during the additional financing phase, the project will accord high priority to
develop institutional capacity of WUAs to enable them to generate financial resource
through the collection of irrigation service fee and adopt good governance in resource
utilization.

 Component C: Institutional and Policy Support for Improved Water Management (USD
3.480 Million)

 The objective of this component is to provide more effective and streamlined water
resources management services at the national level and within the selected basins
through institutional strengthening of Water and Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS)
and the Department of Irrigation. During the additional financing phase, this component
will help develop six river basin management plans and ensure greater coordination
between WECS and the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology which is also
collecting hydrological data for making informed decision. The coordination between the
two is important to enhance synergy and avoid duplication of work.

 Component D: Integrated Crop and Water Management (USD 7.043 million)

  The aim of the component is to increase production and profitability of agriculture and
related production activities in schemes selected under the project. The component
integrates the improvements made to irrigation systems under Components A and B with
agricultural production activities. It addresses the issue of insufficient integration
between agriculture and water management interventions in order to derive full benefits
from investments in irrigation.

 The past few years have shown significant gains in agriculture through the use of high
yielding varieties, adoption of appropriate farming practices, soil fertility management,
integrated pest management and introduction of mechanized farming. With the reliable
supply of year round irrigation water, priority will now be accorded to promote cropping
patter and introduction of crops that makes the best and optimal use of water. This
component will work very closely with component B for implementing on-farm water
management activities and in identifying and introducing new cultivars that not only
address the productivity but also cultivation of crops that addresses nutritional needs.
The additional financing phase will continue to consolidate and internalize the gains by
enhancing the capacity of WUAs, local farmers, service providers which will include
District Agriculture Development Offices, Agriculture Service Centers and private sector
such as agro-vets. The expected outputs of this component are higher productivity in
agriculture and related production activities; increase in cropping intensity and
diversification into vegetables and other high value crops and introduction and promotion
of cropping pattern that makes the best use of irrigation water. Overall, the component
will provide a package of appropriate agronomic and water management practices and
investment support as appropriate.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Component A of the project will be located in three western regions of the country in
forty districts and Component B will be located in eight Terai districts, as was the case in
the parent/ ongoing project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse social and environmental impacts
due to the proposed project interventions. However, depending on their exact location
and type of activities involved, a few of the subprojects could cause minor adverse social
and environmental impacts. These may result from diversion of water, construction
activities, disposal of construction wastes, upgrading such as widening canal or
realigning some portion of canal alignment or slight change in the location of some parts
(intake), induced use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides, pumping ground water,
disposal of excess water, quality of water (arsenic in groundwater and silt content in
surface water) etc. On individual subproject basis, one or more issues such as those
mentioned above could trigger safeguard policy on social and environmental assessment.
Project will take in to account the local environmental and social conditions during the
design and implementation phase of sub projects. Each subproject will have specific
Social and Environmental Management Plan (SEMP).

  Review of SEMP implementation was carried out by the project for the parent project.
The results show that adverse impact on the environment is limited to the canal widening
and project intervention has improved the environmental conditions. The rehabilitation
work was carried out within the available width and in some sub projects the additional
land required was voluntarily contributed by the community. The agreement for land
donation was between the land owner and the water users association (WUA). The land
donation process has been documented by the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future
activities in the project area. Though the project has triggered four safeguard policies as
indicated in the previous section, the community-based approach to the project should
help ensure that most of the issues are discussed and resolved within the community
itself. Moreover, the physical interventions of the project are limited and focused on
rehabilitation of existing schemes. A screening framework included in the Social and
Environment Management Framework (SEMF) will exclude subprojects with significant
adverse environmental and social impacts (e.g. severe and irreversible impacts such as
subproject inside core protected areas, high water diversion structure, involuntary
resettlement, social conflicts with regard to encroachments, etc). The screening
framework will also be used to assess the application of each safeguard policy for each
subproject

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
As indicated above, subprojects with major social and environmental adverse impacts
would be excluded. Alternative designs and locations will be considered to avoid land
acquisition and minimize adverse social and environmental impacts in each subproject.
For each subproject, specific Social and Environmental Management Plan (SEMP) will
be prepared.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has had long history of implementing Bank-funded irrigation projects. The
Borrowers are implementing the Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project
(the original project) with moderately satisfactory safeguards rating for both environment
and social issues. The client as part of original project has prepared Social and
Environmental Management Framework (SEMF) which provides a good basis to respond
to the environmental and social issues in a programmatic manner. SEMF includes
screening criteria and guidelines, list of non-eligible activities, social and environmental
assessment process for subprojects, an entitlement framework for resettlement of project
affected people, strategies for consultation and to address the issues related to tribal, and
women and institutional strengthening activities in relation to the social and
environmental management of project. The SEMF describes the processes to ensure that
environmental and social aspects are integrated in planning and implementing project
activities at the sub-project level. Social and Environment Management Plans (SEMP) for
each identified sub project is prepared by the project based on SEMF. Safeguard
orientations and trainings have been organized in the past as part of project
implementation. Proposed project provides for further orientation, training and hiring
external consultant/ technical assistance for implementing the SEMF. The proposed
project will emphasize on strengthened monitoring and reporting on the environmental
compliance and mitigations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project include the beneficiaries of improved irrigation
system, affected people and functionaries of Department of Irrigation and other line
departments (specifically Agriculture, Rural Development), District Administration and
NGO/Civil Society. Extensive consultations were held with the key stakeholders
(including the affected people, indigenous people and other vulnerable groups) to gather
experiences and incorporate the lessons learnt into the preparation of the additional
financing. The project also envisages consultation with and involvement of the key
stakeholders to continue throughout the planning, implementing and monitoring project
activities at the subproject level.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/23/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  10/24/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10/24/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/23/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  10/24/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10/24/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/23/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/24/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/24/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Purna Bahadur Chhetri                     10/30/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Drona Raj Ghimire                         10/30/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Parthapriya Ghosh                         10/24/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano                        10/30/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                         10/24/2013
  Comments:
