                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/25/2013                                      Report No.: AC7062
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106870                 Original Project Name: Improving
                                             Community and Family Health Care
                                             Services Project
Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P146880
Project Name: Ni-(AF) Comunity Health Project
Task Team Leader: Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 25,       Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2014
2013
Managing Unit: LCSHH                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Population and reproductive health (50%);Health system performance
(30%);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are to: (i) improve the access to, and the quality of,
preventive and promotion health and nutrition services among poor and vulnerable
populations in the Nicaragua; (ii) strengthen the operational capacity of the Nicaragua
Ministry of Health through the rehabilitation of health centers; and (iii) ensure financial
support in case of a Public Health Alert or Public Health Emergency.

3. Project Description
Component 1. Expansion of Coverage of Health Services (US$3 million). This
component aims to finance capitation payments to ensure access by Eligible Beneficiaries
to health services, through: (a) the expansion of coverage of health services in the
selected municipalities and in the indigenous territories of Alto Wangki y Bokay; (b) the
standardization of the health services; (c) the improvement of the quality of health
services; and (d) the implementation of the Community and Family Health Model
(MOSAFC).
  Component 2. Institutional Strengthening of Ministry of Health, Rehabilitation of
Health Care Networks and Contingent Financing of Public Health Emergencies (US$6.9
million). Subcomponent 2.1 It will strengthen the institutional capacity of essential public
health functions of the MOH and rehabilitation of municipal and national health care
facilities of the recipient through: (a) the strengthening of the supervision and
management capacities of the MOH administrative central structures and selected Local
Systems of Integrated Health Care (SILAIS) for the overall coordination, supervision,
and implementation of the MOSAFC; (b) the acquisition of equipment and the
rehabilitation of facilities in the Municipal Health Networks for the implementation and
execution of the MOSAFC; (c) the replacement of medical and non-medical equipment
required to re-establish the operating capacity of Nicaragua's National Health Networks;
(d) the strengthening of the medical and non-medical equipment maintenance activities of
the MOH; and (e) the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples' Planning Framework
(IPPF) and Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to ensure that the Health
Services are environmentally safe and culturally adapted to the needs, and practices of the
relevant Indigenous Peoples community.
  Subcomponent 2.2 It will finance goods, minor rehabilitation works, consultants' and
non-consultant services, and Operating Costs to address the needs of the Public Health
Alert or Public Health Emergency.
  Component 3. Strengthening of Ministry of Health's Capacity to Administer, Supervise
and Evaluate the Implementation of Health Services (US$0.10). This component will (a)
strengthen the MOH's capacity for administering, supervising and evaluating the
activities referred to in Component 1 of the Project, including the carrying out of an
internal technical audit; (b) carry out of the external annual technical audit to validate the
number of eligible beneficiaries receiving services and the achievement of performance
goals, (c) carry out of the annual Project external financial audit, and to (d) analyze and
disseminate the 2011-2012 Nicaraguan Demographic and Health Survey (Encuesta
Nicaragüense de Demografía y Salud).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
All the national territory and 65 municipalities in nine selected Local Systems of
Integrated Health Care (SILAIS). The population in these municipalities has been
identified as the most vulnerable and is currently lacking access to preventive and
promotional health care services.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSEN)
   Mr Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given the presence of indigenous peoples in the Project area, the Project triggers the
Indigenous Peoples safeguards (OP/BP 4.10). To this effect, the Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) prepared based on free, prior and informed consultations in
the national territory was completed in June 2010. It was disclosed in-country on the
MoH's Website and in the Bank's Infoshop on July 27, 2010. The IPPF was updated to
include progress to date and to reflect the additional municipalities and will be published.

 For the indigenous communities and ethnic communities during project implementation,
the MoH will alter/complement the standard set of basic health and nutrition services as
defined under the Community and Family Health Model (MOSAFC) to ensure that they
are culturally appropriate. To do so, a consultant has been contracted to prepare a study
describing the traditional health practices and customs and how they can be integrated in
the public health systems and how traditional health networks can be strengthened.

 OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is also triggered because the Project supports
minor rehabilitation works in national and municipal health facilities with potential
improvements in health care waste management. There will be minor rehabilitation works
in health care facilities or minor pre-installment works for the medical and non- medical
equipment to be purchased by the Project. While the effects of these activities are
localized, minor and reversible, they still, nonetheless, warrant certain care and the
appropriate mitigation measures will be put in place through the updated Environmental
Management Framework (EMF). For the ongoing Project, consultations on the EMF took
place in June 2010 and the EMF was disclosed in-country on the MoH's Web site on July
23, 2010 and in the Bank's Infoshop on July 26, 2010. For the purposes of this AF, the
MoH has updated and approved the EMF in September 2013 and it will be published
before appraisal. The AF will finalize the development of hospital waste management
plans in few hospitals and will allocate resources to materialize those plans.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
When preparing the parent project consultations were carried out to obtain broad
community support for the project. The implementation of the IPPF is being managed by
the Directorate of Planning, and supervised by the National Coordination of Indigenous
Peoples and Traditional Medicine (as part of the Ministry of Health). The IPP will be
updated and consulted with the additional communities that were included in the AF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework for the parent project was discussed with
the SILAIS, the Regional Governments on the Atlantic Coast (RAAN and RAAS),
NGO's, universities and other local institutions and Traditional Health Agents (Agentes
de Salud Tradicional- AST).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/03/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/22/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/25/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/03/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/22/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/25/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
In country disclosure website:
 http://www.minsa.gob.ni/pub/DOCUMENTO_MPPI 10-10-13-final.pdf
 http://www.minsa.gob.ni/pub/Documento_ MINSA_elaborado en_base_normativa 070-
3.pdf


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar     11/22/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez   11/21/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Peter F. B. A. Lafere           11/21/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Joana Godinho                   11/24/2013
  Comments:
