                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6112
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nicaragua                          Project ID:    P147006
                            Project Name:      NI Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (P147006)
                            Task Team          Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Jan-2014                        Estimated   17-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSWS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (40%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                              (30%), Sanitation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                              Rural policies and institutions (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      32.00           Total Bank Financing:                  30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           2.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 14.30
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   15.70
                              Total                                                                                       32.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are: (a) to increase the access to sustainable WSS
                           services in selected poor rural areas of Nicaragua through the consolidation of rural WSS sector


                                                                       Page 1 of 16
                         institutions and the provision of adequate infrastructure; and (b) to improve Nicaragua’s capacity to
                         respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed operation will assist the Republic of Nicaragua to increase access to WSS services in
                         rural areas of the country, by helping it to deliver these services in a sustainable way. The Project
                         will finance four components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (US$7.00 million). This
                         component will finance the following sub-components:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Strengthening of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (US
                         $1.40 million). This sub-component will (i) support FISE in the articulation and harmonization of
                         policies, norms, planning instruments, and approaches to enhance institutional coordination at
                         national, municipal, regional and community levels (including through, inter alia, the carrying out of
                         sector workshops, knowledge-sharing activities, and communication campaigns); (ii) support the
                         development of PISASH’s rural component through the provision of technical assistance ; (iii) (a)
                         strengthen FISE’s capacity to lead the water supply and sanitation sector, through the provision of
                         technical assistance and training; (b) support the design and implementation (in terms of technical
                         assistance, capacity building and office improvements) of an internal re-organization plan for FISE;
                         and (c) upgrade FISE’s office equipment and carry out minor civil works for refurbishment of office
                         space; (iv) support FISE in the preparation, consolidation, and dissemination of instruments to
                         promote international best practices on water supply and sanitation sector harmonization .

                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening of an Integrated Structure for Sustainability of Rural WSS
                         services - “sustainability chain” (US$2.90 million). This sub-component will: (i) support the
                         preparation of rural water supply and sanitation plans for Municipalities, and territories located in the
                         Alto Wangki y Bokay Area, which plans shall include, inter alia, an assessment of the needs related
                         to training, equipment, staffing, institutional strengthening, capacity building, and investments, of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         said Municipalities and territories, all selected pursuant to the criteria set forth in the Operational
                         Manual; (ii) support the institutional strengthening and capacity building of selected UMAS , the
                         governments of the RAAN and RAAS, and the territorial authorities in the Alto Wangki y Bokay
                         Area; (iii) support the capacity building and training of selected CAPS , and selected communities
                         that are not benefitting from the investments under Part 2 of the Project and which meet the criteria
                         set forth in the Operational Manual ; (iv) support the strengthening of coordination mechanisms
                         between FISE and sub-national stakeholders; and (v) support the strengthening of SIASAR through
                         provision of data collection equipment, dissemination, coordination activities amongst sector
                         institutions, and support to Municipalities and other stakeholders for the improved access and use of
                         SIASAR. Together, these activities should strengthen the sustainability chain in an ‘integrated’
                         manner, meaning improving capacity and coordination at all levels, both vertically (between FISE
                         and sub-national stakeholders) and horizontally (between the different sub-national stakeholders).

                         Sub-component 1.3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$2.70 million).This sub-
                         component will support FISE and other institutions directly involved in Project implementation for:
                         (i) the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Project, including support for its overall
                         reporting responsibilities under the Project; (ii) the carrying out of (A) technical and procurement
                         audits of the Project; (B) a Project evaluation; and (C) the IAPPF, the RPF, and the ESMF.

                         Component 2: Increase Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Coverage in Rural Areas (US


                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         $21.00 million): On the basis of the municipal and/or territorial plans for rural WSS developed under
                         sub-component 1.2, this component will support the increased coverage of rural WSS services
                         through the financing of sub-projects to provide technical solutions and level of service tailored to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the context of each beneficiary community. This will involve works, including construction or
                         rehabilitation of WSS systems, installing equipment in water systems, water quality improvements,
                         and sanitation solutions, including tools for their operation and maintenance. The investments will be
                         made using a community demand responsive approach, aiming at mainstreaming sustainability. The
                         Operations Manual will define percentages of counterpart financing and subsidy levels depending on
                         the characteristics of communities, infrastructure systems, and the nature of the intervention (new
                         works, rehabilitation or expansion). The component will finance the entire project cycle, including
                         formulation, execution, supervision, post-works accompaniment, and technical and social aspects.
                         Regarding sanitation, the Project will provide demand-based infrastructure and will support
                         household visits and hygiene trainings as part of the regular sub-project cycle, and sanitation
                         marketing options. All investments will follow the principles and funds allocations mechanisms
                         defined in the MEPAS, which will be updated to: (i) include lessons learned from PRASNICA in the
                         overall project cycle, (ii) introduce pro-poor eligibility criteria and increase the relative weight of
                         sanitation within the funds allocation mechanism, and (iii) include the sanitation markets approach in
                         the list of interventions.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Increase Sustainable Water and Sanitation Coverage in the Pacific, Center, and
                         North regions (US$10.00 million with US$ 1.00 million as counterpart funds from municipalities).
                         Support Eligible Municipalities to increase coverage of WSS services in their rural areas through the
                         carrying out of water supply and sanitation investments. The sub-component will finance WSS works
                         and technical assistance in approximately 65 municipalities, prioritizing those with greater poverty
                         indices (as per INIDE data) and greater coverage deficits.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Increase Sustainable Water and Sanitation Coverage in the Atlantic Regions and
                         Alto Wangki y Bokay (US$10.00 million with US$ 1.00 million as counterpart funds from
                         municipalities). Support (i) Eligible Municipalities in RAAN and RAAS; and (ii) communities in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Alto Wangki y Bokay Area, to increase coverage of WSS services in their rural areas through the
                         carrying out of water supply and sanitation investments. The sub-component will finance WSS works
                         and technical assistance in approximately 20 municipalities, prioritizing those with greater poverty
                         indices (as per INIDE data) and greater coverage deficits.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Alliances for sanitation (US$1.00 million). This component will design and
                         implement a strategy (which includes, inter alia, the carrying out of a communication campaign) to
                         support the implementation of FISE’s sanitation marketing program in Selected Municipalities,
                         which program consists of, inter alia, providing financial access to households to acquire sanitary
                         equipment and to improve sanitary facilities. Municipalities in the Pacific, Center, and North regions
                         that fall outside of the pro-poor selection criteria will be prioritized in this sanitation program. This
                         approach was piloted under PRASNICA and its methodology creates enabling conditions and social
                         mechanisms to allow families to purchase sanitary facilities, focusing on both demand and supply
                         sides of a sanitation market (thus the name “alliances”). Participating municipalities will be selected
                         during implementation pursuant to criteria in the Operations Manual.

                         Component 3: Innovations in Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (US$2.00 million): this
                         component will support developing, carrying out, monitoring and documenting WSS pilot
                         subprojects (consisting of technical assistance, training, and/or rural WSS works and related
                         equipments) that enhance the sustainability of rural water supply and sanitation investments in an

                                                                       Page 3 of 16
                         innovative way, by contributing to one or more of the following sustainability dimensions: water
                         availability, water quality, resilience to climate change and natural disasters, operation and
                         maintenance strategies, and innovative technologies for rural WSS access. The criteria for selection
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of pilot subprojects will be determined based on whether proposed interventions contribute to these
                         dimensions, and according to criteria set forth in the Operations Manual. Possible activities may
                         include (but not limited to): (i) training of youth in social accompaniment of rural WSS sub-projects,
                         including water board administration, hygiene practices and operation and maintenance of WSS
                         systems, (ii) preparation of climate change vulnerability studies in selected municipalities, following
                         the methodology piloted in the PACCAS , and (iii) solar energy pilot projects for water systems.

                         Component 4: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) contingency (US$0.00): this component will
                         support Nicaragua to improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to emergencies by
                         providing immediate response to an Eligible Emergency, as needed, through an IRM contingency
                         component, as part of the IRM established for Nicaragua. This component is only triggered once an
                         emergency occurs, hence its zero allocation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of Nicaragua and in
                         municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 inhabitants that are not served by the national
                         utility, ENACAL. An important component of the Project will increase WSS access country-wide.
                         The investments involve dispersed and small-scale minor infrastructure works, such as small wells,
                         gravity augmented pumps and/or electric pumps, water storage tanks, aqueducts, household
                         connections and on-site sanitation in communities distributed across the entire country. Most of the
                         systems rely on groundwater sources (wells with hand pumps, gravity augmented pumps and/or
                         electric pumps). There will be no disposal of sewers (treated or untreated) in any waterways (mostly
                         on-site sanitation solutions are contemplated). On an exceptional basis, the Project may also finance
                         small sewerage (condominial) systems, and in this case, the effluent will be treated in a manner
                         acceptable to the Bank before its disposal in any waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In very few cases, the investment could coincide with natural habitats such as wetlands or native
                         forests. The nature of works, including small excavation, could eventually expose cultural property.
                         Furthermore, none of the Project activities will take place in disputed areas. There will be no direct
                         water use from transboundary waterways by investments under the proposed operation, and total
                         estimated additional water abstraction is therefore null. If some systems were to use surface water
                         from small tributaries, the extraction would be non material, since the estimated average flows per
                         project for the entire portfolio of similar projects ongoing in the country (PRASNICA and Additional
                         Financing) ranges from 0.01 l/s to 20 l/s; with an average of 3.4 l/s (while the flow of the Rio San
                         Juan that is shared between Nicaragua and Costa Rica, for example, is about one million times that
                         amount). The OP-BP 7.50 (Project on International Waterways) has been triggered.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO)
                         Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Project is expected to generate positive
                          BP 4.01                                             impacts on environmental sustainability in the



                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                 future target areas by improving the access to
                                 potable water and sanitation. The Project will
                                 support rural, dispersed and small scale civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 works to provide water and sanitation, potentially
                                 also including small condominial sanitation
                                 schemes. The Project is classified as Category
                                 “B,” requiring a partial assessment of the
                                 potential environmental and social impacts and
                                 mitigation measures to prevent and reduce
                                 adverse or negative impacts. The proposed
                                 Project interventions - dispersed and small scale
                                 civil works to provide water and sanitation,
                                 including small condominium sanitation schemes
                                 - are not likely to result in significant negative
                                 impacts on human populations and/or
                                 environmentally important areas. This is mainly
                                 due to the small scale of the interventions, their
                                 dispersed locations and nature of the potential
                                 impacts which are easily identifiable, mostly
                                 temporary, and easily mitigated with known
                                 management techniques. The implementation of
                                 the Project will also generate positive health
                                 impacts such as decreased incidence of
                                 waterborne diseases among the beneficiary
                                 communities. As the Project will include civil
                                 works, there will be minor environmental impacts
                                 such as digging trenches to install pipes or
                                 clearing small, vegetated areas to install a latrine,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 tanks, etc. Since these are small-scale systems for
                                 rural, often dispersed populations, no large scale,
                                 significant or irreversible impacts are likely or
                                 expected. Any sub-projects considered as
                                 Category A according to the definition of the
                                 World Bank are not eligible for funding by the
                                 Project. An Environmental and Social
                                 Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                 prepared on the basis of the PRASNICA ESMF,
                                 to screen, assess, and mitigate environmental and
                                 social impacts related to site selection,
                                 construction and operation of the water and
                                 sanitation facilities. The ESMF also includes the
                                 criteria to screen out type of investments that
                                 could be category A. The ESMF includes a few
                                 new interventions eligible for financing under this
                                 Project that were not contemplated under
                                 PRASNICA (in particular, small condominial
                                 sanitation schemes). The ESMF also includes the



                         Page 5 of 16
                                                                     institutional and strengthening provisions for
                                                                     preparing and implementing the ESMF given the
                                                                     limited environmental and social management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     capacity of the implementing agency and its
                                                                     partners (above all at the municipal level). FISE
                                                                     has prepared an institutional strengthening plan in
                                                                     order to ensure that the participating
                                                                     municipalities and communities are fully
                                                                     prepared to implement FISE’s ESMF. The ESMF
                                                                     takes into account this plan and clearly defines in
                                                                     detail the actions to be taken for institutional
                                                                     strengthening (e.g. training, technical assistance,
                                                                     etc.).
                                                                     The ESMF harmonizes with the assessments
                                                                     prepared and participatory processes undertaken
                                                                     as part of Project preparation, and these
                                                                     assessments and outcomes of the consultation
                                                                     process have been incorporated in consistency
                                                                     with the ESMF. Finally, the ESMF also covers
                                                                     the interventions proposed under Component 2
                                                                     and the elaboration of municipal and/or territorial
                                                                     plans for rural WSS (under sub-component 1.2.).
                                                                     These plans may be available at earlier stages of
                                                                     the Project to guide investments under other
                                                                     components of the Project. The principles and
                                                                     criteria included in the ESMF will be integrated
                                                                     to these plans to guide priorities and investments.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             The policy is triggered since some small works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     could coincide with natural habitats such as
                                                                     wetlands or native forests. However, these works
                                                                     will not represent a significant conversion, loss or
                                                                     degradation of natural habitats directly or
                                                                     indirectly. The ESMF has adopted the Bank’s
                                                                     natural habitats definition and contains guidance
                                                                     on the selection of the minor works in this Project
                                                                     as well as information on the location of
                                                                     protected areas, both of which should minimize
                                                                     any impacts on the coastal ecosystems and
                                                                     forests. No civil works are eligible which may
                                                                     have adverse impacts on natural habitats. The
                                                                     screening process for reviewing proposed sub-
                                                                     projects include criteria which explicitly excludes
                                                                     such works from Project support.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes             The Project has no impact on the management,
                                                                     utilization or protection of any forested areas.
                                                                     However, this policy is triggered because small
                                                                     areas with native forest, which cannot be


                                                             Page 6 of 16
                                                                         identified now due to the framework nature of the
                                                                         operation, could be slightly affected by the set-up
                                                                         of the proposed interventions. For these cases, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ESMF includes the procedures and measures to
                                                                         be followed to avoid unnecessary impact on
                                                                         native vegetation and to carry out restoration
                                                                         activities in the eventually affected sites.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              This policy is not triggered because there are no
                                                                         interventions of the Project involving the use of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             This policy is triggered because the type of
                         BP 4.11                                         work, including small excavations, could
                                                                         eventually expose cultural property. The ESMF
                                                                         contains measures and instructions in the case of
                                                                         any “chance finds” of archeological materials. A
                                                                         screening mechanism is included in the ESMF to
                                                                         screen for and mitigate potential impacts on
                                                                         cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Given the presence of Indigenous and Afro-
                                                                         Nicaraguan peoples in the Project area, the
                                                                         OP4.10 is triggered. FISE has prepared an
                                                                         Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples
                                                                         Planning Framework (IAPPF) on the basis of the
                                                                         Social Assessment and the lessons learned from
                                                                         the implementation of the Indigenous and Afro-
                                                                         Nicaraguan Peoples Plan (IAPP) under
                                                                         PRASNICA. The IAPPF also includes significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         inputs from the consultations carried out by
                                                                         FISE with the Regional Governments of the
                                                                         Autonomous Regions of RAAN and RAAS,
                                                                         Indigenous Authorities of the Pacific, Center and
                                                                         North, Indigenous Territories of Alto Wangki y
                                                                         Bokay, and RAAN. Moreover, a local consultant
                                                                         team carried out interviews with Mayors and
                                                                         UMAS, and separate focus groups with men and
                                                                         women in 16 communities of both the Pacific and
                                                                         Caribbean Regions. As the Project will target
                                                                         poor and extremely poor communities with 40%
                                                                         or more extreme poverty, it is expected that a
                                                                         large number of Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
                                                                         communities throughout the country, but
                                                                         particularly on the Caribbean Coast and the
                                                                         Indigenous Territories of the Caribbean Coast and
                                                                         the Pacific, Center and North regions, will benefit
                                                                         from the Project. The IAPPF implementation will
                                                                         use the Social Management Scheme set up for the
                                                                         Project but will ensure (a) Broad community


                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                                                        support on the part of the Indigenous
                                                                        communities and their authorities, regardless of
                                                                        the ethnic composition of the community; (b) Full
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        and meaningful participation in decision-making
                                                                        regarding the Project design of the water projects
                                                                        and households’ choices of sanitation system; and
                                                                        (c) Capacity building of the UMAS, ARAS,
                                                                        CAPS and hired promoters to prepare and
                                                                        implement Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
                                                                        Peoples Plan (IAPPs) for all the subprojects
                                                                        where the policy is triggered. The IAPPs will be
                                                                        prepared by the Community Facilitator, under the
                                                                        Supervision of the UMAS and ARAS, and with
                                                                        the support of the CAPS. A format to guide the
                                                                        preparation of the IAPPs will be elaborated
                                                                        during Project implementation to ensure a
                                                                        culturally-adequate treatment of ethnic groups,
                                                                        respectful of their cosmo-vision and forms of
                                                                        social organization. Public consultations on the
                                                                        IAPPF were held between November 26 and 29,
                                                                        2013 with 9 presidents of indigenous territorial
                                                                        groups, 12 representatives of the nine indigenous
                                                                        territories, 27 municipalities represented by two
                                                                        mayors and 27 technical staff (UMAS), four civil
                                                                        society organizations working in the rural WSS
                                                                        sector, four representatives of the RAAS and
                                                                        RAAN regional Governments, and two
                                                                        representatives of CAPS boards. It was disclosed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        on the FISE web page on December 4, 2013 and
                                                                        at the Bank’s website on December 5 2013.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The OP4.12 is triggered as the Project will build
                         4.12                                           small infrastructure for water systems, such as
                                                                        water tanks, wells, water pumps, etc. which may
                                                                        require the acquisition of small pieces of land for
                                                                        the construction of the facilities, or the
                                                                        resettlement of socialunits or economic activities
                                                                        occupying those particular pieces of land. Thus,
                                                                        FISE prepared an Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) which comprises the
                                                                        processes and procedures for identification,
                                                                        screening, and assessment of impacts, and the
                                                                        corresponding compensation of lost assets at full
                                                                        replacement cost. The RPF and its instruments
                                                                        are a stand-alone document and are also referred
                                                                        in the ESMF. It was agreed that involuntary
                                                                        resettlement should be avoided where feasible, or
                                                                        minimized, exploring all viable alternatives, but



                                                                Page 8 of 16
                                 where it is not feasible to avoid it, resettlement
                                 should be conceived and executed as sustainable
                                 development programs. The policy framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 covers direct economic and social impacts that
                                 both result from Bank-assisted investment
                                 projects, and are caused by the involuntary taking
                                 of land resulting in (i) relocation or loss of shelter
                                 (of social units or economic activities); (ii) loss of
                                 assets or access to assets, or (iii) loss of income
                                 sources or means of livelihood. The policy will
                                 apply to all components of the Project that result
                                 in resettlement, regardless of the source of
                                 financing. For the implementation of the policy, it
                                 was agreed that:
                                 (a)      As only small pieces of land may be
                                 required for the construction of water facilities
                                 (tanks, pumps, wells or other), the instrument
                                 foreseen to be used is the Abbreviated
                                 Resettlement Action Plan.
                                 (b)      A Resettlement Committee will be
                                 formed in FISE to foresee the preparation,
                                 implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
                                 RAPs.
                                 (c)      RAPs will either be prepared and
                                 implemented in-house by FISE or contracted out,
                                 but FISE will be responsible for monitoring and
                                 evaluation of resettlements.
                                 (d)      Since the application of the policy is new
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 to FISE, particular attention must be paid in cases
                                 where vulnerable groups, the extreme poor, the
                                 landless, the elderly, and Indigenous peoples are
                                 involved.
                                 (e)      As good practice, land acquisition and
                                 legalization will need to be resolved before a
                                 subproject is eligible for financing under the
                                 Project.
                                 (f)      The RPF includes institutional
                                 responsibilities regarding financing of land
                                 acquisition and resettlement costs and
                                 compensations at replacement value. Land
                                 acquisition will not be financed with Project
                                 funds. FISE will be responsible for coordinating
                                 with other entities (i.e. Municipalities, Housing
                                 Ministry, Ministry of the Family) for the
                                 acquisition of land and/or replacement housing in
                                 both the Project area, and the receiving
                                 communities.



                         Page 9 of 16
                                                                                 (g)      Technical assistance will be provided by
                                                                                 the Bank to FISE to ensure adequate handling of
                                                                                 the above Policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 The RPF was consulted on November 28, 2013
                                                                                 for the RAAN, on November 26, 27 and 29 for
                                                                                 the RAAS, and on November 27 for stakeholders
                                                                                 from the North and Central Pacific regions. It was
                                                                                 disclosed on the FISE web page on December 4,
                                                                                 2013 and at the Bank’s website on December 5
                                                                                 2013.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                 The Project will not finance the construction of
                                                                                 new or rehabilitation of existing dams nor will the
                                                                                 Project rely on the operation of existing dams.
                                                                                 The water systems supported by the Project
                                                                                 largely use wells as primary water source. There
                                                                                 are also some proposedsystems that catch water
                                                                                 in local streams, but without the need of a dam.
                                                                                 Any type of dams would be ineligible under this
                                                                                 Project.
                            Projects on International           Yes                This policy is triggered considering that some
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 beneficiary communities could be located in
                                                                                 transboundary watersheds. The main areas of
                                                                                 influence of OP 7.50 are the Alto Coco and Rio
                                                                                 San Juan watersheds. A riparian notification was
                                                                                 sent to the Governments of Costa Rica and
                                                                                 Honduras in compliance with this Policy on
                                                                                 October 31, 2013 in compliance with this policy.
                                                                                 The notification requested that comments to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 proposed activities be conveyed by November 29,
                                                                                 2013. No response has been received, and the
                                                                                 Association has determined to move ahead with
                                                                                 the processing of this operation.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    This policy is not triggered because there are no
                            7.60                                                 interventions of the Project in Disputed Areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project has been classified as Category B. It is expected to have an overall positive impact on
                              the environment, by generating positive impacts on environmental sustainability in the future
                              target areas by improving the access to potable water and sanitation.The Project will support rural,
                              dispersed and small scale civil works to provide water and sanitation, potentially also including
                              small condominial sanitation schemes. Safeguards triggered are Environmental Assessment (OP/
                              BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
                              4.11) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP7.50).


                                                                        Page 10 of 16
                           Many positive social impacts are expected from the Project, including: (a) the bulk of financing
                           will focus on providing complete WSS coverage to rural communities located in municipalities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with more than 40% extreme poverty, and 50% of the funds will be targeted to the Atlantic Coast;
                           (b) it will improve the local capacity of municipal WSS teams and community water boards to
                           manage WSS systems; (c) communities will review and approve the WSS models they can afford
                           (co-finance, operate and maintain), and hand-washing facilities will be mandatory in all sanitation
                           solutions; (d) land tenure of spaces used for construction of water facilities will be secured
                           beforehand to avoid legal conflicts later; and (e) better access to WSS services is expected to
                           contribute to improved health, particularly in young children. A Social Management Scheme
                           (including consultations) is embedded in the Project design to ensure social participation before,
                           during and after the public works. No negative impacts are foreseen.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated as a result of the proposed civil
                           works. These consist of relatively small civil works which are not expected to generate significant
                           environmental impact. But in light of the fact that Central America is a natural disaster-prone area,
                           site selection and design and installation of water tanks (reservoirs) and pumping stations will take
                           into account the specific natural constraints to minimize risks to the public and the environment.
                           Water tanks (reservoirs) construction will be designed to withstand major natural disasters (i.e.
                           earthquakes, floods, landslides). As appropriate, each civil works contract would specify the
                           required structural safety and exposure to natural hazards to be considered in the design and
                           construction of water and sanitation facilities. A rigorous monitoring and quality assurance
                           procedure will be included in the contracts to ensure compliance with environmental health and
                           safety standards as outlined in the ESMF.

                           As with the PRASNICA experience, positive long term social impacts are expected, particularly in
                           regions inhabited by Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan peoples, as their communities will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           empowered and their regional and territorial Governments will be strengthened to solidify their
                           relationship with FISE, and the World Bank, paving the way for future projects.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None for the Project as a whole; however, FISE requires each sub-project to consider at least 2
                           alternatives in a report that takes into account basic environmental requirements and a site
                           evaluation.

                           No adverse social impacts are expected, provided the Social Management Scheme and procedures
                           set out in the IAPPF for the preparation and implementation of the IAPPs are followed. The ORID
                           Bureau and the Operations Bureau of Central FISE will be responsible for overseeing a
                           satisfactory implementation of the policies. ORID is also responsible for training FISE
                           Delegations, Municipal WSS Units (UMAS) and Community Water Boards (CAPS). The Project
                           includes an institutional strengthening plan for FISE.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Safeguards. The Borrower has a system of environmental management to manage
                           minor and expected Project impacts which has been strengthened during the implementation of the
                           Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project – PRASNICA (P106283). This system has been


                                                                     Page 11 of 16
                         mainstreamed in the Project’s ESMF; therefore, FISE has the necessary experience to manage the
                         environmental impacts of this Project. Currently, FISE employs a qualified ecologist and, in 2012,
                         FISE hired an environmental consultant to reinforce the environmental management unit. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         addition, and as part of the expansion associated to this loan, FISE will hire two Consultant
                         experts to ensure field supervision. FISE also has experience coordinating with at least 20
                         technical specialists (architects and engineers) in their 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua.
                         While FISE is responsible to ensure safeguards compliance and implementation, the on-going
                         management system relays many technical decisions to decentralized units in municipalities led by
                         municipal experts whose capacity will be strengthened as part of Project activities. The ESMF also
                         details the requirements and criteria in order to ensure the institutional strengthening at the
                         municipal levels, including (i) training sessions on the use of the ESMF at the municipal and
                         community levels and (ii) workshops to exchange experiences among municipalities. The ESMF
                         details each role and responsibilities for environmental management. Participating municipalities
                         and communities will adopt the use of the ESMF as legally binding document as determined by
                         the agreements to be signed with the FISE in order to access to the Project financing.
                         Overall, central technical capacity within FISE is adequate; however the Environmental
                         Management Unit will deepen the technical analysis of the proposed interventions considering
                         their impacts in a broader scale, taking into account the level of degradation of watersheds as well
                         as the area of influence of the interventions and their eventual effect on the environmental flows.
                         These technical aspects have been strengthened by including specific requirements in the Project’s
                         ESMF and by planning technical exchanges and study tours for the FISE environmental staff.
                         These activities are part of the ESMF. In addition, this wider approach for environmental issues at
                         a micro basin level will be adopted during the elaboration of municipal and/or territorial plans for
                         rural WSS (under subcomponent 1.2) which may be available at earlier stages of the Project to
                         guide investments under the Project’s other components. It is expected that these plans will
                         identify the environmental restrictions and opportunities for WSS in rural areas.
                         In terms of specific experience with implementation of World Bank safeguards, FISE has adopted
                         an ESMF which has been prepared for an on-going Bank financed operation (PRASNICA,
                         P106283) and was updated and revised during the preparation of Adaptation of Nicaragua’s Water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Supplies to Climate Change Project (PACCAS, P127088). The Prasnica Additional Financing
                         (P132102) used the ESMF prepared for the PACCAS and also included a Safeguards Diagnostic
                         Review which found FISE’s environmental management to be satisfactory. Overall safeguards
                         compliance remains Satisfactory under these ongoing operations. FISE has been carrying out
                         environmental supervision visits to sub-project sites, and has also been quite proactive in securing
                         environmental documentation for the purposes of different projects. No remedial actions have
                         been identified. Some gaps have been detected in the definition of the technical scope in TORs
                         (for baseline studies, definition of area of influence, ecology of water bodies, wetlands
                         conservation) and in the effective capacity to supervise a sub-project in the field, which involves
                         multiple interventions in remote and non-accessible areas. It is therefore expected that
                         environmental supervision will continue to be satisfactory under the proposed Project, which
                         builds on these prior arrangements. The ESMF for the Project has included all the measure and
                         procedures to address this capacity gaps.

                         Social Safeguards.

                         OP 4.10. Indigenous Peoples. FISE benefited from the implementation of the Indigenous and
                         Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plan under PRASNICA. In fact, the IAPP implemented under
                         PRASNICA successfully paved the way for the Project (P147006). Some measures taken by FISE
                         to comply with the policy are: (a) Consultations on the proposed operation and the institutional

                                                                  Page 12 of 16
                          arrangements for implementation were carried out with regional Governments of RAAN and
                          RAAS, and with territorial Governments in communities of RAAN, RAAS and Pacific, Center
                          and North regions; (b) free, prior and informed consultations with eight communities on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pacific, Center and North regions and with eight communities of the Caribbean Region were
                          carried out during Project preparation; (c) The Operational Manual MEPAS and the Annex for the
                          Caribbean Coast was revi sed by the GRAAN and GRAAS ; (d) The Manual for the Community-
                          Managed projects (PGC) was approved; (e) The Manual of Sanitation Options for the Caribbean
                          Coast was elaborated and approved by the GRAAN and GRAAS, and approved by FISE.
                          Moreover, FISE has carried out numerous Trainings (AVAR, FECSA, etc.) on WSS Sectorial,
                          Management, Administrative, Social and Environmental topics, for the regional and territorial
                          Governments, regional advisors, municipal Governments, and the Water Boards (CAPS) at the
                          community level.

                           For the present Project preparation (P147006), FISE carried out the consultations described above,
                           including Consultations in Bilwi with the regional Government of GRAAN, to present them the
                           proposed Project’s objectives, goals and implementation arrangements. On the basis of all
                           consultations, FISE prepared the Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Planning Framework
                           (IAPPF) which was subsequently consulted with communities together with the Resettlement
                           Policy Framework and the Environmental Framework. Public consultations on the IAPPF, RPF
                           and ESMF were held between November 26 and 29, 2013 with 9 presidents of indigenous
                           territorial groups, 12 representatives of the nine indigenous territories, 27 municipalities
                           represented by two mayors and 27 technical staff (UMAS), four civil society organizations
                           working in the rural WSS sector, four representatives of the RAAS and RAAN regional
                           Governments, and two representatives of CAPS boards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are found at the Central, Regional, Municipal and Local levels. Those consulted
                           were:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           At the Regional Level:
                           (a) Regional Governments of RAAN and RAAS,
                           (b) Important stakeholders are the FISE Regional Advisors (ARAS), whose radius of action is in
                           the regions, and who report to the WSS Office at FISE.
                           At the Municipal Level: Mayors and their Water and Sanitation Units (UMAS).
                           A sample of Mayors and their Municipal WSS Units in the Caribbean Region were consulted by
                           an independent consultant team, as part of the Social Assessment.
                           At Territorial Level:
                           (a) The territorial Governments (15 in RAAN), and several in the Pacific, Center and North
                           regions, and
                           (b) The territorial Governments of Alto Wangki y Bokay (Department of Jinotega). Consultations
                           with territorial Governments were carried out by FISE’s ORID department.
                           At Local Level:
                           (a)      Water Boards (CAPS). A sample of Water Boards of the Caribbean Region was consulted
                           as part of the consultations for the Social Assessment, carried out by an independent consultant.
                           (b)      Communities: A sample of eight communities in the Pacific, Center and North Regions
                           and 8 communities on the Caribbean Coast were consulted on their traditional knowledge of
                           protection of water sources, preserving Indigenous knowledge, their vision of water and its
                           utilization, and their experience with water and sanitation projects.
                           An ESMF including criteria for screening investments, environmental assessment, mitigation


                                                                    Page 13 of 16
                           measures, roles and responsibilities for environmental and social management and institutional
                           strengthening measures, has been prepared, reviewed with key stakeholders, and disclosed in
                           accordance with World Bank guidelines. Consultations on the ESMF, the Indigenous and Afro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nicaraguan Peoples Framework (IAPPF), and the Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF) took place on November 28, 2013 for the RAAN. Consultations for the RAAS took place
                           on the 26, 27 and 29 November 2013. Stakeholders from the North and Central pacific were
                           consulted in 27 November 2013. Feedback from consultations has been recorded by the Project
                           and incorporated in the final version of the three instruments. No major issues or concerns were
                           identified during the consultation process. The final version of the instruments were disclosed on
                           the FISE website on December 4, 2013 and on the World Bank’s Infoshop on December 5, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nicaragua                                                        04-Dec-2013
                           Comments: http://www.fise.gob.ni/documentos.asp?idlvl=57&nivelsel=16
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nicaragua                                                        04-Dec-2013
                           Comments: http://www.fise.gob.ni/documentos.asp?idlvl=57&nivelsel=16
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nicaragua                                                        04-Dec-2013
                           Comments: http://www.fise.gob.ni/documentos.asp?idlvl=57&nivelsel=16
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?

                                                                    Page 14 of 16
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                     Page 15 of 16
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Greg J. Browder (SM)                        Date: 02-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
