                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                             APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 6/12/2015                                                      Report No.:    86957
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Nigeria                                   Project ID: P120207
Project Name: Nigeria Power Sector Guarantees Project
Task Team Leader: Erik Magnus Fernstrom
Estimated Appraisal Date: 26-March-2014            Estimated Board Date: 1-May-2014
Managing Unit: AFTG2                               Lending Instrument: PRG
Sector: Power (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                0
IDA Amount (US$m.):                 0
GEF Amount (US$m.):                 0
PCF Amount (US$m.):                 0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                               0.00
         IBRD Guarantee (up to)                                             395.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                              Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
                                                                          Yes [ ]    No [X]
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development object of the PSGP Project is to increase the supply of electricity to the
Nigerian consumers.

3. Project Description - Description of the PRG Series
The proposed Series of PRGs (the Series) will support the implementation of the Roadmap for
Power Sector Reforms. Each PRG will support a specific transaction, such as a greenfield IPP, a
GENCO privatization, or a DISCO privatization. Each of the transactions supported will fall
under one of the PRG Series Sub-Components (described below) and the commercial, technical,
economic, financial, safeguards due diligence will be similar for each transaction as described in
this PAD. The PRG Series will support transactions on a first-come-first-served basis. As per the
FGN’s request and FGN’s borrowing plan with the Bank, the proposed Series is initially expected
to be capped at US$700 million in the form of IBRD PRG support. Guarantees will be provided
in support of private transactions, as and when such transactions are ready. The proposed support
(up to US$395 million) for Azura Power and Exxon QIPP will form an integral part of the series.
Subsequent transactions will be presented to the Board for approval as additional financing to the
PSGP PRG Series.

The proposed Series contains: Component 1: PRG Series with three sub-components based on the
type of transactions supported:
             (i) Sub-Component 1: Greenfield IPP Transactions;
             (ii) Sub-Component 2: Privatization of GENCOs; and
             (iii) Sub-Component 3: Privatization of DISCOs.
Sub-Component 1: Greenfield IPP Transactions: Support to greenfield IPPs will include the
option of both credit enhancement for NBET and private debt mobilization support, i.e.: (a) the
NBET credit enhancement guarantee, with or without Letter of Credit; (b) the commercial debt
mobilization guarantee; or (c) a combination of both forms of guarantees. The first generation of
fully project financed IPPs will need a reasonable securitization package to close, as most of the
key agreements with responsible government institutions (such as NBET, Market Operator,
NERC) have yet to be tested. The FGN has agreed to provide a backing of NBET’s obligations
and a combination of termination and liquidity cover through MIGA/IBRD. As the commercial
framework and market performance is confirmed, subsequent pipeline transactions should expect
gradually lower securitization support both in terms of outright FGN support to NBET as well as
WBG guarantee instruments until the market develops to the point where willing buyer-willing
seller transactions are possible. Annex 2 provides a brief description of the pipeline for greenfield
IPPs. Two greenfield IPP transactions have been identified for PRG support (the Azura Edo and
the Qua Iboe IPPs). These are described below in more detail. Additional IPPs are being
identified for support as transactions mature.

Sub-Component 2: Privatization of GENCOs: The structures of the PRGs in support of the
GENCOs will be similar in terms to greenfield IPPs. The PRGs could support the initial capital
mobilization that is anticipated to be carried out by the new owners of the 6 new GENCOs. New
finances could be used for expansion of the available capacity of the plants or for rehabilitation of
the currently installed but unavailable capacity. The PRG support will be for: (a) the NBET credit
enhancement guarantee, with or without Letter of Credit; (b) the commercial debt mobilization
guarantee; or (c) a combination of both forms of guarantees. However, currently, the capital
expenditure (CAPEX) plans are being developed by the new owners who have recently taken
over the GENCOs. Annex 2 provides a description of all the privatized GENCOs (not the
prioritization of transactions). The privatized GENCOs include both gas fired as well as
hydropower companies.

Sub-Component 3: Privatization of DISCOs: It is important that each link in the energy value
chain be fully functional for the reforms to be effective. The ability, therefore, of the DISCOs to
successfully turn around dismal customer service levels and improve revenues flows to finance
investments upstream in the value chain will make or break the power sector reform efforts. The
PRG structures available to DISCOs may fall into one of the following categories: (a) commercial
debt mobilization guarantee; and/or (b) regulatory risk guarantee (draft Term Sheets in Annex
10).The PRGs to be provided under sub-component 3 are necessary to ensure the DISCOs are
able to attract the CAPEX financing required to implement the investment plans proposed by the
new owners, and provide confidence to commercial lenders that the regulatory process will not be
reversed. The criteria used for selecting DISCOs will include, inter alia, their revenue potential,
cost effectiveness (using population density as a proxy), industrial customer base and access to
electricity generation. Out of the 11 DISCOs being privatized, four have been identified as
advanced stage candidates: Abuja DISCO, Benin DISCO, Eko DISCO, and Ikeja DISCO. Annex
2 provides a description of the four DISCOs.

The First Two IPP Transactions in the PRG Series (Under Sub-Component 1)

The first two front-runner transactions (up to US$395 million) are fully described in this PAD. By
mitigating the uncertainty that these frontrunner transactions face, the PRG Series will augment
the reforms and build market confidence and set industry benchmarks. The successful
implementation of the first set of transactions will be critical to the success of the power reform
agenda, as it will confirm the viability of the financial, transactional and regulatory systems put in
place under the reform program. In the longer term, as Nigeria’s power sector reforms progress
through the transitional phase, it is expected that the need for risk mitigation will decrease, as
NERC, NBET, and TCN establish track records of successful financial and operational
performance. The FGN has nominated, as transactions that require credit enhancement and debt
mobilization support in the short to medium term, a total of 18 new greenfield IPPs, 6 privatized
GENCOs, and 11 privatized DISCOs. This PAD presents the PRG design for the complete Series
and appraises the overall scope of the universe of transactions to be supported. It also presents the
first two greenfield IPP transactions for Board approval. A pipeline of IPPs, GENCOs, and
DISCOs that are in advanced stage of preparation has been established and will be considered for
PRGs when mature. Subsequent PRGs will be presented to the Board as additional financing to
the PSGP.

The first two IPP transactions will increase the installed power generation capacity by around
1,000 MW, and deploy nearly US$2 billion in financing, which includes about US$1.7 billion of
private capital. The initial set of greenfield IPP transactions proposed for PRG coverage are as
follows: Azura Edo IPP (Azura) and Qua Iboe IPP (QIPP). These initial transactions inherently
possess a higher level of risk and require diligent support in order to achieve success. In the long
term, the risks as well as costs of such transactions are expected to reduce. The two greenfield
IPP transactions that have been identified for PRG support under Sub-Component 1 are described
as follows (draft Term Sheets in Annex 10):

        a) Transaction 1: Azura Edo IPP (up to US$245 million): The Azura Edo IPP
           includes: (a) The NBET credit enhancement guarantee (up to US$120 million), and
           (b) The commercial debt mobilization guarantee (up to US$125 million). This open-
           cycle gas-fired power plant is being developed by Azura Power West Africa Limited
           (the “Company?), a Special Purpose Vehicle (“SPV?) incorporated in Nigeria, with
           the sole purpose of developing a 459 MW open-cycle gas power plant located in the
           vicinity of Benin City, in Edo State, Nigeria. The Sponsors are: (a) Amaya Capital
           Ltd., a principal investment firm and majority investor in Azura Power Holdings
           Ltd., its dedicated vehicle for investing in IPPs and the power distribution sector in
           Africa, jointly owned with the American Capital Energy and Infrastructure Fund, a
           fund managed by American Capital Ltd.; (b) Aldwych International Ltd.
           (“Aldwych?), an international power developer focusing on Sub -Saharan Africa; (c)
           African Infrastructure Investment Fund 2 (“AIIF2?), an Africa -focused fund
           managed by the Macquarie Group and Old Mutual which will invest through both its
           Rand-denominated and US$-denominated vehicles; and (d) Asset and Resource
           Management Ltd., a leading Nigerian asset manager. The Sponsors are investing in
           the Company through Azura Edo Ltd. (the “Shareholder?), an SPV incorporated in
           Mauritius. The Edo State Government, the local State authority, is also expected to
           have a 2.5 percent shareholding in the Company. The Power Plant will be located in
           Edo State and will have an installed capacity of about 1,000 MW, developed in two
           phases (a first phase of 459 MW and a second phase of 500 MW. It is possible that
           the Company later converts the first phase project into a combined cycle plant and
           then adds ‘Phase 3’ thus the total capacity could reach 1,500MW). The Plant is
           expected to include 4 high voltage (15 kV to 330 kV) transformers, one for each of
           the generator sets and a switchyard that is designed to accommodate additional
           capacity in the event that plant is converted into combined-cycle. Power will be
           evacuated from the switchyard through a single tower on a new 330 kV transmission
           line connecting the plant to the adjacent 300/132 kV new Benin North substation,
           currently under construction. Total transaction costs are estimated at US$813 million,
           expected to be financed on 72.5:27.5 debt-to-equity ratio. The most advanced of the
           IPPs, Azura has already executed its PPA with NBET as part of the Presidential
           Signing Ceremony held 22 April 2013 in Abuja, although certain aspects, such as the
           security package provided by NBET under the PPA, and termination provisions
           under the Put Call Option Agreement (PCOA), including the final PRG terms, are
           being finalized.

           (a) Transaction 2: Qua Iboe IPP (up to US$150 million): The Qua Iboe IPP includes
           the NBET credit enhancement guarantee (up to US$150 million). This 533 MW
           combined-cycle gas-turbine (CCGT) power plant is being developed by a Joint
           Venture (JV) between Mobil Producing Nigeria Unlimited (MPN) and the Nigerian
           National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC). MPN is a wholly owned indirect affiliate
           of Exxon Mobil Corporation, and is the operator of the JV. The JV is involved in the
           exploration, development, and production of several oil and gas concessions in
           Nigeria. The power plant will be constructed in Ibeno, Akwa Ibom State, on the
           south-eastern coast of Nigeria. The JV will also be responsible for the construction of
           a new, 58-km, 330 kV double-circuit transmission line connecting the plant to the
           new Ikot Abasi substation. The new substation at Ikot Abasi is part of a larger plan
           being progressed by the Transmission Company of Nigeria and the Niger Delta
           Power Holding Company Ltd. to extend the grid from Ikot Ekpene to Ikot Abasi
           through a new 78 km transmission line that is scheduled to be completed by mid-
           2014. Selection of EPC contractors for the power plant and the transmission line is
           being finalized. QIPP has met the disclosure and consultation requirements for its
           power plant ESIA. The Nigerian Electricity Regulatory Commission has issued MPN
           the requisite power generation license. Total cost of the power plant is estimated at
           US$1 billion. Transmission line is estimated to cost US$136 million. Major
           agreements underpinning the project, e.g. the PPA and PCOA, are being finalized.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
The project is national in scope. The PRGs will cover payments for electricity that will be
supplied to the national grid (through existing or new associated infrastructure).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (GENDR)
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
   Mr Amos Abu (GENDR)
6. Applicable Environmental and Safeguards Policies

VII. Environmental and Social Safeguards

Performance Standards (PS) for Azura IPP

     Performance Standards (PS)                                                         Triggered
    PS 1. Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts          YES
    PS 2. Labor and Working Conditions                                                     YES
    PS 3. Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                                     YES
    PS 4. Community Health, Safety and Security                                            YES
    PS 5. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                                    YES
    PS 6. Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural            NO
    Resources
    PS 7. Indigenous People                                                                 NO
    PS 8. Cultural Heritage                                                                YES

   Performance Standards (PS) for QIPP
Performance Standards (PS)                                                            Triggered
PS 1. Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts            YES
PS 2. Labor and Working Conditions                                                       YES
PS 3. Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                                       YES
PS 4. Community Health, Safety and Security                                              YES
PS 5. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                                      YES
PS 6. Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural             YES
Resources
PS 7. Indigenous People                                                                  NO
PS 8. Cultural Heritage                                                                  YES

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

        1.      PRG Series

The PRG Series is classified as ‘Category A’ because of its geographical extent and the power
sector investments it will support - a number of which have major environmental impacts. World
Bank Performance Standards (PSs) for Projects Supported by the Private Sector (OP 4.03) apply
to the Azura IPP, QIPP, and subsequent transactions in this Series. Environmental and social
safeguards appraisal has been carried out by the joint WBG team. The safeguards preparation
approach for PSGP is consistent with the overall project processing arrangement, in which two
PRGs are presented for Board approval now, and subsequent investments for which PRGs are
being sought will be presented to the Board as additional financing. A prerequisite for Board
presentation of any investment will be completion and disclosure of the appropriate safeguards
instruments satisfactory to the Bank. In Nigeria, ESIA drafts are disclosed in the project-affected
area as part of the FMEnv review process that includes a public hearing and comment period. If
the draft disclosed by FMEnv has already been cleared by the Bank, this disclosure will also
satisfy the disclosure requirement of PS 1; otherwise, the proponent will make a separate in-
country disclosure after Bank clearance. Depending on investment type and setting, the main
environmental impact management instrument to satisfy PS 1 requirements will be one of the
following:

            (i) For new IPPs – a full ESIA: The IPPs nominated by FGN are all gas-fired
            generation plants of moderate size, many if not all of which would be classified in
            Category B if they were being supported as individual transactions. None of the
            power plants under consideration is expected to be located on or near critical natural
            habitats. However, FMEnv has been requiring full ESIAs for these plants, and the
            Bank will do the same. Ancillary facilities, the most significant of which are gas
            pipelines and power transmission lines, will be covered in the IPP ESIA when they
            are being constructed by the developer. When they are being constructed by NGC or
            TCN and thus have separate ESIAs in accordance with Nigerian regulations, those
            ESIAs will also have to be acceptable to the Bank, disclosed, and included in the
            documentation for Board presentation. Where a new IPP requires land acquisition, a
            RAP will also have to be acceptable to the Bank, disclosed and included in the Board
            presentation.

            (ii) For privatization of existing generating facilities: Depending on the
            characteristics of the individual transactions, GENCO privatizations (which may be
            gas fired or hydropower plants) will be treated as Category A or B under PSGP. An
            environmental audit acceptable to the Bank, including a remedial action plan to
            address deficiencies, risks, or legacy issues identified in the audit. The decision on
            disclosure of an audit will be made on a case-by-case basis with the client; some
            audits contain information that is sensitive from a security standpoint, and others do
            not. Clear responsibilities for implementation of the various elements of the action
            plan will have to be spelled out in the legal agreements for the privatization.

            (iii) For privatization of distribution companies: Privatization of distribution
            companies would be classified in Category B if it were being financed as a separate
            transaction. The investments the DISCOs will need to make in their respective
            systems may not be known with certainty at the time a PRG is issued. They are
            unlikely to require full ESIAs under World Bank or Government procedures, but new
            infrastructure investments by the DISCOs will need some level of environmental
            assessment culminating in formulation of environmental and social management
            plans (ESMP). For work at existing substations or other facilities that may be
            included in a DISCOs program, an environmental audit will be conducted as a first
            step in the implementation process to determine the physical state of the facilities, the
            viability of investing in their rehabilitation from an environmental management
            perspective, and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with the
            rehabilitation project. Under these circumstances, an Environmental and Social
            Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide DISCOs in carrying out
            the necessary environmental and social assessments or audits and preparing the
             appropriate safeguards instrument for each distribution system PRG. The level of
             detail and rigor in the assessment or audit should be consistent with Category B.
In addition to the safeguards instruments for individual investments, FGN will undertake a
Sectoral Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (SESIA) for development of gas-fired
generating plants in Nigeria. The terms of reference for the SESIA have been drafted by the
Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) in PHCN, approved in draft by the Bank, and
presented for stakeholder consultation at a workshop conducted by ERSU on 24 October, 2012.
Comments and recommendations from the stakeholders have been taken into consideration in the
final terms of reference. The SESIA will be conducted early in PSGP implementation, reviewed
and approved by the Bank, disclosed, and made available to IPP developers to inform the ESIAs
for their respective investments.

        2.      First Two IPP Transactions

The Azura Edo site is in a disturbed area that would not be considered natural habitat. Azura is
acquiring land from two communities and have prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
approved by the Bank for this purpose. The Azura Edo plant will receive gas through short
pipeline spurs from the Escravos-Lagos Pipeline System (ELPS) that has already been the subject
of a Pipeline Integrity Study conducted for WAGP and updated for NEGIP. The plant will
evacuate power to nearby TCN substations through short transmission lines - less than 1 km for
Azura Edo. PS 8 applies to the project because the land being acquired for Azura Edo contains
some shrines and sacred areas of local cultural importance. In addition, the excavation of the
power plants’ sites and ancillary activities relating to gas pipelines and mounting of the
transmission lines may lead to chance finds of physical cultural properties. The Azura Edo ESIA
and RAP provide for protection of known cultural resources, and the ESMPs for all plants will
include measures to protect chance finds. PS 2, 3, and 4 also apply because of the industrial
nature of the power plant workplaces, their emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases, and
the risks, albeit minor, that gas-fired power plants and gas pipelines pose to nearby communities.
The requirements of all triggered performance standards are met in the ESMPs included in the
ESIAs with the exception of PS 5, for which RAPs are prepared. The ESRS was disclosed on
September 5, 2013.

QIPP Plant will receive gas from the offshore Oso platform via a pipeline which will land at the
NNPC/MPN’s Qua Iboe Terminal that abuts the plant site. Its power will be transmitted to TCN’s
Ikot Abasi Substation through a 58-km line that will be operated by TCN. The QIPP transmission
line crosses small amounts of swamp forest and other wetland, and also affects crops and
productive trees. The routing of the line was designed to minimize impact on populated areas.
The QIPP plant site is disturbed land. PS 2, 3, and 4 apply because of the industrial nature of the
power plant workplaces, their emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases, and the risks,
albeit minor, that gas-fired power plants and gas pipelines pose to nearby communities. PS 5, 6
and 8 because the project’s gas pipeline and transmission line pass through some natural habitats,
the project may involve or affect physical cultural resources, and it will require acquisition of
land currently used for agricultural production. The requirements of all triggered performance
standards are met in the ESMPs included in the ESIAs with the exception of PS 5, for which a
RAP has been prepared. The ESIAs for the QIPP plant and QIPP transmission line were disclosed
respectively on 19 June 2012 and 13 December 2012. The RAP for the QIPP transmission line
was disclosed on 1 November 2013. The ESRS was disclosed by MIGA on June 17, 2014.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The ESMPs included in the ESIAs for the two plants indicate that nearly all potential adverse
environmental, social, and health and safety impacts can be mitigated to low levels. None of the
residual impacts are considered major, and the few that are predicted to be moderate after
mitigation are: reduction in local biodiversity due to site clearing (Azura-Edo), and short-term
noise impacts during construction at both locations. Loss of wetland associated with the QIPP
transmission line is being minimized by modification of the originally-proposed alignment.
Quantitative models were employed to analyze impacts on air quality and noise levels during
plant operation – a process that involved consideration of cumulative impacts for the Azura-Edo
plant because of the proximity of another emission source, the Ihovbor power plant. Modeling
results predicted no violations of World Bank Group or WHO guidelines. Both plants would
contribute to greenhouse gas emissions but to a much smaller extent than the most likely
alternative power sources (fuel oil, coal, or individual diesel generators). Moderate positive
impacts would occur in the forms of short-term employment during construction, service
contracts for local firms during construction and operation, and training for local people to
prepare them for possible longer-term employment at the plants.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts. Other energy sources and fuel types were considered but determined either to
be not feasible or less desirable environmentally. Alternative locations were examined, and the
selections made were based on a combination of proximity to load, proximity to gas supply, and
proximity to grid connection points. Alternative alignments were examined for the QIPP
transmission line, and the selected alignment was one that minimized resettlement and wetland
loss.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Prior to the commencement of construction, Azura will appoint an Environmental, Health and
Safety (EHS) professional and a community liaison officer both of whom will report to Azura’s
General Manager. The EHS professional and the community liaison officer will have the
responsibility for overseeing the development and implementation of the ESMP. Azura will
establish an overarching policy defining the environmental and social objectives and principles
that will guide the Project to achieve sound EHS and Social performance and as such the ESMP
and IFC’s ESAP will be the basis of developing the thematic points of detailed management
programs to support the policy objectives. These management programs will be compliant with
IFC Performance Standards, WBG General and Thermal Power Plant EHS Guidelines, WHO
standards, and Nigerian standards.

MPN implements an Operations Integrity Management System (OIMS) to manage the Security,
Safety, Health and Environmental (SSHE) risks inherent in its business operations. The OIMS
provides a disciplined management framework, which will apply to all phases of the Project.
MPN shall require the EPC contractors to have SSHE management systems in place comparable
to the OIMS system. Within OIMS, MPN has an Environmental Management System (EMS) and
Occupational Health and Safety System (OHS) to methodically identify, assess and manage
Project activities that may potentially result in significant OHS and environmental impacts,
including monitoring of contractors.

NBET will rely on the Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) of the project
implementation unit for NEGIP and NEDP for the management of safeguard policies. ERSU has
demonstrated satisfactory capacity to address impacts of power project and associated facilities;
in fact, the ERSU prepared both the ESMF and the RPF for NEGIP. NEGIP, TDP and NEDP
supervision missions have shown that the ERSU's capacity to implement the ESMF properly for
those projects is fully adequate. ERSU has overseen audits of substations, prepared ESMPs, and
supervised preparation of RAPs and implementation of ESMPs for substation and distribution
line improvements and extensions.

In addition to the safeguards instruments for individual investments, FGN will undertake a
Sectoral Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (SESIA) for development of gas-fired
generating plants in Nigeria. The terms of reference for the SESIA have been drafted by the
ERSU, approved in draft by the Bank, and presented for stakeholder consultation at a workshop
conducted by ERSU on 24 October, 2012. Comments and recommendations from the
stakeholders have been taken into consideration in the final terms of reference. The SESIA will
be conducted early in PSGP implementation, reviewed and approved by the Bank, disclosed, and
made available to IPP developers to inform the ESIAs for their respective investments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Azura ESIA includes a detailed socio-economic assessment, stakeholder engagement and
disclosure process. The RAP includes a detailed stakeholder engagement plan. A significant
number of meetings took place between May 2010 and February 2012 such as preliminary
community engagement exercise prior to socio-economic and valuation survey; valuation
methodology; review of data collection; consultation with vulnerable groups, youth groups, and
local traders; and address of grievances. Furthermore, Affected People and communities had the
opportunity for informed participation in key phases of resettlement planning, as such, a series of
meetings were held with community leaders, appointed community valuers, and the State
Government to discuss entitlement matrix and gain feedback which were taken into account in
finalizing the draft RAP for disclosure. Stakeholders in the project-affected area participated in
the public hearing convened by FMEnv as part of the national ESIA review procedure. The
issues identified have been/will be addressed in the respective assessments undertaken and
management plans such as: (i) Local Employment and Procurement Policy; (ii) Local
Employment Strategy; (iii) Comprehensive Community Investment Plan; (iv) Traffic
Management Plan; and (v) Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan. There were no
specific objections to the Project which is generally perceived as an opportunity to bring further
development in the areas. As per its Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Azura Power will maintain a
formal procedure for communications with the regulatory authorities and communities. The
community liaison officer will be responsible for disseminating information, handling grievances
and coordinating community communications through the course of the Project.

The QIPP ESIA includes a detailed socio-economic assessment and stakeholder engagement and
disclosure process. MPN has community relations principles and guidelines, which will be the
basis of developing a project-specific Community Engagement Plan. The MPN guideline outlines
a standard engagement procedure that is designed to provide transparent, two-way engagement
with stakeholders. A Grievance Redress Mechanism is included as part of the RAP and the
Community Engagement Plan will include a grievance redress procedure. In addition to
consultations during ESIA preparation and participation in preparation of the RAP, stakeholders
in the project-affected area participated in the public hearings convened by FMEnv as part of the
national ESIA review procedure. Key issues identified by stakeholders included impacts on
human health from air emissions and degradation of land and water resources. Communities
along the transmission line were primarily concerned about impacts on land use and
compensation. In addition, communities requested infrastructure improvements and other
economic benefits, including local employment opportunities, and provision of electricity. Details
of all the issues raised and interactions with the various stakeholders are included in the EIA. The
extent of the information provided about the project was considered to be adequate and the
stakeholder comments were considered to be free in their expression.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02/01/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    03/05/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03/05/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02/01/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    03/06/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03/06/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

PS1. - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [ x ] No [ ]               N/A [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ x ]   No [ ]               N/A [ ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the ESAP incorporated in Yes [ x ] No [ ]               N/A [ ]
the credit/loan?
PS 2. – Labor and Working Conditions
Does a Human resources policy has been agreed on as part of the    Yes [ x ] No [ ]               N/A [ ]
ESMS?
PS 3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Does the EA adequately address pollution prevention, control and Yes [ x ]   No [ ]               N/A [ ]
abatement issues?
Is a separate PMP/VMP required?                                     Yes [ ]    No [ ]   N/A [ x ]
If yes, has the PMP/VMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP/VMP                Yes [ ]    No [ ]   N/A [x ]
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project
team include a Specialist?
PS 4. Community Health, Safety and Security
Does the EA adequately address communities and workers              Yes [ x ]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
exposure to hazards and safety issues?
Has an Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) been Yes [ x ]           No [ ]   N/A [ ]
prepared in stand-alone or as part of the ESAP?
PS 5. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     Yes [x ]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?                                     Yes [x ]    No [ ]   N/A [ x ]
PS 6. Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
Does the project result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes []    No [ x ]  N/A [ ]
natural habitats or threatening of endangered/iconic species?
Have Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) been prepared                   Yes []    No [ ]   N/A [ x]
Does the project design include satisfactory mitigation measures    Yes [x]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
acceptable to the Bank?
PS 7. Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected            Yes [ ]    No [ ]   N/A [x ]
Indigenous Peoples?
PS8. –Cultural Heritage
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [x]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public
place in a form and language that are understandable and            Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Performance Standards
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to performance standards?
Have costs related to safeguard measures been included in the       Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to         Yes [X]    No [ ]   N/A [ ]
performance standards?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project Yes [X]     No [ ]   N/A [ ]
legal documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom   07/01/2015
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Thomas E. Walton        07/01/2015
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paula F. Lytle          07/01/2015
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Amos Abu
Social Development Specialist(s):                              07/01/2015

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Hanneke van Tilburg        07/01/2015
  Comments:
Practice Manager                    Meike van Ginneken         07/01/2015
  Comments:
