                                                                                                                                 90304
                                        INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE

    Date prepared/updated: August 25, 2014

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

          . P roJec
    1 Bas1c
      0
                . tD ata
     Country: Federal Republic ofNigeria                                        Project ID: Pl46319
                                                                                Additional Project ID (if any):
      Project Name: Development Finance Project
      Task Team Leader: Arnaud Dome!, Andrej Popovic
      Estimated Appraisal Date: June 20, 2014        Estimated Board Date: September 25,2014
      Managing Unit: GFMDR                           Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                     Financing
      Sector: Banking (10%), SME Finance (50%), Microfinance (30%), Other non-bank financial
      intermediaries (I 0%)
      Theme: Corporate governance (10%), Regulation and competition policy (10%), Micro, Small
      and Medium Enterprise support (80%)
     IBRD Amount (US$m.): 500
     IDA Amount (US$m.):
     GEF Amount (US$m.):
     PCF Amount (US$m.):
     Other financing amounts by source:
     Environmental Category: FI-2 Financial Intermediary Assessment
     Is this a transferred project                   Yes []                 No [X]
     Simplified Processing                           Simple []              Repeater []
     Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises     Yes []       No [X]
     and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The project development objective is to increase the availability and access to finance for
micro, small, and medium enterprises through eligible financial intermediaries with the
support of a new wholesale development finance institution.

3. Project Description 1:

Component 1: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$12 million)

The project will fund tailored technical assistance to the Development Finance Institution
(DFI) and participating financial institutions (PFis) and provided by qualified external
providers.

The support to the DFI will include technical assistance and institution building to enhance
its operational capacity. The proposed support includes but is not limited to defining and

1   In addition to four project components, the front-end fee of US$1.25 million will also be financed out of the proceeds of the loan.
 establishing robust operating principles, policies, procedures, and governance, design and roll
 out of finance instruments, assistance with pilot bond issuance, setting up and implementing
 monitoring and evaluation practices, impact assessment methodologies, financial consumer
 protection mechanisms, environmental and social safeguards system, and so forth. This
 component will also support capacity building for the FMOF to ensure adequate policy and
 technical oversight of the new DFI.

 The project will also support strengthening the institutional and human resource capacity
 of (PFis) with the tailored technical assistance to enhance their ability to serve the micro-,
 small-, and medium enterprise (MSME) sector. Among the areas to supported are recruiting
 and training new loan officers, strengthening of lending policies and procedures, putting in place
 appropriate accounting, risk management, and management information systems, supporting the
 sub-loan application process through enhancing screening and decision-making capacity,
 supporting development of capacity in sub-loan monitoring and collections, environmental and
 social safeguards system, and establishing financial consumer protection procedures.

The T A will also include support to the DFI and its PFis in building capacity to implement
World Bank Group (WBG) Performance Standards. The areas to be supported will include:
i) capacity building of the DFI to implement the Environmental and Social Operations Manual
(ESOM); ii) support to the PFis in improving their knowledge of and implementation of the
Performance Standards; and iii) leveraging IFC' s existing programs to ensure continuous support
is available to PFis through its local consulting pool to ensure that WBG Performance Standards
are applied in project assessments.

Specific attention will be paid to cater to supporting the needs of female entrepreneurs,
given that their access to finance is particularly constrained. This will be primarily achieved
by sensitizing PFis to gender issues during provision of TA and specifically targeting women
entrepreneurs.

Component 2: Line of Credit Facility (US$445 million)

This component will provide US$445 designated for lines of credit to eligible PFis for on-
lending to eligible enterprises and sub-projects. Sub-loans will be extended to eligible
MSMEs and to a limited extent small corporates (up to 10 percent of available line of credit
resources will be allocated for the latter) which will include both investment and working capital
loans in the expected amount of up to US$500 thousand equivalent for MSMEs and up to US$2
million for small corporates.

Component 3: Credit Guarantee Facility (US$35 million)

The project will support the establishment of a Credit Guarantee Facility (CGF). The
credit guarantee facility will provide a 50 percent guarantee on bank loans made to SMEs.
Banks will have to meet the same criteria for eligibility as for the DFI's credit line instrument.
Guarantees will be priced, based on each bank's performance indicators in managing its SME
portfolio, notably the level of non-performing loans and write-offs.
     Component 4: Project Management (US$6.75 million)

    This component will fund the project management functions supporting overall project
    implementation. These include fiduciary requirements such as procurement, financial
    management, withdrawal and disbursement requests, as well as program outreach,
    communication, and reporting, monitoring and evaluation, and impact assessment. This
    component will fund relevant staff, consultants, training, equipment, and operational expenses.
    As part of this component funding will be provided to ensure that proposed technical assistance
    activities and consulting services under the project's Components I and 4 are undertaken in
    compliance with the World Bank fiduciary requirements.

    This component will also provide support for developing and testing mechanisms for
    reducing the cost of SME credit such as auctioning of credit line funds and incentives-
    based first loss facility 2 . In order to put competitive pressure on the spreads offered by banks to
    final borrowers interest rates will be determined by an auction process under which PFis will
    compete on the basis of the spread they propose to offer to particular market segments. The
    focus of the first loss facility will be to explore possibilities for providing up to 15 percent first
    loss coverage for loans to first-time borrowers in order to reduce bank credit risks for the first I
    to 2 years of a loan's term.

    4. For Category C projects, project location and rationale for finding of little or no
    environmental or social risk or impact:

    N/A

    5. For Category FI projects types of activities or sectors likely to be supported by the Fl
    with Bank financing or other financial support, and rationale for classification as Category
    FI-1, FI-2, or FI-3:

 The project is categorized as a Financial Intermediary (FI) project and the appropriate FI
 category is FI-2. This is based on the assumption that the sub-loan portfolio may potentially
 comprise subprojects that have limited and moderate adverse environmental or social risks or
 impacts that are few in number - generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed
through mitigation measures - or that it may include a very limited number of subprojects with
potential significant adverse environmental or social risks or impacts that are diverse,
irreversible, or unprecedented. In terms of the proposed sub-project activities, while they are not
limited to specific sectors, they are expected to include small scale manufacturing, light industry,
transport, trade, hospitality, agriculture, and similar activities. It is important to note that these
activities will be limited in scope due to the fact that the loan sizes are relatively small and
capped, and given that the MSME and small corporates sector is either not, or is only to a limited
extent engaged in larger scale manufacturing or agriculture. It is therefore expected that these
activities will have a limited negative environmental and social footprint. Nevertheless, adequate
measures will be taken to screen any project that may potentially have a more significant adverse
impact.




2
    Unrelated to the Credit Guarantee Facility presented in Component 2.
 While the project is not expected to have adverse social risks, and long-term or large-scale
 negative environmental impacts, adequate measures will be taken to mitigate potential
 environmental and social risks, in line with the World Bank Group (WBG) Performance
 Standards. Specifically, an Environmental and Social Operations Manual (ESOM) will be
 applied by the DFI and all PF!s. The capacity of DFI and PF!s to assess and mitigate
 environmental and social risks will also be developed.

Through explicit review of social issues at the implementation level and the overall
attention to the market gaps in finance which impact MSMEs sector, the project design
reflects safeguards and elements to support sustainable livelihoods. Social risk screening
will review particularly: i) commitment to the fair treatment, non-discrimination and equal
opportunity of employees, maintenance of employee-management relationships, and compliance
with national employment and labor laws (Performance Standard 2 on Labor and Working
Conditions); and ii) application of all applicable national and state laws and regulations
pertaining to home ownership, occupancy and land tenure (Performance Standard 5 on Land
Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement). The sub-projects will need to meet the requirements
ofPS's 2 and 5.

The principal activities of the DFI will be to provide wholesale term funding in local
currency and partial credit risk guarantees to eligible participating financial institutions
(e.g. commercial banks, microfinance banks, leasing companies) for -lending to eligible
sub-borrowers for eligible activities.

Sub-borrowers will be creditworthy private sector MSMEs and small corporates which
meet all of the following criteria:

  Enterprise   #Employees      Annual Turnover       Total Assets         Max. Loan Size
  Type

  MSMEs        <250            < $3.125mn (N500mn)   <$3.125mn(N500mn)    < $5001<{N80mn)
  Small        <500            < $15mn (N2.4bn)      < $15mn (N2.4bn)     < $2mn(N320mn)
  Corporales

Total amount of DFI support to small corporales will be limited to I 0% of available credit line
resources.

Eligible Sub-Loan Activities and Terms: Sub-loans will be extended to eligible MSMEs and
small corporales (up to I 0% of available DFI credit line resources for the latter) which will
include both investment and working capital loans in the expected amount of up to US$! million
equivalent for MSMEs and up to $2million for small corporales. The sub-loan maturity is
expected to be up to I 0 years with a grace period of up to 18 months, specifically:

           a. Investment Loans: the maximum available sub-loan amount will be US$500
              thousand for MSMEs and US$2 million for small corporales. Maximum maturity
              will be I 0 years with grace period of up to 18 months.               .
           b. Working Capital Loans: the maximum available sub-loan amount will be
              US$200 thousand for MSMEs and US$800 thousand for small corporales.
              Maximum maturity will be 3 years with grace period of up to 6 months.
  While the proposed activities are not expected to have a substantial negative environmental
  and social impact, adequate mitigation mechanisms will be established and implemented.
  One of the prerequisites of the World Bank Group support for the DFI in Nigeria is that the PFis
  integrate into their lending operations the requirements of environmentally and socially sound
  and sustainable development as identified in laws and regulations of Nigeria and the
 sustainability policies and frameworks in line with the World Bank Group standards.
 Accordingly, the ESOM will serve as the guiding document ensuring that all project activities
 comply with the mandated environmental and social safeguard requirements. These measures
 will ensure that appropriate risk management measures have been identified for implementation
 by the loan applicant. While, Performance Standards I, 2, and 5 are expected to be the only
 applicable standards for this project, each PFI will assess E&S risks of transactions according to
 Performance Standards I through 8 and will require its borrowers/investees to meet the
 requirements of these Performance Standards in their operations.

The ESOM, along with the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that is
 established by each PFI, should meet the requirement of the World Bank Group that a
financial intermediary has established an appropriates ESMS. PFis are required to establish
or arrange for proper capacities to duly implement their ESMS in a manner consistent with the
guidance provided in this manual. If a PFI does not have the capacity to implement the ESMS,
the project would support the PFis to develop an Action Plan that identifies all action necessary
to meet the requirements set forth in this manual.

6. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Obi Ugochuku (Consultant)
Joseph Akpokodje (AFTNI)
Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)


 6. Performance Standards Applicable                                       Yes           No
 PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and                        X
 Social Risks and Impacts
 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                          X
 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                                       X
 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                                             X
 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                        X
 PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                               X
 of Living Natural Resources
 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                 X
 PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                  X


7. If PS 1 and PS 2 are NOT applicable, provide a brief explanation why:

N/A
  II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 I. Describe key environmental and social risks and impacts likely to be associated with the
 proposed project, if Category C, or the Bank-supported portfolio, if Category FI:

 It is anticipated that a number of transactions covered by the Development Finance
 Institution (DFI) will be services or investments that will have little or no negative
 environmental or social impact. However, it is recognized that there may be some business
 activities in which the environment and social risk and impacts may be more significant and may
 require commensurate assessment and management (e.g. land acquisition, labor and working
 standards, inappropriate disposal of wastes or unhealthy or hazardous working conditions).
 Procedures and guidance will be developed in a manual for screening, assessing and managing
 these risks for transactions funded by the new DFI.

 2. Describe the key features of the client's Social and· Environmental Management System and
 the capacity to implement it in a responsible manner:

 Procedures and guidance will be developed in the Environmental and Social Risk
 Management Operations Manual (ESOM) for the new DFI that will define all the
 requirements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for all Participating
 Financial Institutions (PF!s) that will include procedures for screening, assessing, and managing
 these risks for transactions under each PFI.

The ESOM requires that the PFis integrate into their lending operations the requirement
of environmentally and socially sound and sustainable development as identified in laws
and regulations of GoN and the sustainability policies and frameworks prescribed by WBG
Performance Standards. The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) sustainability guidelines will be
adopted as much as possible particularly where there are overlaps with World Bank safeguard
standards. In summary, the World Bank Group and the Federal Ministry of Finance (FMoF) will
collaborate to ensure that the PFis use the required procedures in screening loan applications for
environmental and social risks and ensuring that appropriate risk management measures have
been identified and implemented by the final borrowers.

3. Describe the key instruments used by the client to identify and assess risks and impacts, and
measures taken by the client to address environmental and social risks and impacts of the project.
Provide an assessment of client's capacity to implement the measures described:

The ESOM, along with the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that
will be established by each PFI, will also meet the requirement of the World Bank Group
Performance Standards for financial intermediary lending. Participating financial
institutions are required to establish or arrange for proper capacities to duly set up their ESMS in
a manner consistent with the guidance provided in the ESOM. If a PFI does not have the
capacity to establish such an ESMS and/or prepare appropriate environmental and social
management documents (e.g. Environmental and Social Management Frameworks,
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments, and/or Environmental and Social Management
Plans, Resettlement Policy Frameworks, Resettlement Action Plans, etc.), the World Bank Group
reserves the right of prior review and approval of all transactions that take place under the DFI
  until such capacity is developed. Also, capacity building measures will be provided under the
  project. Alternatively, satisfactory arrangements which include external expertise assisting the
  PFis in establishing the ESMS and implementing the environmental and social management
  documents may be considered.

 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 For Category Fl -- Fl's Policy Statement and Procedures for Screening and Assessing
 Risks:
  'Dates of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
 If in-country disclosure of any ofthe above documents is not expected, please explain why:


 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
 finalized by the project decision meeting)

 Client's Environmental and Social Mana~ement System
 Has the client developed an appropriately detailed      Yes [ ]          No [ ]        N/A []
 ESMS, and does the client have the technical. and
 organizational capacity to implement it?
 Labor and Working Conditions
 Does the client have a written human resources policy   Yes [ ]         No [ ]         N/A [ ]
 available to all employees that describes labor and
 working conditions?
 Monitorin~ and Reportin~
 Has the client agreed to submit an annual Environmental Yes [ ]         No [ ]         N/A []
 and Social Performance Report to the Bank to report
 progress on implementation of its ESMS, and does the
 Legal Agreement contain this provision?


D. Approvals

Sitmed and submitted bv:                                 Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:             ArnaUd Dornei,Alitdrei Popovic
                              VL. ..... ~--y;_ --::;,.7) ~.;;;               0&' /27 /Z.o14
                                                    7
Annroved bv:                                  I             /
Regional Safeguards           AI~         Bezeredi      ·
                                        o.:;. ~ye_ cL.t                    oP/.lP/ 2017
                                                            -
Coordinator:                  '- .
  Comments:                                       AIJJI                           I  l
Sector Manager:               Irina Astrakhan TI7+nA.            :::>     /JC2i/}_<KfIXOJ!.;
 Comments:                                                  v                I I         I
