                                                                                           89479


                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information

Date prepared/updated: May 29, 2014

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                                Project ID: P150522
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any): P125414
Project Name: Additional Financing for FATA Urban Centers Project
Appraisal Date: May 19, 2014                     Expected Approval Date: June 30, 2014
Managing Unit: SASDU                             Lending Instrument: Multi Donor Trust Fund
                                                 (MDTF)
Sector: Sub-natl govt admin(30%); Urban Transport(30%); Solid waste mgmt(10%); Water
supply(30%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing(60); Municipal governance and institution
building(20); Other urban development(20)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                     0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                      0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                      0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):                      0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         MDTF for Crisis Affected Areas of KP/FATA/Balochistan           1.00
         Total                                                           1.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes [x]        No []
and Emergencies)




                                                                                                1
2. Project Objectives:

The objective of the FATA Urban Centers Project (FUCP) is to improve urban services and
management in Khar, Bajaur Agency, and develop a framework for urban management in
FATA.

The objectives of the Additional Financing will be the same as the original project.

3. Project Description:

The project comprises two components: a) Priority Infrastructure Investments; and b) Technical
Assistance and Implementation Support. The additional financing for the project will support
both components of the ongoing project. The additional financing would specifically focus on
scaling-up priority infrastructure investments in Khar, Bajaur Agency, and undertake a planning
exercise to develop structure plans and identify priority investments for two additional urban
centers in FATA.

Component 1: Priority Infrastructure Investment Projects (US$ 0.4 Million): This
component supports priority infrastructure investments in Khar town in Bajaur Agency. The
universe of infrastructure sub-projects supported under this component includes rehabilitation,
reconstruction, expansion, and upgradation of urban municipal infrastructure and services.

The additional financing will support the implementation of additional infrastructure investments
in Khar, including (i) primary collection of solid waste; (ii) provision of rescue and firefighting
equipment; (iii) development of a family park; and (iv) construction of public toilets.

Component 2: Technical Assistance and Implementation Support (US$ 0.6 Million): This
component supports: (a) design and development of an overall urban management framework to
be implemented under the TARUCCI program in all 14 towns in FATA; and (b) detail the
implementation plan for the pilot center (Khar, Bajaur Agency) being supported under this
project.

The additional financing will assist in the undertaking a planning exercise, involving the
development of structure plans and identification of priority investments in two more towns in
FATA, besides Khar.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected area of the Federally Administered Tribal
Areas (FATA) in the northwest of Pakistan, lying between the provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkwa
(KP), Baluchistan, and neighboring Afghanistan. The insurgency and counter insurgency actions

                                                                                                 2
of 2009 led to a displacement of approximately 3 million people in FATA and the neighboring
Khyber Phaktunkhwa (KP) regions. While by now most have returned to their homes, the events
are likely to have long-term effects on their socio-economic growth, with high unemployment
and large scale internal migration. FATA lags behind other provinces across a wide range of
social and economic indicators, with the lag even more pronounced when viewed through a
gender lens. Khar is the Agency headquarter for Bajaur, with an estimated population of 0.16
million. It has been adversely affected by violent militant activity in the recent past, before a
successful military operation to restore peace.

       6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)           Yes          No
       Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
       Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
       Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
       Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
       Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
       Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
       Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
       Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
       Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
       Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts

The rehabilitation/reconstruction, expansion, and/or upgradation of urban municipal
infrastructure and services including primary collection of solid waste; development of a family
park; and construction of public toilets under Component-1, may potentially cause negative
environmental and/or social impacts such as contamination of soil and water, air quality
deterioration, and safety hazards for workers and surrounding population. However, none of
these impacts are likely to be irreversible, wide-spread, or unprecedented.

Moreover, sub-projects are unlikely to cause large scale resettlement impacts as maximum
efforts will be made to avoid land acquisition, displacement, and damages to private or public
assets. Once the scope of each sub-project is defined and preliminary designs prepared, the
Implementing Agency (IA) will conduct social screening of each sub-project to determine the
scope of involuntary resettlement impacts. In case of small scale land acquisition and other
resettlement impacts, the project will follow the principles laid down in the Environment and

                                                                                               3
Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) developed by the Bank for all projects
under MDTF, consistent with the World Bank policy BP/OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
Since this project is financed by the MDTF, the ESSAF will apply on it.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area

No indirect or long term environmental negative impacts associated with the proposed
interventions are expected, other than those related to the usage/operation and maintenance of the
municipal services/infrastructure. No large scale social/involuntary resettlement impacts will
occur due to this project. In case of small scale land acquisition and minor resettlement impacts,
the extent of such impacts will be limited due to the nature of the sub-projects.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts

The only other alternative is the ‘no-project’ option, which could have detrimental effects by
denying essential municipal services to the local population. Moreover, restoration of such
services is linked with enhancing confidence of the local population in the State and will
contribute towards peace building efforts. The ‘no-project’ alternative would avoid the negative
environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation, reconstruction, expansion and/or up-
gradation of the municipal infrastructure and services. However, it would also result in
continued environmental degradation and health hazards for the population associated with non-
or poorly-functioning municipal services.

At the conceptual stage, different technical design options for every sub-project will be
considered to avoid or minimize adverse social impacts. Where these impacts cannot be avoided,
the project will follow ESSAF/ESMP guidelines and principles to systematically assess,
mitigate, and/or compensate them.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described

The Bank has prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
(ESSAF), in accordance with the OP 8.0 for emergency operations applicable to all interventions
under the KP/FATA/Balochistan MDTF. It specifies the environmental and social assessment
requirements that the implementing agency will need to fulfill before any Project component
under the MDTF can be implemented.            The Framework also describes the generic
environmental/social monitoring and reporting requirements to be fulfilled during Project
implementation, in addition to defining the broad institutional arrangements required for


                                                                                                4
environmental and social safeguard aspects associated with the individual projects under the
MDTF. The ESSAF has been shared with the FATA Secretariat and TARUCCI Project
Management Unit (TPMU). It has been disclosed locally by the FATA Secretariat on its website
since 15 December 2010.

In accordance with ESSAF requirements, the FATA Secretariat/TPMU has prepared a project-
specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the original project. This
ESMP has been cleared by the Bank. The same ESMP will be applicable for the AF as well.
Once preliminary engineering design of each sub-project under AF is available, the IA will
screen it for any negative impacts on the local population, and to confirm that it will not cause
any involuntary resettlement. In case negative impacts are identified, the IA will conduct sub-
project specific Social Impact Assessment (SIA), and prepare a sub-project specific Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP). Their clearance by the Bank will be a condition for disbursement of funds
against that sub-project. Project funds will not be used for land acquisition.

TPMU has appointed Environment and Social Safeguards Specialists, to ensure effective
implementation of ESSAF and ESMP during implementation of the original project and to
coordinate with the Bank and other stakeholders such as EPAs, on matters relevant to
environmental and social management of the Project. These specialists will ensure ESMP
implementation for the sub-projects under the AF as well. Moreover, capacity building of these
Specialists and other related officials of Directorate of Local Government and Rural
Development (DLG&RD) and Khar Municipal Committee, as well as awareness raising of the
remaining Project staff, will continue to be undertaken for effective implementation of ESSAF
and ESMP.

ESMP Implementation of the Original Project: ESMP implementation had initially been
somewhat weak, primarily because of inadequate Environment-related capacity of the IA.
TPMU has recently taken steps to address this issue and has engaged a short term environmental
consultant to strengthen its safeguard team. TPMU has been conducting safeguards trainings of
the supervision consultants and contractors. With the help of these actions, the safeguard
compliance has now improved.

Experience of Implementing Safeguards in Parent Project: The ESMP has been applied on
all sub-projects funded under FUCP to date, without encountering any major issues. TPMU is
regularly sharing the Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs). A Third Party Monitoring Agent hired
by the MDTF Secretariat, has undertaken bi-annual reviews including of FUCP, and not raised
any safeguard-related issues.




                                                                                               5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people

Stakeholders of the AF are the same as those for the original project and include FATA
Secretariat, line directorates, the Khar municipal committee, Khar political administration,
project affected persons (PAPs), and the beneficiary population of Khar town. Much like the
original project, the Project Director of TPMU will ensure that all relevant agencies involved in
the implementation of ESSAF, ESMP, and RAPs (if required), are fully informed of the World
Bank Policy requirements. Consultations will be mainstreamed in the preparation of new sub-
projects under the AF. Before the preliminary technical design of each sub-project under the AF
is undertaken, the IA and line agencies will consult the potentially affected groups on the project
environmental and social issues, and will take their views into account. The IA will initiate these
consultations soon after identification of each sub-project. For the initial consultation, the IAs
will provide a summary of the proposed subproject's objectives, description, and potential
impacts. For the sub-projects which cause involuntary resettlement impacts, a systematic Social
Impact Assessment (SIA) will be conducted with active participation of affected persons and
other stakeholders with the objective of eliciting their views on sub-project impacts, available
design options to avoid or minimize resettlement impacts and ways to compensate them, and to
reflect their concerns and recommendations in the construction activities.

The ESSAF has been shared with the FATA Secretariat and TPMU. It has been disclosed locally
by the FATA Secretariat on December 15, 2010 on its website, and disclosed at the InfoShop.
The project-specific ESMP has also been disclosed on the FATA Secretariat website and locally.
Despite the fact that the project is a low-risk category B project, the client has been conducting
public consultations to assess the perceived environmental and social risks associated with the
project, and has established a grievance redressal mechanism. The GRM will be further
strengthened and made fully operational. Draft RAPs (where required) will also be disclosed to
the PAPs and other stakeholders in a form and language(s) that are understandable and accessible
to take their views on the resettlement planning and implementation before finalization of
detailed design. RAPs (where required) will be finalized in light of comments made by the PAPs
and other stakeholders. In addition to this, the Environment and Social Safeguard Specialists and
Focal Persons of the DLG&RD and municipal committee, Khar have been conducting
consultations for the original project and will continue to do so with the beneficiaries, PAPs, and
other stakeholders of the sub-projects under the AF.


B. Disclosure Requirements Dates
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          01/03/2013


                                                                                                 6
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/09/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors                     N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why: N/A



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected

                                                                                               7
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project No
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)




                                                                                               8
