                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 87725
Date prepared/updated: 12/26/13

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                                Project ID: P145420
Project Name: Developing Artisanal Livelihoods in Rural Pakistan ‘RANG’
Task Team Leader: Vinayak N. Ghatate
Appraisal Date: December 16, 2013                Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: SASDL                             Lending Instrument: Japan Social
                                                 Development Fund (JSDF) Grant
Sector: Other Industry (100%)
Theme: Rural Non farm Income Generation (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$ 2.80 million (Japan Social Development Fund)
Environmental Category: C
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises      Yes [ ]    No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the livelihood opportunities for rural
artisans. It will demonstrate to policy makers the effectiveness of a crafts-based cluster approach
to poverty alleviation and to improve living conditions for weavers and embroiderers (especially
women and girls) and their families in targeted communities in Punjab and Sindh.

The project is to assist an estimated 2,600 vulnerable artisan families, mainly women headed
households as is common in project districts, at the bottom of the pyramid to help them rebuild
their lives and access sustainable livelihoods through establishing their own artisan institutions.
The project is expected to benefit an overall population of about 18,200 individuals. Out of the
total number of beneficiaries, 70% of the beneficiaries are expected to be women.

3. Project Description:

The project will work with weavers and embroiderers from poor income households in the
identified districts in Punjab and Sindh provinces. The identified project areas in these provinces
have the highest concentration of poverty in the country, but are known for their exquisite
traditional skill. At the initial level, the project will conduct an awareness campaigns at the
village level about the project and its objectives. It will examine the existing skill set of the
artisans and assess the technical and design support requirement for product innovation and
design of new contemporary products that are demanded by the market. The project will target
women, who have lost or are at a high risk of losing their livelihoods because of their inability to
keep pace with contemporary market requirements. It will help them re-build their livelihoods
and regain their dignity through their traditional weaves and needle work.

The project will primarily focus on introducing new tools (such as light embedded eye glasses,
weaving tables etc.) to reduce drudgery while at work. More outputs can be resulted by the
enhanced technology and the modified tools introduced by the project, which will eventually
lead to better economic benefit. Along with the technical details, the project will also put its
attention on the social empowerment aspect. The project plans to create artisan clusters, mainly
constituting women members. Also, from them, on person will made the president (selected by
the cluster members) of the group, similarly a treasurer, accountant and so on. This will firstly
build ownership among the members and secondly will build confidence and a feeling of
empowerment. Basic capacity building support will be provided by the project.

The project will support the communities to build their own artisan institution, create and access
tailor made artisan specific credit products and finally, market their markets though a brand that
is fully owned by them. The pilot would have the following four components:

Component A: Cluster Development and Capacity Building (US$ 0.941 million)

A total of 15 new cluster enterprises will be developed in these areas in the two provinces, and at
least two complete with Common Facility Centers for production operations and auxiliary
centers for packing, tailoring, etc.

Specifically, Component A will provide the necessary capacity building assistance, equipment
and tools, facilities and focused hand-holding and mentoring support to the poor artisan
communities to set up and strengthen their very own organization. It will also focus on working
with artisans to develop newer and more marketable products. Product developers and designers,
who have substantial experience in working with artisan communities would work with artisans
in the cluster. With the help of the artisans, the project will also set up focus on a resource and
design center.

Expert product developers and designers would work with skilled rural and semi nomadic tribal
artisans to examine their skills and their traditional designs and motifs for creating marketable
products. Through this design intervention, specific skill training programs/modules would be
developed and executed to equip the poorest artisans to create a range of products that are in
demand by the market. To increase outreach and effectiveness of the program, the experts will
work at the cluster level with the artisans to produce the new product lines. Identified
entrepreneurial youth from the cluster will be provided specific training to help them establish
long term business connections with mainstream markets and buyers.

Furthermore, to achieve greater livelihoods impacts, the project will work with artisans with
different skill levels and try to design and develop products for all skill grades (not only the
highly skilled). Since many of the artisans would need re-skilling, the focus of the skill
enhancement program will be to develop contemporary products based on the artisans skill-level
i.e. designing and developing contemporary/marketable products for semi-skilled and new
artisans so that they are able to equally benefit from the project. The project will work in
developing marketing strategies for these products, targeting local, regional and national
markets.

Component B: Artisan Cluster Investment Fund (US$ .706 million)

At the regional stakeholder consultation, artisans mentioned that they are not able to seek loans
from commercial banks. As a result, they are heavily depended on middlemen/traders and
money lenders for meeting their financial needs, who in turn, lend at high interest rates or
purchase their products at marginal value. Several artisans pointed out that their problems are
compounded by the fact that the raw materials are usually very expensive, followed by the long
lag time in selling their products. A large proportion of products are sold in the festival season.
Hence, they often have to resort to either borrowing from middlemen/traders or selling product at
significantly reduced prices. In areas where NGOs/microfinance institutions operate, sometimes
artisans are able to get small loans. It was observed that in most cases, NGOs and MFI credit
products are geared towards agriculture inputs, and microenterprises such as tailoring, grocery
store, repair shop and small merchandize. Lack of access to specific credit services, such as to
purchase raw material, implements, risk management instruments etc, the artisans are often left
with no choice but to work with exploitative middlemen and traders.

Through this Component each artisan cluster supported through the project will be provided with
a small fund with an objective to provide an opportunity to the poor to access funds, otherwise
inaccessible through formal financial institutions to initiate their businesses. The members of
each of the clusters can request for loan. The size, duration and the interest rate will be
determined by the cluster members themselves, based on the type of activity the member
proposes to undertake. The loan that is paid off along with the interest will be ploughed back in
the cluster’s artisan investment fund pool. This way, the fund is intended to be a self-
replenishing resource to help maintain continuous production and sales cycles for the cluster. A
detailed guideline on management and operation of Cluster Investment funds will be formulated
to guide each of the clusters on its usage and terms.

Hence, through this component, an innovative mechanism would be piloted whereby Micro
Finance experts will work with the artisans to identify the key financial constraints and services
that are critical for ensuring viability and sustainability of their activity. Once the financial needs
are properly assessed, the experts would then work with the identified community members to
help design a set of tailored financial products for the livelihood activity. These will include
providing access to the cluster members to meet their working capital requirements, design
livelihood activity specific loan products i.e the quantum, repayment schedules and duration of
the loan based on the business cycle of the craft activity, develop artisan specific innovative
insurance products and also explore possibilities of testing artisan credit card schemes and also
offer livelihood financing for higher level of investments for purchase of small machineries for
the cluster level initiatives that would enable the business promoted by the poor to grow and
become sustainable.

The expert will work with the communities to develop Community Operations Guidelines to
manage the fund. The expert will help the clusters to negotiate and leverage a credit line from
commercial banks and other private sector organizations for scaling up and ensuring
sustainability and continuity of operations. The Fund is intended to be a self-replenishing
resource to help maintain continuous production and sales cycles for the cluster.

The project will work in partnership with the World Bank assisted Pakistan Poverty Alleviation
Fund project that is now a premiere micro-finance institution in Pakistan. So far, PPAF has
cumulatively financed 4.7 million micro finance loans through over 100 partner NGOs/CSOs
and rural support organizations. IHT has already had preliminary discussions with PPAF and are
now working towards signing an MoU with them.

Component C: Marketing, Trade Facilitation and Support Services (US$ 0.659 million)

This component aims to provide front-end marketing and trade linkages for the products
produced by the clusters and test new mechanisms to efficiently link the cluster organizations
developed in the project to local, provincial and national markets.

The project will work on developing a robust strategy to market these products, based on
consumer feedback (local, provincial and national). The project will focus on developing strong
links with existing retail shops, exhibitions; conduct specific buyer-seller meets. The project will
reach out to the government as a promoter and a buyer of these new products. Developing on the
positive signals, it will work with the governments to institute Handmade in Pakistan fairs at the
key provincial, national and regional cities and emerging growth centers. The project will
conduct periodic market research to develop a game plan for marketing the products produced by
the clusters. Specifically, this will include:

   1. Developing a detailed product/market database for identifying and organizing marketing
      events most suitable for the new products. Furthermore, entrepreneurial youth from the
      clusters will be taught key elements of effective marketing, sales and business
      negotiations.

   2. Developing focused strategies and structuring participation in the identified marketing
      events. This would include developing catalogues and product briefs and exploring
      possibilities of accessing government sources for opening shops that are owned and
      managed by the community members.

   3. Organizing fashion shows to promote key market linkages.

   4. Developing a successful brand management strategy that includes brand launching and
      marketing.

Component D: Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination and Project
Management and Administration (US$ 0.493 million)

This component would support a small administration unit dedicated to implementing the project
and will support the incremental administrative and operational costs of the project at IHT. The
unit will be responsible for implementing the grant, including hiring and supervising of
implementing partners, facilitating contacts with key partners, art institutes, market sector
players, organization of training, preparation of TORs for consultants, The project would hire a
full time Project Manager, Project Accountant and Cluster representatives from within the
community as well as some support staff.

Component deliverables include: baseline and midterm surveys, audit report and quarterly
reports used for M&E, impact assessment study – mid-term and after completion of the project.

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): IHT will work with cluster leadership to closely monitor and
evaluate the use of grant funds and track the Development Outcome Indicators. The team will
gather data, prepare reports and consult with the World Bank on a periodic basis, as may be
necessary.

Knowledge Dissemination: Throughout the 4 year grant period, IHT staff will gather information
and lessons learned from the project. IHT will share information on the website, in relevant
publications and by other means to the extent appropriate and helpful to the larger community.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will be implemented in the identified districts of Punjab and Sindh in Pakistan. These
are:

Sindh Province- districts of Khairpur, Sukkur, Tharparker, Thatta and Hyderabad;
Punjab province- districts of Muzzafargarh, Bahawalpur, Rahimyar Khan and Multan.

These areas in southern Punjab and Sindh are mainly irrigated agro-based economies and are
situated in arid regions with little rainfall. Environmental settings in these areas highlight high
suspended dust particles, poor water quality and partly degraded lands. Lands are generally dead
flat with lack of natural drainage posing small water ponds here and there, and in Sindh generally
used for fish farming.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:


Mr. Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                    Yes           No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                 X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                         X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                  X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                             X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                       X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                 X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                           X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                      X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                               X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The project area is a target program area for PPAF and it is expected that together with this
proposed project, a positive change will happen in the overall environmental setting.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

No significant environmental impacts are likely to occur due to the proposed activities. The ESM
Group of the PPAF will be responsible for conducting awareness training for the Implementing
Agency, IHT, who will then impart training to communities on better environmental
management practices in small-scale community work. Project in-charge of the IHT will be the
focal point for the liaison on environmental and social aspects with the PPAF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders include artisan community members, youth and small businesses and PPAF’s
partner organizations already working in the area. The project will work with NGOs/CBOs that
are actively involved in working with the poor at the local level.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            Not Required
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 It is a category C project so no environmental assessment document has been prepared.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [X]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [X]      N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ X]      N/A [ ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ X]      N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ X]      N/A [ ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]   No [ X]      N/A [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No [ X]      N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ X]   N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name            Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Vinayak Ghatate                  4/21/2014
 Environmental Specialist:           Javaid Afzal                     3/20/2013
 Social Development Specialist       Chaohua Zhang                    3/20/2013
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Zia Aljalaly/SanjaySrivastav   3/21/2013
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Shobha Shetty                   12/25/2013
   Comments:
