                      INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                              APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 83879


Date ISDS Prepared: December 9, 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

CounbV: Papua New Guinea                   I Project ID: Pl45864
                                           I Additional Proiect ID (if any):
PrOfect Name: Renewable Energy Resource Maooing and Geosoatial Planning
Task Team Leader: Roberto Aiello (Gerard Fae, co-TTL)
Estimated Aooraisal Date: N/A              I Estimated Board Date: N/A
Manaliillli Unit: EASNS                    I Lending Instrument: N/A
Sector: Energv
Theme:
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$1.05 million ESMAP
Environmental Catel!orv: B
Simolified Processing              Simole fxl                Reoeater []
Is this a transferred oroi ect      Yes fl                  No fxl

B. Project Objectives:
The Project Development Objective (PDO) for this operation is to improve the awareness of the
Government of Papua New Guinea (PNG) and the private sector of tbe resource potential for
biomass, small hydropower, solar and wind, and provide the Government with a spatial planning
framework to guide commercial investment in the sector.

C. Project Description:
This multi-year, ESMAP-funded technical assistance activity will carry out small hydro, solar
and wind resource mapping and spatial planning at the national level in PNG (biomass is planned
to be included once the implementation arrangements firm up).

The activity will follow the five non-sequential phases outlined by ESMAP, consisting of: (i)
Phase I: initial scoping, data collection and preliminary meso-scale mapping (for solar/wind)
using satellite data, atmosphere models and existing ground measurements, (ii) Phase 2:
commissioning of ground-based data collection and assessment, (iii) Phase 3: production of a
validated atlas for the RE resource in question and dissemination of commissioned data, (iv)
Phase 4: carrying out geospatial planning and a Strategic Environmental ~d Social Assessment

                                                                                             I
  (SESA), whereby RE resource mapping outputs are analyzed alongside other geospatial and
  environmental data to determine zones most appropriate for development, (v) Phase 5:
  development of policy conclusions and their incorporation into government policy frameworks
  to help guide commercial investment in a way that is consistent with economic, social and
  environmental objectives. Due to PNG's relatively low starting point in terms of resource
  awareness it is expected that this activity will need to complete Phases 1-5 for each RE resource,
. except where initial outputs suggest that further work is unnecessary (e.g. for solar).

 The resource mapping will be undertaken by one or more preselected international consultants
 under framework contracts established by GSD with ESMAP support. All work will follow the
 latest guidance and standards, and will benefit from the standards and partnerships established
 under the ESMAP initiative and from continuous lesson-learning over the course of the activity.
 The ownership of any meteorological equipment installed will be assigned to MET Services,
 Government of Papua New Guinea upon finalization of the ground based measurement campaign
 financed. by this project, with an agreement in place for them to be responsible for ongoing
 upkeep and maintenance of all or some of them. Long term data collection will contribute to
 reduce the uncertainty associated to inter-annual variability, and provide useful information to
 the global scientific community.

 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known):
 The resource mapping will be undertaken at a national level. Work undertaken in Phase I, Phase
 3 and Phase 5 will not involve physical works. Phase 2 will involve the commissioning of
 ground based data. collection, and will require some physical works, namely the positioning of
 ground-based measurement equipment. While expected to be on government land, the specific
 location and salient physical characteristics of the most suitable data collection sites will not be
 known until the completion of Phase I. The location of sites of future RE installations are not
 known at this stage, and would in addition to technical criteria also require that either land is
 acquired for the purpose or the beneficiary community (or communities) agree to make voluntary
 donations of the land required based on a process of free, prior, and informed consultation. The
 Bank team will supervise this process accordingly and consult with the WB's Safeguards
 Secretariat as needed.

 E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
 This project is a World Bank executed non-lending technical assistance undertaken in close
 cooperation with the Energy Division of the Department of Petroleum and Energy (DPE) and
 PNG Power. DPE and PNG Power do not have recent experience in implementing World Bank-
 supported projects and have little or no internal environmental or social management capacity.
 The consultants procured to undertake the SESA will be responsible for developing generic
 guidelines that: (i) identify the environmental and social issues, constraints and risks associated
 with local RE investments, (ii) develop the corresp9nding measures to ensure compliance with
 the relevant World Bank safeguard policies, including Terms of Reference (ToRs) for
 preparation for the preparation of potential safeguards documents of individual projects that may
 be proposed and based on this, (iii) undertake a capacity building program on safeguard
 preparation and management for government and regulatory officials, and for commercial
 developers.

                                                                                                    2
The role of the World Bank in supervision of the social and environmental aspects of the PNG
Renewable· Energy Resource Mapping and Geospathil Planning Project would end when this
project closes. Unless the World Bank were to become involved in the financing of any RE
investments (i.e. under a subsequent project), ensuring compliance with World Bank standards
and policies for documents by subsequent RE developer(s) not financed by the World Bank and I
or for those undertaken after the closing of the WB-financed PNG Renewable Energy Resource
Mapping and Geospatial Planning Project would be the decision of the GoPNG:

This may pose a risk that agreed social and environmental meas'ures may not be implemented
fully in subsequent RE projects which could lead to negative social and I or environmental
impacts. However, DPE and PNG Power have specifically sought WB technical assistance
support in order to benefit from WB experience on hydropower development, and bo.th GoPNG
and WB view the PNG Renewable Energy Resource Mapping and Geospatial Planning Project
as part of a longer term engagement in the energy sector, so it is not expected that GoPNG would
reverse the agreed safeguards approach.

Any civil works related to the PNG Renewable Energy Resource Mapping and Geospatial
Planning Project undertaken while the proposed Project is under implementation (e.g. ground-
based measuring equipment) would be undertaken in compliance with Woild Bank policies, even
if the World Bank may not finance the civil works.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
James Monday              Senior Environmental Specialist
Asger Christensen         Lead Social Developp1ent Consultant

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please expla/11 wily)                         Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                        X
    OP4.01 is triggered due to the environmental and social impacts ofRE investments, when implemented.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          I X I
    OP4.04 is triggered as REinvestments such as small scale hydropower, when implemented, may be located in
and would affect natural habitats
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   I              I                 X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   I                      I     X       I
   There is no pest management required as part of the project design.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           I             I     X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X        I             I
OP4.10 is triggered because IPs are present in the RE projects areas of influence. The rural communities
that will benefit from and be affected by RE projects exhibit the four characteristics that the policy uses to
identify indill.enous peoples.
Involuntarv Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X                      I
    OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered since (a) the installation of ground-based measurement
equipment under Phase 2 of the project may be on both government and private land, and (b) future
small-scale RE projects benefitting local communities may be established on project acquired land or
                                                                                                               3
Safel!llard Policies Trie;e;ered (please explain why)               .Yes I No                I TBD
beneficiary communities voluntarily donated land based on a process of free, prior, and informed
consultation.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                    I             I X
    This pn~iect does not involve the construction or operation of dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                               I X           I
    This· project is not located on or near international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                        I X I
    This proiect is not located on or near disputed areas.
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                       X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OPIBP 4.00)


 III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
 The environmental safeguard policy that would be triggered by future development of specific
 local REinvestments, if the World Bank were to participate in fmancing the development of the
 these (i.e. under a subsequent project), is likely to be Environmental Assessment OP4.01, Natural
'Habitats OP4.04.                        ·

The social safeguard policies that would be triggered by future development of specific local RE
investments, if the World Bank were to participate in fioancing the development of the these (i.e.
under a subsequent project), is OP4.1 0: Indigenous Peoples; and OP4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement.

The SESA will include development of an environmental and social screening process and
methodology to enable identification and management of environmental and social issues of
future RE projects. This will. involve: (i) identification of the generic environmental and social
issues, constraints and risks associated with local.RE investments, (ii) development of guidelines
on the corresponding measures to ensure compliance with the relevant World Bank safeguard
policies, , including tors of reference for preparation for the preparation of potential safeguards
documents of individual projects that may be proposed and (iii) a capacity building program on
safeguard preparation and management for govemmimt and regulatory officials, and for
commercial developers. The TORs for the SESA will include an outline for the table of contents
of the SESA, which will be prepared during implementation of this project.

While specific potential sites for different types ofRE investments (biomass, small hydropower,
wind, and solar) will only emerge during Phase 2-5 of the proposed project, initial data indicate
that small hydropower and biomass would be the likely sources of RE in the PNG Highlands,
with wind and solar in the coastal regions. At the same time, the environmental and social
contexts of the Highlands and the coastal regions also differ. The SESA will account for the
potential generic environmental and social impacts of the different RE options in these two
contexts along with the corresponding generic environmental and social safeguard mitigation
measures to provide guidance for the preparation and review of the individual project level
environmental and social safeguards documents. However, it is important to highlight the key
environmental and social issues which are:

                                                                                                     4
Key Environmental issues: individual RE sub projects/investments are likely to be small scale
in terms of size, footprint and budget, with associated potential impacts also likely to be small
and local, readily avoided or otherwise managed with tangible mitigation measures. These types
of impacts will vary depending on the type of sub project, but none are expected to be long
lasting or have a residual or cumulative effect. However, they would require proper planning,
site selection and tangible mitigation plans. A few may possibly require full environmental
impact assessments. The exact process to be followed to evaluate these sub projects, to determine
their impacts and to develop and apply the mitigation measures will be done compliant with
OP4.01, if these sub projects were to be included in a project that is supported by the World
Bank. The SESA recommendations regarding planning and implementing these types of projects
will be made consistent with the requirements ofOP4.01.

Key social issues: The rural communities that will benefit from and be affected by RE projects
exhibit the four characteristics that the World Bank Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous
Peoples uses to identify indigenous peoples. These characteristics are: (a) self-identification as
members of a distinct indigenous cultural group and recognition of this identity by others; (b)
collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories and to the natural
resources in these habitats and territories; (c) distinctive customary cultural, economic, social, or
political institutions, and (d) indfgenous hinguages.

The basis for reaching agreement on specific RE projects would be a process of free, prior, and
informed consuitation that starts early in the preparation phase, and that results in broad
community support/demand for the project in question and culturally appropriate social and
economic project related benefits. The parties to this consultation process will on the one hand
be the project developer (with oversight and monitoring by GoPNG), and on the other hand the
men and women from the community or communities that benefit from a particular RE project,
and that own or have interests in the land, and other natural resources affected by that project.
The approach to information dissemination and consultation on specific RE projects will be
designed to ensure: (i) that both men and women receive timely and adequate information to
make informed decisions, (ii) that the consultations are undertaken at locations and with groups
of people that are meaningful in terms of the rights and interests in the project area, (iii) that the
approach itself is accepted by the involved social groups and their representatives, and (iv) that it
results in decisions that responds to the interests and concerns of both women and men in the RE
project area, and advance the objectives of the project in question (e.g. with regard to access to
the land required for the RE facilities , and sustainable operation and maintenance of these).

The land requirements for the small-scale RE projects will be modest, and there may be no land
acquisition antiCipated for these. Even though in PNG about 97% of all land is held under
customary ownership by local communities, and access to the use of land and resources for
construction of a particular RE project would only be obtained through documented voluntary
donations from the beneficiary community (or communities) based on the free, prior, and
informed consultation process outlined above, there may be occurrences for land acquisition.
Hence, the triggering of OP 4.12 applies to the RE projects. The recommendations of the SESA
regarding planning and implementing the RE projects will be· made consistent with the
requirements of both OP4.1 0 and OP4. 12.



                                                                                                    5
The consultation process would be supplemented by institutional arrangements using existing
systems and· structures for handling of complaints and grievances that are accepted by the
involved communities and that provide for timely resolution, and by documentation requirements
comprising: (i) records on consultations and agreements, (ii) monitoring of the implementation
of agreements on community benefits and obligations, and (iii) records on the management and
resolution of complaints.

The installation of ground-based ·measurement equipment under Phase 2 of the project is
expected to be on government land. At the conclusion of Phase I, the consultants will prepare a
Candidate Site Identification Report for the number of wind measurement masts, which are
primarily expected to be located at secured areas such as government offices, police stations, or
military areas. The shortlisted sites will then be visited by a small team, including relevant
experts from the consultant team, the World Bank and client representatives to assess any
localized site constraints or potentially adverse impacts, before recommending a final set of
measurement sites. Following the field visits the Consultant will prepare and submit a Phase 2
Implementation Plan containing· final site selection details, arrangements for permitting,
safeguards mitigation measures, commissioning and maintenance, and proposed capacity
building measures.

Physical cultural resource issues: While the location of sites for future RE investments is not
known, potential adverse impacts on arcl\aeological or contemporary sites of cultural importance
need to be avoided through consultation on the location of such sites with the communities
benefitting from RE projects, and procedures will need to be specified in case a chance find of
any artifact/site of archeological significance occurs during construction

IV. APPROVALS

 §ii!ned and submitted bv:
 Task Team Leader:                  Roberto G. Aiello                                  Date
 ADDroved bV:
 Regional Safeguards Adviser:       Ruxandra Floroiu, Act~ RSA                         Date

                                   AA   b.!to/!4./Mr.                           n.j). '3 )Ao/3
   Comments:                                            'I
 Sector Manager:                    Micbe~K~                                           Date
                                           ,)\                                   I   I 'l I   U.l~
   Comments:




                                                                                                     6
