                                                                           93454

                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/04/2014
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P125101                   Original Project Name: Inclusive
                                               Development in Post-Conflict Bougainville
Country: Papua New Guinea                      Project ID: P151766
Project Name: Inclusive Development in Bougainville Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Erik Caldwell Johnson
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 17,         Estimated Board Date: January 23, 2015
2014
Managing Unit: GSURR                           Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                               Financing
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Gender (30%);Rural services and infrastructure (30%);Conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction (20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         0.00
         State and Peace Building Fund                                    2.40
         Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                          2.40
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed additional financing (AF) project seeks to contribute to the rebuilding of
post-conflict social capital at the community level by: (a) strengthening the capacity of
women's organizations and civil society organizations that support the involvement of
women in development activities and which advance the priorities of women in
development to initiate and manage development activities and (b) increasing the
implementation of community development activities which are more inclusive of
women in planning and decision-making processes, and which more explicitly focus on
the development priorities of women.

3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing project will be implemented over a three and a half
year period (FY15 – FY18), scaling up the original project period from FY10-FY15. It
will include the following components:
 Component 1: Building Capacity for Inclusive Community Development

 This component seeks to strengthen the capacity of women's organizations and civil
society organizations that support the involvement of women in development activities
and which advance the priorities of women in development to initiate and manage
development activities, as well as the capacity of the ABG, local government and civil
society organizations to undertake community development activities which are more
inclusive of women in planning and decision-making processes, and which more
explicitly focus on the development priorities of women.

  Subcomponent 1A: Strengthening Capacity for Inclusive Community Development
  This subcomponent will continue to finance trainings which will target staff in the most
relevant ABG divisions (such as Community Development, Education, Health, and
Planning) posted to the ABG, district and sub-district levels, as well as Local Level
Governments, civil society and other community leaders, especially individuals whose
mandates include planning and managing community development interventions. The
training modules will be designed to prepare civil service, local government and civil
society leaders to undertake community development activities (under the small grants
component described below) which are more inclusive of women in planning and
decision-making processes, and which more explicitly focus on the development
priorities of women.

  Subcomponent 1B: Strengthening Civil Society Organizations in Support of Women
  This subcomponent will continue to finance training for women's organizations and civil
society organizations that support the involvement of women in development activities
and which advance the priorities of women in development. These organizations must
meet at least one of the following criteria: highest executive is a woman; majority of
members are women; current programs have a significant focus on women as primary
beneficiaries; experience in implementing community development projects. Since the
training delivered under this Subcomponent is primarily intended to strengthen the
overall performance of CSOs which support women, it will, in turn, enhance the capacity
of these organizations to implement small grant projects in Component 2 of this project.
The stronger these organizations are internally, the better equipped they will be to
effectively implement development projects.


 Component 2: Small Grants for Inclusive Community Development

 This component seeks to strengthen the role of women and civil society organizations
that support the involvement of women in development activities and which advance the
priorities of women in development by providing funding for projects which: are more
inclusive of women in planning and decision-making processes, and/or explicitly focus
on the development priorities of women.

 Subcomponent 2A: Inclusive Development Grants
 This component will continue to finance small grants to civil society organizations
which meet the criteria defined under Subcomponent 1B (grant size will be up to
PGK50,000).

 The main eligibility criteria for small grant proposals are:
 1.      Applicant organizations must meet one or more of the following criteria: highest
executive is a woman; majority of members are women; current programs have a
significant focus on women as primary beneficiaries; experience in implementing
community development projects;
 2.      the role of women in planning and decision-making processes leading to the
submission of the proposal is clear and significant;
 3.      the development priorities of women have been identified and explicitly
highlighted in the proposal;
 4.      a participatory process was used to mobilize the community and prioritize
activities for which funding is requested
 5.      projects are focused at the village or ward (inter-village) level
 6.      projects should improve living conditions and/or economic wellbeing

  The types of activities eligible for funding include: school building repair or
rehabilitation; construction or repair of teacher housing; building or rehabilitation and
equipping of aid posts; market access tracks, roads, or bridges; common storage or drying
areas for crops; occupational activity and economic livelihood training; social issues
training and awareness campaigns such as, on: health training including HIV/AIDS
awareness and reproductive health; etc.

 If activities require land to construct new facilities, then a Clan Land Use Agreement
(CLUA) will be required. Guidelines on the CLUA process are detailed in ESMF and the
Operations Manual. These guidelines include a requirement that the land is already
recognized as community land and/or donated. Steps will also need to be taken to ensure
individuals who donate land are aware of the option to say no, that the land is a small part
of their existing holdings (5% or less is usually the norm), that the donation is entirely
voluntary, and that the donation is properly documented and signed. In addition, the
CLUA will clarify where natural resources on the land can be used or accessed for
project purposes and no activities can be supported that would require involuntary
resettlement.

 A negative list identifies activities ineligible for funding such as: the purchase of private
or individual goods, political and religious activities, and activities which have negative
environmental or social impacts.

 As mentioned above, the procedures for implementing the Inclusive Development
Grants are detailed in the ESMF and Operations Manual. The Manual is available to all
grantees and provides details on small grant procedures including those regarding
environmental and social safeguards, consultation and participation, procurement, and
reporting on the use of grant funds.
 Component 3: Project Management and Knowledge Sharing

 Subcomponent 3A: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation
 This subcomponent will continue to finance the project management and monitoring
and evaluation costs of the project. It will also finance local and international consultants
supporting project management, training, equipment, as well as operating costs of the
Project Team in the Division of Community Development.

 Subcomponent 3B: Knowledge Sharing and Networking
 This subcomponent will continue to finance meetings that will serve as a platform for
knowledge exchange. These meetings provide an opportunity for both government (ABG
and local level) and civil society organizations that have been engaged in the project to
meet, build alliances, and share information and lessons on their activities in a structured
setting.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Bougainville is located at the eastern-most point of the New Guinea islands and
comprises two large and many smaller islands. It has a population of approximately
200,000 and is diverse with over a dozen different language groups. A province of Papua
New Guinea (PNG) since 1975, Bougainville is now an autonomous region within PNG,
a result of a nine-year revolt that left tens of thousands killed, a divided and traumatized
population, degraded infrastructure, and a shattered economy brought on by the collapse
of its main industry, mining. As elsewhere in the Pacific, the vast majority of the
population is considered to be Indigenous Peoples. Subproject locations will primarily
occur in rural villages throughout the districts of the Autonomous Region of
Bougainville.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
   Ms Claire Marion Forbes (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The subprojects supported under the project will be very small in both scale and scope
with the average amount expected to be between PGK40,000 and PGK50,000
(US$20,000 and $30,000). It is unlikely that there would be any large-scale or significant
safeguards risks associated with the proposed project. A range of demand-driven sub-
projects will have an overall net positive impact in the project area and encourage an
inclusive approach. The project activities are likely to include renovation of small-scale
infrastructure and buildings (such as health facilities, markets, teacher housing, resource
centre, market stalls, etc.); very small-scale transportation infrastructure repairs and
upgrades (tracks, small feeder roads, foot bridges, road repairs, etc.); small-scale water
supply systems (rainwater tanks); training programs; and construction of new facilities.

 Potential environmental issues and impacts include temporary disturbance of drains or
streams, noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, localized logging
to source bush materials for construction, removal of sand/gravel for construction and
pollution from insufficient implementation of mitigation actions including inappropriate
disposal of construction waste. However, such risks are expected to be temporary, site-
specific, and limited to the construction phase.

 Potential social risks and impacts could include individual injury sustained through
construction activities, disputes arising from improper consultation and agreement-
making around natural resource use (for community contributions), land donation and
benefit distribution, and minor social disharmony due to changing gender roles or
dynamics.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The proposed community-based subprojects are very small in scale and widely dispersed,
and are anticipated to have a positive long-term social impact overall by improving the
quality and access of basic services. Indirect impacts may include upstream or
downstream impacts for subprojects dealing with water supply infrastructure if not fully
considered in the technical design.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project is based upon the principles of community-driven development, maximize
the participation of community members to ensure broad community support for
subprojects is established early. The siting of subprojects is dependent upon community
decisions and willingness of voluntary land donation on the part of legitimate customary
landowners, a process by which alternatives will be considered by the participating
community or group. Project alternatives will be considered by the communities
themselves, with advice from technical specialists where necessary.
 A 'negative list' will be disseminated to ensure ineligible subprojects are filtered out at
the first stage, including activities considered that may result in significant adverse
impacts or risks. The negative list will identify ineligible subprojects that are considered
to have substantive environmental and social risks, as explained in awareness-raising
activities, and effectively screened out. For instance, sub-projects will NOT: (i) be
located in critical natural habitats or lead to conversion or destruction; (ii) damage or
result in the permanent removal of physical cultural properties; (iii) involve logging or
quarrying of aggregates or minerals for commercial purposes (iv) involve the purchase of
chemical fertilizers, pesticides and similar substances for large-scale agricultural
production; and (v) require land acquisition or be sited on land where ownership is
disputed. Through the preparation phase of subprojects, environmental and social risks
specific to subprojects will be identified with project partners through the use of a risk
identification and screening tool at the proposal development stage, through the process
described in the ESMF.

 Technical guidelines and Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) will be applied to
all the project activities, and appropriate mitigation measures will be developed to
address these risks or potential impacts for each subproject that is approved by the PMU.
In addition, technical guidance on appropriate construction designs, mitigations and
practices will be provided. Written agreements regarding land and resource use will be
established at the commencement of the proposal stage.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Borrower Capacity: While the ABG is "drawing down" the powers of various ministries
from the national government to the regional level, it does not have a division for
Environmental and Conservation to carry out work similar to the national Department of
Environmental and Conservation. Under the original project, the main implementing
agency, the Division of Community Development (DCD) has been responsible for
applying screening criteria, monitoring implementation and certifying completion. DCD
has engaged the support of the engineers working in the Division of Technical Services to
validate environmental risks identified at the design stage and to monitor mitigation
actions for subprojects during implementation. The Division of Technical Service and the
Environment Officer from the Department of Mines have been engaged to conduct
Technical and Environmental Completion Audits. The subprojects being funded are very
small in scale with relatively limited risks; and reviews and spot checks by technical
specialists and independent monitoring is undertaken to ensure adequate measures are in
place to minimize social and environmental risk.

 The performance of the ABG in these areas has been moderately satisfactory, with
confirmation that CLUAs have been used in all cases (with the exception of one which is
being addressed now) , but limited application of safeguard instruments by small grant
recipients due to limited training and low awareness of safeguard tools. As a result, the
safeguard screening, monitoring and audit instruments have been simplified in order to
make them more user friendly and to enhance compliance. The completion audits for
small grant subprojects have yet to be conducted. While these audits are likely to reveal
limited attention to safeguard issues in subproject implementation, the ABG will ensure
that an individual with relevant safeguard qualifications will conduct the audit and
facilitate agreement with the beneficiary communities on follow-up actions. Support from
the Division of Technical Service and the Environment Officer from the Department of
Mines has been insufficient due to their limited availability due to competing demands
on their time. Therefore, DCD will engage a qualified short-term consultant to conduct
completion audits for the ongoing round of small grants, and to conduct training and
monitor implementation on future rounds of small grants. ABG capacity will be drawn
upon when possible, but will be supplemented as needed.

 Under component 1, capacity building, the project will train small grant recipients and
other ABG counterparts on the safeguard requirements and use of the instruments before
small grant funds are received in order to ensure the environmental and social guidelines
for the subproject preparation and implementation are fully followed and implemented.
The capacity building activities for the AF will include improving their capability the
implement, monitor and report on safeguard compliance.

 Environmental Assessment: An Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been developed to assist in the identification and mitigation of potential
environment and social issues, and to help address any environmental risks associated
with the proposed sub-project activities. The ESMF also outlines subproject procedures
customized to the proposed sub-project, and simple forms to screen sub-projects prepare
environmental and social mitigation and management plans where required. It also
includes an Environmental Code of Practice (ECoPs).

 Indigenous Peoples: OP/BP 4.10 will be applied. Papua New Guinea is one of the most
culturally diverse countries in the world, with over 800 indigenous languages and at least
as many traditional societies, out of a population of almost seven million. The majority of
the population (approximately 80%) reside in rural areas in a subsistence-based economy
with strong attachments to the land and a clan-based social structure. Customary land
notionally covers most of the usable land in the country, some 97% of total land area. The
overwhelming majority of communities are indigenous, as defined in the policy. These
populations are inherently vulnerable due to their remoteness and distance from basic
services. Since all beneficiaries of the project are indigenous, no stand-alone Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) or Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is required, but a
summary of how the project design complies with OP 4.10 is annexed to the ESMF. The
ESMF also outlines a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that would be accessible to
communities to directly raise issues or concerns on project implementation (including
those related to environmental and/or social issues).

 Involuntary Resettlement: OP4.12 has not been triggered as the project will not finance
any activity that requires involuntary resettlement, economic displacement or land
acquisition and subprojects which may result in these impacts will not be eligible and
screening out in the early project identification stages. Safeguard instruments, together
with the inclusive and participatory approach of the project, will ensure that communal
decisions about subproject activities will not involve the involuntary disruption, or loss of
livelihoods or fixed assets.

  Any land necessary to support the project can be done on a voluntary basis through the
application of a "clan land use agreement" (CLUA as described in the ESMF). Since the
focus of the project remains in rural areas it is very likely that such lands would be under
communal ownership. Combined with the community-driven approach, it is realistic to
expect that voluntary donation is a viable alternative and compensation payments will be
avoided through the application of a CLUA which is common practice in PNG. Any
existing assets on donated land that might be affected will be specified in the CLUA and
the project would not pay compensation. In certain cases, the CLUA may be expanded to
confirm agreement regarding use and access to natural resources (water, sand, gravel,
timber) with landowners and resource-owners as appropriate.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The PMU and DCD are responsible for identifying stakeholders and participants at the
onset. Consultation activities based upon the principles of free, prior, and informed
consultation (FPIC) will enable meaningful consultation, particularly for projects
pursuing a community-driven approach. Key stakeholders in the project will be rural
residents and women's groups of villages in the Autonomous Region of Bougainville
(ARB), community development workers (CDW) and district officers (DCDOs), as well
as the Bougainville Women's Federation.

 The project will continue to ensure the targeted communities are fully informed about
the project and the environment and social guidelines through training and other
information campaigns. A combination of participatory methodologies will enable
stakeholder participation and information disclosure at every stage of the project
implementation. At the preparation phase, awareness raising, capacity building training
and broad engagement takes place to set the foundation for a participatory approach with
support of Council of Elders (CoEs), CDW and CDO's to enable broad community
support for subprojects is demonstrated. Any subproject under the project will be
required to follow planning process that includes the social and environmental
information, training and screening process described in the ESMF. At the
implementation phase, it may be necessary for initial validation of the subproject plans
directly with beneficiary communities will determine broad community support prior to
any activities or physical works taking place.

 Dedicated avenues for information dissemination will be established by the ABG DCD
and PMU to ensure regular, ongoing communication with stakeholders throughout the
project cycle. Project staff at all levels (DCD officers and consultants, District
Community Development Officers (DCDOs) and other District and Council of Elders
staff and/or executives) will be provided with training dedicated to the environment and
social aspects of the project to ensure that the ESMF and guidelines will be fully
followed and implemented throughout the subproject cycle.
 The project will make all safeguards procedures of the project available to concerned
stakeholders through DCD in Buka, and the World Bank Public Information Center in
Port Moresby (as well as in the World Banks' Infoshop in Washington, DC). The ESMF
will been disclosed locally in English. The ESMF was disclosed at a stakeholder meeting
attended by DCD, ABG, PMU, BWF and independent monitoring organization on 18
November 2014 in Buka. It was disclosed publicly in the Autonomous Region of
Bougainville (ARB) at DCD offices, at the Public Information Center in Port Moresby, as
well as through the World Bank's Infoshop on 25 November 2014.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/18/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/25/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/25/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/25/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/25/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                No
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      N/A
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed Yes
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information-
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  fonn and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
- All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?                                                 ·


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Erik Caldwell Johnson                     11/20/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz                 11/i0/2014
Social Development Spec~list        Ms Claire Marion Forbes                      11/20/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                                                 12/9/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                                                                  1~1 c,/~t'f
  Comments:
