                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/01/2013                                    Report No.: AC7061
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P088799                   Original Project Name: PY PRODERS
                                               Sustainable Agriculture & Rural
                                               Development
Country: Paraguay                              Project ID: P148504
Project Name: AF to Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development Project
Task Team Leader: Renato Nardello
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 4,          Estimated Board Date: December 5, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                               Financing
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Animal production (50%)
Theme: Rural markets (40%);Other rural development (40%);Indigenous peoples (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        20.00
                                                                         20.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO is the same as the original Project: to improve the quality of life of Small-Scale
Farmers and Indigenous Communities in the Project Area in a sustainable manner,
through the support of actions to: (a) strengthen community organization and self-
governance; (b) improve natural resources management; and (c) enhance the socio-
economic condition of the target population.

3. Project Description
The project is designed to address rural poverty and natural resource degradation in the
Eastern Region of Paraguay (Paraguay Oriental), expanding the Project's Area to five
departments (Caazapá, Canindeyú and Concepción, San Pedro and Caaguazú). The
Eastern Region (Región Oriental) of Paraguay, is where 93 percent of the country's
population and an even greater share of smallholders and rural poor live.
 The project will use a highly participatory and decentralized demand-driven approach to
poverty reduction based on improved natural resources management, increased
productivity and competitiveness, and better market linkages. The project has four main
components: (1) Community Organization Development and Capacity Building; (2)
Rural Extension and Adaptive Research; and (3) Sustainable Rural Development Fund;
and (4) Animal Health, in addition to a component for project management.

 Component 1: Community Organization Development and Capacity Building, to: (a)
organize beneficiaries to participate actively in local decision-making structures both
within and outside of the project; and (b) prepare project staff for the implementation of
the project technical strategy aimed at adopting sustainable agriculture and rural
development activities. It has three sub-components: Training, Community Organization
and Development, and Environmental Education.

 Main outcomes: Beneficiary organizations institutionally strengthened for sustainable
rural development management; Project staff trained to execute project actions.

  Component 2: Rural Extension and Adaptive Research, to assist small-holder farmers,
community groups and indigenous communities to overcome specific technical, socio-
economic and environmental constraints to allow them to shift from existing non-
sustainable agricultural practices to sustainable livelihood strategies based on increased
linkages with markets. It has two sub-components: Rural Extension, and Adaptive
Research and Studies.

 Main outcomes: Small-holder producers and indigenous communities trained in
planning and implementing business plans and investment proposals for sustainable
increase in agricultural productivity and marketing management, supported by rural
extension and relevant research initiatives.

  Component 3: Sustainable Rural Development Fund, to finance demand-driven
investments identified in the context of the Community Business Plans (CBP) and
Indigenous Community Development Plans (ICDP), both based on a participatory local-
level diagnostic and planning process supported under Component 2.

 Examples of eligible activities at the farm-level will include production diversification;
forest and water conservation; micro irrigation schemes, greenhouses for horticulture,
basic processing and marketing.

 Subproject proposals would be prepared by eligible beneficiaries with support from
project extension agents. Once awarded, matching grants would be transferred to
beneficiary groups for implementation through their legal associations.

 Main outcomes: Farm Investment Proposals (FIPs) and Indigenous Community
Development Plans (ICDPs), financed and implemented.

 Component 4: Animal Health Improvement, to assist Paraguay to initiate animal health
improvement measures and to contribute to the regional strategy for animal health
management.
 Main outcomes: Improved animal tracking and information systems, laboratory facilities
and field operations established and managed effectively by SENACSA and the VMG to
ensure high national standards of animal health; support to small producers in the project
areas.

 Component 5: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation to support a functional
and effective project management team and monitoring system.

 Main outcomes: Project Management Unit (PMU) at the central level and several Zone
Coordination Units (ZCUs) established and functioning effectively, executing and
monitoring project activities, in coordination with other rural development programs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project area will include five department of Eastern Paraguay (Paraguay Oriental),
which comprises 14 departments and 93 per cent of the total population of the country.
In the five targeted departments, activities will be concentrated in the districts with the
highest levels of poverty and extreme poverty in rural areas. Direct project beneficiaries
will be poor smallholder families, indigenous communities and rural workers in the
project area.

 It is estimated that the project will reach 30,000 additional small-holder farming
families in an estimated 1,500 communities, and 6,500 indigenous families in 130
indigenous communities, for an estimated total of 190,000 additional beneficiaries.

 The original project covered the departments of San Pedro and Caaguazú over areas of
Upper Parana Atlantic Forest, Cerrado savannah, and Humid Chaco ecosystems. Few
protected areas exist within the departments and remaining forests are fragmented and
highly degraded at present.

 The Additional Financing will cover three additional departments, Concepción, Caazapá
and Canindeyú, covering a greater area with the Parana Atlantic Forest, Cerrado
savannah, and Humid Chaco ecosystems. Due mainly to its fertile soil and good climate
conditions, at the basis of a strong expansion of the agricultural frontier, this area has
alarming deforestation rates. However, Eastern Paraguay has preserved some remnants of
Atlantic Forest under a few protected areas and some ecological corridors. The same
region has been targeted by the "Conservation of Biodiversity and Sustainable Land
Management in the Atlantic forest of Eastern Paraguay Project" – GEF Grant No
TF096758, which is under implementation with Itaipu Binacional, as recipient and the
SEAM and the PRODERS as executing partners.

 In the five departments of the Project area live about 34,000 indigenous people in 6,800
families distributed in 280 indigenous communities. These communities belong
predominantly to the Guarani linguistic family and include ethnic groups Mbya, Pai
Tavytera, Ava Guarani, and Ache.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)
   Mr German Nicolas Freire (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed AF project is basically repeating the same typology of interventions as the
Parent Project. Accordingly, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
impacts are foreseen. Positive environmental impacts are a basic objective of the project,
especially relating to the improved management and conservation of natural resources
and the reversal and control of land degradation processes (i.e. through improved soil and
water conservation, adoption of agro-forestry techniques, restoration of riparian forests,
water source protection and domestic sanitation). The monitoring and evaluation system
will incorporate specific means to measure impacts. Some of the expected direct positive
impacts in the project area include: (i) improved soil fertility; (ii) improved water quality
(both surface and ground water); and (iii) greater biodiversity within riparian zones. In
addition, project-supported activities for environmental education and improved inter-
institutional coordination are expected to generate substantial environmental benefits for
the project area.

 Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The project is classified as a Category B.It was
designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank umbrella policy on
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Positive environmental impacts are a basic
objective of the project. Some project activities may have potential environmental
impacts, in particular among those financed by the Project's Sustainable Rural
Development Fund (FDRS) to support the adoption of improved land use practices,
community and municipal sub-projects. In conformity with Bank policy, an
Environmental Assessment (EA) was conducted, and an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared. In compliance with GoP legislation an
Environmental Assessment License for the project will be requested by the MAG before
approving the subprojects' requests.

 A list of activities ineligible for FDRS financing has been incorporated into the ESMF
and the Project Operational Manual of the on-going operation and will be applicable for
this.

 The EA and respective ESMF of the Parent Project have been updated to reflect the
expanded areas covered under the proposed Additional Financing. The document has
been disclosed in-country and in the Bank external website on October 31, 2013. The
ESMF is also publicly available on the Project's website hosted within the Ministry of
Agriculture website at: http://www.mag.gov.py/SiteProders/index.html.

 Consultations, including stakeholder meetings, preparation workshops presentation
events, and interviews were held during the preparation period of the Parent Project. The
project design includes a participatory approach where consultations is a cross cutting
aspect in the preparation of subprojects to be submitted to the FDRS. This approach has
shown to be effective and acceptable to both farmers and indigenous communities during
the implementation of the parent operation.

  Training has been incorporated into the EMP and the program for project management,
field personnel, and stakeholders include several environmental thematic areas including:
Environmental assessment and management, land-use planning and watershed
management, and other thematic areas that may result from local needs during project
implementation.

 To date, the project capacitated almost 3,300 beneficiaries, 118 extension agents and
139 project technicians benefited from an Environmental Education Program
implemented by the Project.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09). The project activities seek to reduce use and dependence
on harmful agricultural chemicals and will not significantly increase use of pesticides or
promote their use to any important level; therefore a pest management plan was not
originally prepared for the parent operation as a whole. Small amounts of veterinary anti-
parasitic chemicals and vaccinations will be procured for the activities related to
strengthening animal health. In those cases, the Bank will provide its no-objection based
on the request for procurement. These substances will conform to Bank OP 4.09
standards in this regard, specifically only class III and IV substances as classified by the
WHO can be procured.

 In addition, it should be noted that small amounts of pesticides will probably continue to
be used by a small portion of microcatchment farmers for which disposal of containers
may be requested by communities to reduce health and environmental risks associated
with pesticide use. This disposal will follow the guidelines set forth under OP 4.09 Bank
guidelines, in particular FAO Guidelines for Packaging and Storage of Pesticides (Rome,
1985), Guidelines on Good Labeling Practice for Pesticides (Rome, 1985), and
Guidelines for the Disposal of Waste Pesticide and Pesticide Containers on the Farm
(Rome, 1985). In addition, pertinent national laws and regulations in this regard will also
be followed.

 The project will support technical assistance for the adoption of proven, economically
and environmentally sustainable Integrated Pest Management practices (IPM), an
approach designed to increase farmer productivity (yields) while reducing input costs,
human health risk and adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of
pesticide use. The IPM approach further increases sustainability of agro-ecosystems by
focusing on improving the knowledge and skills of farmers to enable better management
of resources. Finally, IPM programs are economically sustainable as they reduce
farmers' dependence on procured inputs. In this line, during the implementation of the
Parent Project, farmers and indigenous communities expressed the priority need to
manage the pest of "hormigas cortadoras" (leaf-eating ants). A pest management plan
acceptable to the Bank was prepared to address this specific demand following the Bank
policy originally triggered and with the technical assistance of a FAO specialist provided
through the FAO-Bank Cooperative Program.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The proposed project specifically targets indigenous
communities in the project area. During project preparation, consultations at national
level were held with Indigenous Associations to determine their priorities and needs. The
Project has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF, Estrategia
Indigena) which guides the implementation of project activities with the full participation
of indigenous communities and with respect for their cultural identity and special needs.
To ensure this, extension agents and technical assistance personnel working with
indigenous populations received specific prior training and were hired on the basis of
their previous experience working with indigenous communities. In addition, the project
was required to hire an anthropologist to oversee the community engagement strategy and
lead the consultations (the anthropologist is currently the Coordinator of the IPPF,
Estrategia Indigena.

 To date, the IPPF selected 40 indigenous communities in the two departments of the
original project area (departments San Pedro and Caaguazú) through a prior indexing and
consultation process. Selection, specific IPP design, and implementation were carried out
through continuous consultation and counted on the participation of indigenous leaders,
base organizations, and community members throughout. Through the IPPF the Project
has assisted 24 communities to date and is expected to be achieved its target of 40
communities in FY14.

 Funds disbursed so far have been destined to (I) provide access to clean water to 398
indigenous households and improve the existing water supply of other 286 households;
(II) improve the home and basic infrastructure of 361 indigenous households; (III)
improve the food security and agricultural potential of 1043 indigenous farmers, both
men and women, through training and provisions of cattle, seeds, tools, green compost
and other eco-friendly supplies; and (IV) provide continuous support and training on
reforestation, soil, and water sustainable management.
 Additionally, in cooperation with the Paraguayan Institute of Indigenous People (INDI),
the IPPF has secured the land titles of 14 communities and helped 30 more start the
process of legalizing their lands. During supervision missions, indigenous communities
manifested their complete satisfaction with the project and its close support approach.

 On this basis, the status of implementation for OP 4.10 has been rated highly
satisfactory in the ISR#14 (October 2013).

 With the extension of the Project to a total of five department of Eastern Paraguay, the
Parent Project's Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), which has been
consulted and validated at a national level and proven successful at local level, will
continue to be a valid and effective safeguards instrument for the project areas.
 No additional macro-consultation prior to appraisal is necessary for the proposed
Additional Financing, because the IPPF was already consulted at national level. Once the
specific subproject areas and the indigenous communities for the additional finance are
identified, consultations and the proceedings described in the IPPF will apply.

 For the purpose of OP/BP 4.10, the IPPF clearly outlines that sub-projects developed in
conjunction with beneficiary Indigenous Communities are the Project's equivalent to
Indigenous Peoples Plans, as they are prepared through processes of free, prior and
informed consultation and through their on-demand nature, have broad community
support. The IPPF, has been updated to take into account the expanded Project Area of
the Additional Financing and has been disclosed both in-country and on the Bank's
external website on November 1, 2013.

 Forests (OP 4.36). The proposed project will primarily support environmentally
protective activities and those which are supportive of small farmers (i.e., farm and
community forestry). No logging activities, charcoal or fuelwood production are eligible
for financing through subprojects. The project will finance investments focused on
reforestation or regeneration of natural forests to protect water sources and waterways,
and reforestation for productive purposes of smallholders to reduce impacts to native
forests. No large scale reforestation activities with exotic species will be carried out and
the total area of plantation or enrichment activities is estimated under 5,000 hectares.

 The ongoing project has successfully disseminated and supported the adoption of
improved soil management techniques (no tillage, green manure, etc.) on almost 3,000
hectares and small scale reforestation or forest regeneration on more than 1,000 hectares.

  Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). The project seeks to increase sustainability, maintain and
enhance habitat for biodiversity conservation, and provide environmental goods and
services for rural communities. No significant conversion or degradation of natural
habitat is expected from project investments. Improvements in natural resource use and
management should provide an important for the maintenance of connectivity in the
landscape. Critical natural habitats and protected areas have been identified within the
project area and precautions will be taken through the EMP which provides for an
environmental review framework to ensure that natural habitats are not adversely affected
and positive effects are maximized. To date, no natural habitats have been affected
during the implementation of the Parent Project.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) The Project does not trigger this policy because
the activities supported do not foresee the need for any involuntary taking of land or
displacement of economic activities and assets. The Project screens out any sub-projects
requiring the involuntary taking of land and no issues related to impacts covered under
OP/BP 4.12 have been reported during the Parent Project's implementation. The EMSF
includes screening criteria for sub-project selection that screen out involuntary taking of
land as well as criteria to ensure that any voluntary land donations meet the definition of
voluntary as outlined in OP/BP 4.12.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No indirect or long term negative impacts are foreseen as a result of anticipated future
activities in the project area. Long term impacts are expected to be positive, given the
focus on sustainability, social inclusion and community strengthening. Activities in
micro-catchments planning and management, sustainable production, erosion control and
restoration of degraded forest should provide the platform for long-term sustainability.
Training and education activities are also expected to strengthen this focus.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The Additional Financing will scale up what is perceived as a successful intervention
model. An alternative would have been to prepare a separate stand-alone project, which
has been discarded because of a longer processing period without specific value added. A
vast range of issues critical to small-farmers and indigenous communities have been
incorporated into the project, including erosion control, forest restoration, irrigation, and
food security, in addition to the land-titling and sustainable productive activities.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental assessment procedures and environmental licensing mechanisms, as well
as mitigation measures, have been incorporated into the Project Operational Manual.
Three levels or categories of projects have been established based on their environmental
risk or potential for impacts and a framework for review, approval, supervision, and
monitoring has been established within the EMP. A guide for mitigation measures has
been included in the EA based on FAO guidelines in this regard.

 The project has been consistently rated satisfactory for compliance with the
environmental and social safeguards. The PMU includes a person charged with
environmental supervision and monitoring. Field personnel, including technical
specialists and extension agents also facilitate project environmental measures and
mainstreaming of sustainability concepts. Training packages have been incorporated into
the project program of activities in order to ensure adequate understanding of
environmental screening procedures, impact mitigation, and environmental management.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders include small-scale farmers, local community organizations, indigenous
communities and Indigenous Associations (IAs), rural laborers, rural school teachers and
students, technical staff and managers from local governments, main government
agencies implementing projects related to poverty reduction, natural resources
management and sustainable rural development, producer and civil society associations,
and staff from MAG's Directorate of Rural Extension (DEAG) and other directorates.

 During the preparation of the Parent Project, consultation workshops were held with
project stakeholders to identify and prioritize problems to be addressed by the project as
well as resources and constraints to bear in mind during project preparation and
implementation. During implementation to date, participatory design with cross cutting
consultations has been the approach adopted to finance the interventions at the
community, farm and/or household level.

 Stakeholders play a key role in project implementation and decision-making through the
Community Development Groups (CDGs) and project steering committees. Some of
their roles include: participation in the elaboration of Community Development Plans
(CDPs) and Indigenous Community Development Plans (ICDPs) and annual operation
plans, as well as in assuring social accountability of expenditures at community level.
Indigenous groups and Indigenous Associations play an instrumental role in the
implementation of project activities in their communities ranging from elaboration to
approval and implementation of the indigenous community investment proposals.

 The dissemination of the EA, EMP and IPPF will be continued during the
implementation of the additional finance portion of the project. Both printed and
electronic copies were made available for public disclosure.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/31/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/31/2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/01/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/01/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/01/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   No
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           No
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Renato Nardello                              11/01/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi                        11/01/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr German Nicolas Freire                        11/01/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                  Mr Laurent Msellati                                11/01/2013
  Comments: Approved by email @ 6.27 PM 11/01/2013
