                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                              APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/20/2014                                              Report No.: 92736
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Republic of Peru                  Project ID: P133287
Project Name: Optimization of Lima Water and Sewerage Systems – Additional Finance
Task Team Leader: Patricia López
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27,      Estimated Board Date: January 14, 2015
2014
Global Practice: GWADR                     Lending Instrument: Additional Finance –
                                           Investment Project Financing (scale-up)
Sector: Water supply (50%); Sanitation (50%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (90%); other public sector governance
(10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          55.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
                                                              Borrower         18.00

                                                                                            73.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []                    Repeater [x]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                            Yes [ ]       No [x]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Development Objective

To improve efficiency, continuity and reliability of water supply and sanitation services in the
Northern Service Area of Lima.

3. Project Description

The Original project consists of three components addressing civil works, capacity
building and institutional development as well as project management. The original
project’s physical investments were designed to serve four districts, namely, Comas,
Independencia, San Martin de Porres and Los Olivos benefiting about 158,380 people in
an area of 118 km2.

   Component 1: Rehabilitation of water and sewerage networks in Northern
    Service Area of Lima (US$61.2 million, of which US$51.3 million is financed
    by the Bank loan). This component is rehabilitating water supply and sewerage
    systems to expand and enhance quality of service delivery, improving the
    management of the rehabilitated networks and carrying out social interventions to
    complement the physical investments;

   Component 2: Improving SEDAPAL’s Efficiency (US$2.3 million of which
    US$1.88 million is financed by the Bank loan). This component supports a series
    of studies and technical assistance services to provide decision making tools to
    improve SEDAPAL’s institutional capacity and efficiency.

   Component 3: SEDAPAL’s Project Management (US$1.4 million, of which
    US$1.32 million is financed by the Bank loan). This component provides funding
    support for project management functions within SEDAPAL.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The original Project consists of three components addressing civil works, capacity
building and institutional development as well as project management. The project’s
physical investments are designed to serve four districts, namely, Comas, Independencia,
San Martin de Porres y Los Olivos, benefiting about 158,380 people in an area of 118
km2. The proposed AF will expand the geographic scope of the original Project in
underserviced areas that are located on or adjacent to the original Project scope namely in
targeted sectors within the districts of Comas, Los Olivos and Carabayllo, benefiting
around 239,000people.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr. Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
Ms. Kimberly Vilar (GURDR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Positive Environmental Impacts

Improvements in environmental and human health conditions. According to the Country
Environmental Analysis, (World Bank, 2006), of all the impacts of environmental
degradation in Peru, those related to health are the most significant. The study of the
costs of degradation carried out as part of the Country Environmental Analysis estimated
the annual damages from environmentally related sources at S/. 8.2 billion (US$2.45
billion). Over 70 percent of that, around S/. 5.85 billion (US$1.75 billion), is attributable
to environmental health, arising from poor quality water supply, sanitation and
inadequate hygiene. The project will directly improve environmental health conditions of
population to be served. This full pressure, 24-hour service will also eliminate storage
devices, change water use patterns and modify hygiene practices. This behavioral change
will in turn eliminate fertile ground for water borne diseases such as dengue and
gastrointestinal cases associated with lack of hygiene.

Potential Negative Impacts

Impacts will not be significant, irreversible or unprecedented. Negative environmental
impacts have been fully mitigated by proper supervision and design and will also be
mitigated by close supervision of construction and operation practices and by effective
coordination among EGAm, the Contractor, the Supervisor and relevant Units within
SEDAPAL (e.g. Equipo de Proyectos Especiales, former PROMESAL unit). No major
environmental or social issues have occurred in the implementation of the original
project. The minor impacts are expected to be the same in this AF as for the original
Project.

Specifically, related to social safeguards, SEDAPAL prepared an Involuntary
Resettlement Policy Framework in 2011 during the preparation of the original project
which was adopted as SEDAPAL’s institutional policy on resettlement that has since
been applied consistently to self-financed as well as internationally financed investments.
During the original project, no resettlement action plans were prepared related to
investments in the World Bank project area. The framework was applied to investments
financed by other financial sources in one case. This case was properly mitigated and
documented (and recorded in the December, 2013 World Bank mission Aide Memoire)
according to the institutional policy.

No impacts are expected under the AF, given that all new works will be located within
the public right of way and will not affected private property or informal settlements. No
resettlement action plans are expected to be prepared unless design plans are modified
during implementation. In this highly unlikely case, plans would be prepared in
compliance with the institution’s resettlement policy disclosed in February, 2011.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

The alternative considered other than AF was to complete planned investments through
SEDAPAL’s own resources. Given the extent of financing needed, SEDAPAL has
developed a program to rehabilitate water and sewerage networks in the Northern Service
Area of Lima that will be financed in parallel through this AF, JICA, KfW and
SEDAPAL’s own resources.

The AF investments themselves will be located within the public right of way without
any impacts to private property or informal settlements. This design incorporated social
sustainability considerations given the highly consolidated construction in the area.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

In the case of the original project (Lima Norte 1), SEDAPAL’s environmental
management team (EGAm) supervised preparation of the semi-detailed EIA prepared by
NIPPON KOEI and reviewed the EIA report approved by the MVCS. EGAm has also
permanently reviewed monthly environmental reports submitted by contractors to
PROMESAL. Based upon information contained in these reports and random visits to the
works, EGAm undertook technical assessments to verify implementation of
environmental measures established in the semi-detailed EIA approved by the MVCS.
Findings of these assessments were shared with PROMESAL which in turn coordinated
with contractors to implement corrective actions. As an effective coordination
mechanism, EGAm coordinated with the works supervision firm (NIPPON KOEI) and
the contractor (SADE) to electronically receive the inspection report and provide
technical corrective recommendation in the short term.

SEDAPAL has a well-established social supervision team in place who will oversee the
consulting firm that will actually implement the social supervision plan currently being
developed. The plan will provide guidance and mitigation actions to project beneficiaries
affected by temporary environmental disturbances described above before, during and
after project completion.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

On October 12th, 2014, SEDAPAL conducted a community consultation with 78
community members, representatives from neighborhood organizations and local
political leaders from Los Olivos (with a 87% attendance rate), as well as SEDAPAL and
Consorcio Ingenieria Lima Norte II staff. The objective of the meeting was to share
details regarding the scope of works, expected environmental and social impacts and the
plans that SEDAPAL has in place to monitor and mitigate these impacts. The
community concerns expressed during the meeting were documented in detail as were the
utility’s responses to each concern. In sum, the participants expressed support for the
project, interest in participating in community monitoring initiatives to ensure proper
water disposal and compliance with the proposed environmental mitigation plan.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date (N/A)
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank -                                   October 3, 2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure –                              October 21, 2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop -                               October 21, 2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank:                                   February 16, 2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure:                               February 16, 2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop:                                February 16, 2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        3/29/2002
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan: N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report? N/A
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan? N/A
  OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
  adverse impacts on cultural property? Yes
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared? Yes, a framework was prepared
  in 2011 for the Original project, which became the utility’s official policy on
  land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The same policy will be
  enforced during the Additional Financing.
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
  Manager review the plan? Yes.
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies? Yes.
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
  cost? Yes.
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents? Yes.


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Patricia López                          October 24, 2014
Environmental Specialist:           Raúl Tolmos                             October 10, 2014
Social Development Specialist       Kimberly Vilar                          October 23, 2014


Approved by:
Practice Manager:                   Wambui G. Gichuri                        November 7, 2014
  Comments:
