                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:      November 8, 2014

                                                                                         92752
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Philippines          jProject ID:             jP147330
 Project Name:                Programmatic AAA on Metro Manila Development (Pl47330)
 Task Team Leader:            Yan Zhang
 Estimated Board Date:        NIA
 Managing Unit:               GPSURR
 Sector(s):                   Public Administration, Law, and Justice (40%), Finance (30%),
                              Transportation (20%), Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
 Theme(s):                    Social protection and risk management (25%), Urban development
                              (75%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00           No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:               3.02            Total Bank Financing:    I           3.02
  Financing Gap:                    0.00
       Financing Source                                                                         Amount
       Borrower                                                                                    TBD
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       0.485
       DFAT Trust Fund                                                                             2.185
       Korean Green Growth Trust Fund                                                              0.350
       Total                                                                                        3.02
  Environmental Category:     A- Full Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred       No
  project?

  2. Project Development Objective(s)

  The higher level program development objective of the Programmatic AAA is to support the
Government of the Philippines to modernize key institutions that will realize Metro ManiJa's vision:
"Metro Manila for All: Green, Connected, and Resilient; Bridging talents and opportunities,
Processing knowledge and delivering services to the world." This will be achieved by a range of
interrelated initiatives of the Government to make Metro Manila (including the Greater Manila region)
a more competitive, inclusive, and resilient metropolis. These initiatives largely fall into four Pillars
(1) enhancing competitiveness; (2) ensuring social inclusiveness; (3) increasing resilience; and (4)
addressing institutional fragmentation and sustainability.

For the program period of FY14-16, as covered by this Programmatic AAA (PAAA), the specific
objectives is to support the social inclusiveness and resilience Pillars, with some activities to jump
start the competitiveness and institutional sustainability Pillars for the next program period. The
specific objectives for the three years are to be achieved by providing practical technical advice to and
building capacity of the Government in order to ( 1) design and implement safe, affordable and
resilient housing programs for informal settlers living in danger zones at scale; (2) enhance
metropolitan governance for better planning and coordination among key stakeholders regarding mega
infrastructure projects. The advisory and capacity building activities will be drawing on good practices
and lessons learned globally and locally, including the World Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy,
as well as be well-grounded in political economy realities within the Philippines.

The success of this program period will be measured by (I) program design and/or implementation
informed in participating Key Shelter Agencies and possibly other relevant agencies; (2) enhanced
understanding by key policy makers of the constraints of policy environment relating to affordable
housing provision in Metro Manila; and (3) at least one area-based multi-LGU strategic development
plan is formulated to demonstrate the importance of cross-jurisdictional planning and coordination.

3. Project Description
This Programmatic AAA has four thematic pillars and the activities under each pillar are as follows:

Pillar 1: Enhancing competitiveness. This includes the Philippine Urbanization Review which seeks to
better understand the urbanization process in the Philippines and how it can be leveraged for the twin
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. The review will adopt an
integrated approach to assess the key dynamics, characteristics and challenges of the urban sector and
its role in the wider economy. The analytical work will assist the Philippines to identify policy and
investment constraints, learn from global good practices in managing urbanization, and develop a
knowledge base and framework to design and implement effective urbanization policies and programs.
It will also be a useful platform to enhance and expand current engagement with the policy makers on
the issues of urbanization. It will highlight that differentiated actions should be taken for different
cities in the urban system to ensure that urbanization process would realize its full potential. In
particular, it will provide much needed framework for policy and investment decisions regarding the
biggest urban agglomeration - Metro Manila.

The broader program under Pillar I also includes, among others, potential studies under the Metro
Manila Green Print 2030 and other TAs/ESWs on improving connectivity/mobility through mass
urban transport and in delivering quality and infrastructure services in Metro Manila. However, those
transport related studies outside the Green Print are being adopted by the Programmatic AAA for
urban transport, hence not covered in the PAAA.

Pillar 2: Ensuring social inclusiveness. This includes TAs to address shelter needs of ISFs living in
danger zones, focusing on making in-city rehousing viable and sustainable. It would help introduce
needed policy and program innovat~ons within the Key Shelter Agencies (KSAs), and build capacity
of KS As to implement the refonns identified, and facilitate the institutional arrangements for the
shelter assistance program in Metro Manila. These TAs will complement the feasibility studies for the
priority projects identified in the Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan.

Concretely, it includes (i) rental housing voucher study which aims to shed light on the feasibility or'
rental housing voucher schemes as a transitory housing solution for the Jnfonnal Settler Families
(ISFs) living in hazardous zones in Metro Manila.; (ii)TAs to NHA, SHFC, DILG-led TWO, and
HUDCC and HLURB, etc. to introduce innovations and refonns to support the government to
establish policies and processes and build institutional capacity to implement the priority shelter
assistance program for lSFs living in danger zones in Metro Manila; and (iii) Phase I of the Metro
Manila Green Print for Addressing Slum Challenges, which will be concluded in June 2014.

Under sub-component (ii), a new activity called the "Metro Manila Citywide Development Approach
to Informal Settlement Upgrading (CDA)" {P151920) will be introduced. This new child activity will
be funded by both the Programmatic AAA {Pl47330) and by an additional $3SO,OOO grant from the
Korean Green Growth Trust Fund. The objective of this activity is to help establish the CDA as a
viable solution for reducing vulnerability and improving the resiliency of flood-affected infonnal
settlers in Metro Manila. The activity aims to achieve its objective by pilot-testing and showing
demonstrable benefits of CDA in three flood-prone cities in Metro Manila: Caloocan {Barangay 177),
Muntinlupa, and Quezon City {Sixth Congressional District). While discrete activities will vary for
each city depending on the needs, one or more of the following outputs are expected from the CDA
approach: {i) spatial mapping and socio-economic profiling of all informal communities in the city (or
district/village) overlaid with hazard maps ; (ii) a citywide shelter development framework based on
supply (land, subsidy, other financing) and demand-side (shelter needs, affordability etc.) analyses and
prioritization bf infonnal communities based on a clear set of criteria; (iii) community-driven slum
upgrading project planning for priority communities; {iv) establishment or revitalization of a platfonn
for govemment-CSO-private sector collaboration; and (v) capacity building of the key stakeholders.
Should the pilot prove successful, the Project aims to have CDA recognized and replicated under the
ongoing national infonnal settlement upgrading program that aims to resettle 104,000 informal settler
families (ISFs) out of the danger zones in Metro Manila as well as the pipelined World Bank Greater
Metro Manila Flood Management Project where an estimated 400,000 infonnal settlers will be
affected. This activity will be implemented from October 1, 2014, till June 30, 2016.

Pillar 3: Increasing resi1ience. This includes a study to better understand constraints in land tenure,
land administration and management, and land use relating to affordable housing to be provided for
the relocation needed as a result of implementation of the Flood Management Master Plan in Metro
Manila.                                                                                       ·

The broader program under Pillar 3 includes feasibility studies on priority flood control interventions
identified in the Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan. In addition, measures for structural
resilience will be introduced to help MMDA and LGUs to retrofit and build infrastructure and public
facilities better. However; these activities are either stand-alone TAs or have been adopted by other
AAAs and will not be covered under this PAAA.

Pillar4: Addressing institutional fragmentation and sustainability. This includes Phase II of the
Green Print 2030 aiming to fonnulate an ambitious yet practical strategy to realize the vision of Metro
Manila formulated during Phase I. This might take the form of one to two area-based development
strategies covering two su.b-sets of Metro Manila LGUs to demonstrate the importance of
cross-jurisdictional planning and coordination within the Metropolis. The Green Print will be
underpinned by a change management process to re-orient MMDA to provide leadership and
stewardship of the Metropolis {co-financed by an IDF Grant for MMDA capacity building). However,
the IDF grant is recipient executed project and therefore is not part of this PAAA. In addition, the
programmatic AAA on Manila Bay (Closing in April 2014) belongs to this pillar as well.

This pillar cuts across and underpins all three dimensions of competitiveness, inclusiveness, and
resilience; there are also significant synergies to be gained among the three dimensions.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Metro Manila and selected surrounding provinces (Laguna, Cavite, Rizal and Cavite) where
government resettlement projects identified for review and assessment are located.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Victoria Florian S. Lazaro ( GSURR)
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz ( GENDR)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes            The main thrust of the PAAA is to support a range of
Assessment OP/BP                        interrelated initiatives of the Government to make Metro
4.01                                    Manila and the Greater Manila region more competitive,
                                        inclusive and resilient.

                                        This policy is triggered. The TA wiU likely involve preparing
                                        studies, Terms of Reference and guidelines to support the
                                        participating agencies in the assessment, planning, and design
                                        of development sites, supporting urban shelter, livelihoods and
                                        basic services.

                                        Environmental and social safeguards requirements will be
                                        integrated directly into the studies, guidelines and Tenns of
                                        Reference produced under this PAAA.

                                        The studies to be prepared, when applicable, will include
                                        environmental sustainability principles and procedures in the
                                        selection and design of resettlement areas that includes site
                                        assessment, mitigation and monitoring of potential
                                        environmental and social impacts and the adoption of an
                                        Environmental Code of Practice.

                                        The Metro Manila Green Print Phase II will likely include one
                                        to two area-based development strategies covering sub-set of
                                        Metro Manila LGUs to demonstrate the importance of
                                        cross-jurisdictional planning and coordination within the
                                        Metropolis. One of them could be a strategic plan guiding
                                        urban development of the S LGUs along the western shore of
                                        Laguna lake. The planning/strategy formulation will be based
                             on international good practices in environmental planning.
                             Environmental sustainability principles and guidelines will be
                             mainstreamed into the area-based strategies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP No    This policy is not triggered. The areas to be covered by the
4.04                         Green Print. including the western shore of Laguna Lake
                             (Taguig City, and Muntinlupa City), are built-up and no longer
                             considered natural habitats. This is because the eco-systems'
                             biological communities are not comprised of native plants and
                             animal species. Further, the primary ecological functions in
                             the western shore area have been largely modified and
                             compromised by long years of intense commercial and
                             industrial activities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No    This policy is not triggered. There will be no forests affected ·
                             by the project. Metro Manila is a highly urbanized area.
Pest Management OP     No    This policy is not triggered. There will be no use of pesticides
4.09                         in the project.
Physical Cultural      Yes   This policy is triggered. The area-based development strategy
Resources OP/BP 4.11         will integrate the screening, management and conservation of
                             the physical cultural resources when applicable. The guidelines
                             and Terms of Reference will include the development of
                             chance find procedures.
Indigenous Peoples     No    This policy is not triggered. There are no known IP
OP/BP4.IO                    communities in MM, Laguna and Cavite. This has been
                             established by the' Ancestral Domain Information System of
                             NCIP and in discussions with academes engaged with IP
                             concerns. Although there are IPs in the provinces of Bulacan
                             and Rizal (upland areas), the resettlement projects identified
                             for review, specifically for the North Rail Project and the Pasig
                             River Rehabilitation Project are not within ancestral domains
                             and has not affected IP communities in these 2 provinces.
                             The task team confirms that there are no IP communities in the
                             Western shore of Laguna Lake (Taguig City and Muntinlupa
                             City).
Involuntary            Yes   This policy is triggered. The key outputs for technical
Resettlement OP/BP           assistance to NHA, SHFC, DILG-led TWG, HUDCC and
4.12                         potentialJy and BLURB are aimed to enhance the existing
                             programs and operations manual for housing the poor to
                             approximate international standards. To contribute to this, all
                             studies and recommendation to be done related to acquisition
                             of land, other assets and impacts on livelihood will be guided
                             by the objectives and, principles of fairness, justice, respect for
                             and participation of all key stakeholders. In the case of TA to
                             NHA to be launched in January 2014, it was agreed that the
                             TA "shall be governed by and construed. in accordance with
                             Philippine laws and the World Bank Policies and guidelines
                             (including procurement and safeguards)" (from MOA between
                             NHA and the WB). In case of conflict, it was further agreed
                             that the higher prescription shall be followed.
                                      All other participating agencies (HUDCC, SHFC, NHA,
                                      DILG, DENR, etc.) have, through the Joint Memorandum
                                      Circular, been guided by the World Bank Safeguards
                                      principles, particularly OP 4.0 I and 4.12. To pursue this, the
                                      different TORs for the PAAA shall incorporate the use of OP
                                      4.12 (or even more superior legal framework in Philippine
                                      law) as among the basis for review and recommendation.

                                      No civil works are expected to take place under the new child
                                      activity called the "Metro Manila Citywide Development
                                      Approach to Informal Settlement Upgrading (CDA)"
                                      (P151920). However, as the direct output of the sub-activity
                                      (iii) community-driven slum upgrading project planning for
                                      priority communities, a shelter framework will be prepared for
                                      each priority community that reflects options for
                                      upgrading/potential resettlement locations (not definitive
                                      contents of upgrading or final resettlement locations). Thus,
                                      this framework will adopt the elements of a resettlement policy
                                      framework (RFP) consistent with the OP 4. 12.
                                      Due to resource constraints, the Government needs to build
                                      capacity to fully integrate safeguards compliance mechanisms
                                      to its programs.
Safety of Dams OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered.
4.37
Projects on          No                This policy is not triggered.
International
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No            NIA
Areas OP/BP 7.60


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated wUb the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
All of the activities envisaged under the Programmatic AAA are technical assistance for policy
reforms, planning, and capacity building, and no civil works will be funded. However, the TA will
likely involve preparing studies, Terms of Reference and guidelines to support the government
agencies in the assessment, planning, and implementation of both on-site slum upgrading and
resettlement of informal settlers, including livelihoods and basic services. Therefore, the TA has
impacts on environment, cultural resources, social and the ways in which resettlement or rehousing
would be carried out in the future.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The activities supported by the PAAA aim to improve the government's existing policies, programs,
and guidelines related to site assessment, sustainable design of low-cost housing, alternative land
tenure, resettlement of informal settlers, and on-site informal settlement upgrading. If the PAAA's
recommendations are approved by the government as the official policies, programs, and guidelines,
and thereafter implemented, it will have long-term positive impacts on how informal settlement
upgrading and resettlement are implemented in the project areas. There is, however, potential
reputational risk to the Bank, should the government decide not to follow the recommendations from
the outputs of PAAA, and/or implement its ISF shelter programs not in line with the Bank's
safeguards policies and guidelines.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The majority of the activities under this PAAA aim to provide a menu of technical solutions and
policy instruments to avoid or minimize adverse impacts of potential relocation due to flood control
infrastructure interventions.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
All participating agencies (HUDCC, SHFC, NHA, DILG, DENR, etc.) have, through the Joint
Memorandum Circular, been guided by the World Bank Safeguards principles, particularly OP 4.01
and 4.12. To pursue this, the diff~rent TORs for the PAAA shall incorporate the use of OP 4.01 and
OP 4.12 (or even more superior legal framework in Philippine law) as among the basis for review and
recommendation. Concerned national agencies such as the DENR and NHA have sufficient knowledge
and experience of the application of relevant WB safeguard policies to ensure that the Bank's policies
are considered and integrated in the activities and outputs of the TA. For the TA to NHA, the World
Bank has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with NHA that states that the TA "shall be
governed by and construed in accordance with Philippine laws and the World Bank Policies and
guidelines (including procurement and safeguards)". NHA and HUDCC have also participated in
various safeguards for a sponsored by the Bank. Both have also participated in many project specific
consultations which triggered the policy on involuntary resettlement. Both have also implemented a
projects funded by ADB (Pasig River Rehabilitation) which called for the use of similar policies and
procedures. However, due to resource constraints and varying capacity among relevant agencies, the
Government's ability to fully and consistently implement safeguards measures needs to be
strengthened.
To manage potential reputational risk to the Bank, the Bank team will be working closely with the
External Communication Teams both in the HQs and Manila office to develop a communications
strategy for key stakeholders regarding the Bank's position, recommendations, and roles and
responsibilities vis-a-vis the Government's regarding the PAAA and its implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
TA activities under the PAAAs have been and will continue to be carried out with broad stakeholder
engagement and participation, including direct involvement of the targeted urban poor communities,
focus groups, expert panels, etc. throughout all critical phases of the TAs.
 B. Disclasure Req11ire111e11t~·
 Etntironmental Assessment/Audit/.Mmrngemcn.t Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        N.A.                          '
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                      N.A.
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
                                                                                    l
 "In country" Disclosure
 Resettlement Action Pfan/Ii'ramcwork/Policy Process
                                                            ·-
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        N.A.
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                     N.A.
                                                                    -
i ''In   coun~ry" Disclosure
                                   -
'If the project triggers the Pest Management mul/or Physical ~ultural Resources policies, the
            . .                                .                            .
 respective issues arc to be addressed and disclosed us pmi of the Envuonmcntal
 Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 N.A.
 lf in~country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please cx11lain why:
 N.A.


 C. Campliance hftmitoring lmlit:ntors at tlte Corport1te Level
 OP/BP/GP 4.()1 • Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand~alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes  I       r   1 No [XI         NA I     1
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Docs the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes f           l   No [   l NA IXl
 property?
                                                                                            -·
 Docs the crediu'loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes IX]             No [   I NA l     l
                                                                                                                  t
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involunlnry Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy frmnework/proccss Yes          r       I   No [   I NA IXJ
 framework (as appropriale) been prepared'?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safoguards or       Yes I           I   No [   J NA fXJ
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 The World Bank Policy ou Disclosure of Information
                                                   "'~


 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes I                l   No [   I NA lX]
 Bank's lnfoshop?
                                         --                ~~-~~




 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes I              J   No f   I NA (XJ
 place in a form and language that are understandable and accessib1e
 to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ X J    No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [XJ      No C   ]   NA l   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [XJ      Nol    1 NA l     ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation atrangements been agreed with        Yes l X 1    No C   ]   NA l   J
the borrower. and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III.APPROVALS

Task Team Leader.               Name: Yan Zhang


Approved By:
Acting Regional Safeguards
Advisor:
                                Name: Josefa Tuyor                         Date:
                                                                                    ti/ 111~1
Practice Manager/Manager:       Name: Abhas Jh~                    J.;:   Date:
