                                                                                              84553

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARJ)S DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        January 24, 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Philippines          Project ID:               Pl47330
 Project Name:                Programmatic AAA on Metro Manila Development (Pl47330)
 Task Team Leader:            Yan Zhang
 Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                     Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit:               EAPS                 Lending Instrument:       N/A
 Sector(s):                   Public Administration, Law, and Justice (40%), Finance (30%),
                              Transportation (20%), Water, sanitation and flood protection (I 0%)
 Theme(s):                    Social protection and risk management (25%), Urban development
                              (75%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:                          3.01 Total Bank Financing:       3.01
 Total Cofmancing:                                  Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                        Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            TBD
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        0.485
      AusAID Trust Fund                                                                            2.525
      Asian Coalition for Community Action                                                          TBD
     Total                                                                                         3.010
 Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The higher level program development objective of the Programmatic AAA is to support the
 Government of the Philippines to modemize key institutions that will realize Metro Manila's vision:
 "Metro Manila for AU: Green, Connected, and Resilient; Bridging talents and opportunities,
 Processing knowledge and delivering services to the world." This will be achieved by a range of
interrelated initiatives of the Government to make Metro Manila (including the Greater Manila region)
a more competitive, inclusive, and resilient metropolis. These initiatives largely fall into four Pillars
(l) enhancing competitiveness; (2) ensuring social inclusiveness; (3) increasing resilience~ and (4)
addressing institutional fragmentation and sustainability.

For the program period of FY 14-16, as covered by this Programmatic AAA (PAAA), the specific
objectives is to support the social inclusiveness and resilience Pillars, with some activities ro jump
start the competitiveness and institutional sustainability Pillars for the next program period. The
specific objectives for the three years are to be achieved by providing practical technical advice to and
building capacity of the Government in order to (I) design and implement safe, affordable and
resilient housing programs for informal settlers living in danger zones at scale: (2) enhance
metropolitan governance for better planning and coordination among key stakeholders regarding mega
infrastructure projects. The advisory and capacity building activities will be dra'>ving on good practices
and lessons teamed globally and locally, including the World Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy,
as well as be well-grounded in political economy realities within the Philippines.

The success ofthis program period will be measured by (I) program design and/or implementation
informed in participating Key Shelter Agencies and possibly other relevant agencies~ (2) enhanced
understanding by key policy makers of the eonstra ints of policy environment relating to affordable
housing provision in Metro Manila; and (3) at least one area-based multi-LGU strategic development
plan is formulated to demonstrate the importance of cross-jurisdictional planning and coordination.

C. Project Description
This Programmatic AAA has four thematic pillars and the activities under each pillar are as follows:

Pillar I: Enhancing competitiveness. This includes the Philippine Urbanization Review which seeks ro
better understand the urbanization process in the Philippines and how it can be leveraged for the twin
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. The review will adopt an
integrated approach to assess the key dynamics, characteristics and challenges of the urban sector and
its role in the wider economy. The analytical work will assist the Philippines to identify policy and
investment constraims, learn from global good practices in managing urbanization. and develop a
knowledge base and frame,vork to design and implement effective urbanization policies and programs.
It will also be a useful platform to enhance and expand current engagement with the policy makers on
the issues of urbanization. It will highlight that differentiated actions should be taken for different
cities in the urban system to ensure that urbanization process would realize its full potential. Ln
particular, it will provide much needed framework for policy and investment decisions regarding the
biggest urban agglomeration- Metro Manila.

The broader program under Pillar I also includes, among others, potential studies under the Metro.
Manila Green Print 2030 and other TAs/ESWs on improving connectivity/mobility through mass
urban h·ansport and in delivering quality and infi·astructure services in Metro Manila. However, those
transport related st11dies outside the Green Print are being adopted by the Programmatic AAA for
urban transp01t. hence not covered in the PAAA.

Pillar 2: Ensuring social inclusiveness. This includes TAs to address shelter needs of ISFs living in
danger zones, focusing on making in-city rehousing viable and sustainable. It would help introduce
needed policy and program innovations within the Key Shelter Agencies (KSAs), and build capacity
of KSAs to implernent the reforms identitied, and facilitate the institutional arrangements for the
shelter assistance program in Metro Manila. These TAs will complement the feasibility studies for the
priority projects identified in the Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan.
Concretely, it includes (i) rental housing voucher study which aims to shed light on the feasibility of
rental housing voucher schemes as a transitory housing solution for the Informal Settler Families
(ISFs) living in hazardous zones in Metro Manfla.; (ii)TAs to NHA, SHFC, DILG-Ied TWG, and
HUDCC and HLURG, etc. to introduce innovations and reforms to support.the government to
establish policies and processes and build institutional capacity to implement the priority shelter
assistance program for ISFs living in danger zones in Metro Manila; (iii) Phase I of the Metro Manila
Green Print for Addressing Slum Challenges, which will be concluded in June 2014.

Pillar 3: Increasing resilience. This includes a study to better understand constraints in land tenure,
land administration and management, and land use relating to affordable housing to be provided for
the relocation needed as a result of implementation of the Flood Management Master Plan in Metro
Manila.

The broader program under Pillar 3 includes feasibility studies on priority flood control interventions
identified in the Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan. In addition, measures for structural
r~silience will be introduced to help MMDA and LGUs to retrofit and build infrastructure and public
facilities better. However, these activities are either stand-alone TAs or have been adopted by other
AAAs and will not be covered under this PAAA.

Pillar 4: Addressing institutional fragmentation and sustainabi lity. This includes Phase II of the
Green Print 2030 aiming to formulate an ambitious yet practical strategy to realize the vision of Metro
Manila formulated during Phase I. This might take the form of one to two area-based development
strategies covering two sub-sets of Metro Manila LGUs to demonstrate the importance of
cross-jurisdictional planning and coordination within the Metropolis. The Green Print will be
underpinned by a change management process to re-orient MMDA to provide leadership and
stewardship of the Metropolis (co-financed by an IDF Grant for MMDA capacity building). However,
the IDF grant is recipient executed project and therefore is not part of this PAAA. In add~tion, the
programmatic AAA on Manila Bay (closing in April2014) belongs to this pillar as well.

This pillar cuts across and underpins all three dimensions of competitiveness, inclusiveness, and
resilience; there are also significant synergies to be gained among the three dimensions.



D. Project location and salient physical c·haracteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Metro Manila and selected surrounding provinces (Laguna, Cavite, Rizal and Cavite) where
government resettlement projects identified for review are located.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
For the program period of this Programmatic AAA (FY 14-16), the objective is to focus on providing
practical technical advice to and building capacity of the Government to (I) design and implement
safe, affordable and resilient housing programs for informal settlers at scale; and (2) enhance
metropolitan governance. The Bank will work in collaboration with key Government partner agencies
such as MMDA, NEDA, DILG, HUDCC, NHA, SHFC, DPWH, DOTC, DENR, LLDA, LGUs,
among others. The activities under the Programmatic AAA will be co-financed by the Bank,
Government partner agencies, and other development partners such as AusAID and ACCA. The
agencies have previous experience in implementing World Bank safeguards policies in several
 ongoing and complete investment and technical assistance projects in recent years. Most of them have
 also sent representatives to several Safeguards Fora held by the Bank making them familiar with the
 policies and issues met in its application.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Victoria Florian S. Lazaro ( EASPS)
 Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz ( EASPS)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP            Yes         The main thrust of the PAAA is to support a
 4.01                                                  range of interrelated initiatives of the
                                                       Government to make Metro Manila and the
                                                       Greater Manila region more competitive,
                                                       inclusive and resilient.

                                                       This policy is triggered. The T A will likely
                                                       involve preparing studies, Terms of Reference
                                .                      and guidelines to support the participating
                                                       agencies in the assessment, planning, and
                                                       design of development sites, supporting urban
                                                       shelter, livelihoods and basic services.

                                                       Environmental and social safeguards
                                                       requirements will be integrated directly into the
                                                       studies, guidelines and Terms of Reference
                                                       produced under this PAAA.

                                                       The studies to be prepared, when applicable,
                                                       will include environmental sustainability
                                                       principles and procedures in the selection and
                                                       design of resettlement areas that includes site
                                                       assessment, mitigation and monitoring of
                                                       potential environmental and social impacts.

                                                       The Metro Manila Green Print Phase II will
                                                       likely include one to two area-based
                                                       development strategies covering sub-set of
                                                       Metro Manila LGUs to demonstrate the
                                                       importance of cross-jurisdictional planning and
                                                       coordination within the Metropolis. One of
                                                       them could be a strategic plan guiding urban
                                                       development of the 5 LGUs along the western
                                                       shore of Laguna lake. The planning/strategy
                                                       formulation will be based on international good
                                                       practices in environment~! planning.
                                                       Environmental sustainability principles and
                                                       guidelines will be mains.treamed into the
                                             area-based strategies.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No      This policy is not triggered. The.areas to be
                                             covered by the Green Print, including the
                                             western shore of Laguna Lake (Pasig City,
                                             Pateros City, Taguig City,
                                             Paranaque City, Muntinlupa City), are built-up
                                             and no longer considered natural habitats. This
                                             is because the eco-systems• biological
                                             communities are not comprised of native plants
                                             and animal species. Further, the primary
                                             ecological functions in the western shore area
                                             have been ~argely modified and compromised
                                             by long years of intense commercial and
                                             industrial activities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No     There will be no forests affected by the project.
                                             Metro Manila is a highly urbanized area.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No     There will be no use of pesticides in the
                                             project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     Yes    The area-ba.sed development strategy will
4.1 1                                        integrate the screening, management and
                                             conservation of the physical cultural resources
                                             when applicable.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No     This policy is not triggered. There are no
                                             known IP communities in MM, Laguna and
                                             Cavite. This has been established by the
                                             Ancestral Domain Information System ofNCIP
                                             and in discussions with academes engaged with
                                             IP concerns. Although there are IPs in the
                                             provinces of Bulacan and Rizal {upland areas),
                                             the resettlement projects identified for review,
                                             specifically for the North Rail Project and the
                                             Pasig River Rehabilitation Project are not
                                             within ancestral domains and has not affected
                                             IP communities in these 2 provinces.
                                             The task team confirms that there are no lP
                                             communities in the Western shore of Laguna
                                             Lake (Pasig City, Pateros City, Taguig City,
                                             Paranaque City, Muntinlupa City).
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4. 12 · Yes   This policy is triggered. The key outputs fo~
                                             technical assistance to NHA, SHFC, DILG-Ied
                                             TWG, HUDCC and potentially and HLURB.
                                             are aimed to enhance the existing programs and
                                             operations manual for housing the poor to
                                             approximate international standards. To
                                             contribute to this, all studies and
                                             recommendation to be done related to
                                             acquisition of land, other assets and impacts on
                                                      livelihood will be guided by the objectives and,
                                                      principles of fairness, j ustice, respect for and
                                                      participation of all key stakeholders. In the
                                                      case ofTA to NHA to be launched in January
                                                      20 14, it was agreed that the TA "shall be
                                                      governed by and construed in accordance with
                                                      Philippine laws and the World Bank Policies
                                                      and guidelines (including procurement and
                                                      safeguards)" (from MOA between NHA and
                                                      the WB). In case of conflict, it was further
                                                      agreed that the higher prescription shall be
                                                      followed.

                                                      All other participating agencies (HUDCC,
                                                      SHFC, DILG, DENR, etc.) have, through the
                                                      Joint Memorandum Circular, has been guided
                                                      by the World Bank Safeguards principles,
                                                      particularly OP 4.0 I and 4. 12. To pursue this,
                                                      the different TORs for the PAAA shall
                                                      incorporate the use of OP 4. 12 (or even more
                                                      superior legal framework in Philippine law) as
                                                      among the basis for review and
                                                      recommendation.

                                                      No civil works is expected to take place so it is
                                                      recommended that no further safeguards
                                                      instrument be required. Those which may lead
                                                      to specific civil works (e.g., feasibility studies
                                                      for the MM Flood Control) shall be covered by
                                                      specific safeguards instruments for those
                                                      particular projects.

                                                      Due to resource constraints, the Government
                                                      need to build capacity to fu lly integrate
                                                      safeguards compliance mechanisms to its
                                                      programs.

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No            This· policy is not triggered.
 Projects on International Waterways    No            This policy is not triggered.
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP       No            N/A
 7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
    Tentative target date for preparing the PAD St.age ISDS:
 A. Not applicable. ToRs for various activities under the PAAA will be reviewed by the safeguards
    specialists along the way.
      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
 B.     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                     Name: Yan Zhang
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:                          Nam~~"r~{                                               Date:   o//J.g(;_ () 1    y
 Sector Manager:                       Name: Ousmani Dione                 .   \               Date: January 24, 20 14
  1
    Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a fonn and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
