                                                                                                        94360
                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                    INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                             Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           29 January 2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Philippines          IProject ID:                Pl52805
 Project Name:                  Carbon Asset Development - Methane Recovery from Waste Management
                                Project
 Task Team Leader:              Johannes Heister
 Estimated Date of                 20 March 2015
 Approval:
 Managing Unit:                 GENDR                ILending Instrument:        IPF
 Sector(s):                     Solid Waste Management
 Theme(s):                      Climate Change
 Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [    ]
 Financing (in USD Million): Grant from the Carbon Asset Development Fund (CApF)
 Total Project Cost:        0.41                        Total Bank Financing:    0.41
 Total Co-financing:        0                           Financing Gap:           0
     Financing Source                                                                                Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0
     Total                                                                                               0.41
 Environmental Category         c
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          Yes
 project?


 B. Project Objectives
  The objective of the proposed activities is to assist Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) with the
  development of carbon assets for purchase by the Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF).


 C. Project Description
 LBP is a government financial institution and its mission is to promote growth and development in the
 countryside. LBP has taken the lead in extending financial assistance to its priority se,ctors, such as small
farmers and fisher folk, cooperatives, agri-infrastructure and agribusiness, and environment-related
projects.

In 2006, LBP established the Carbon Finance Support Facility (CFSF) as part of its voluntary initiative to
catalyze clean technology investments in the country through the CDM. In 2012, LBP was able to register
three PoAs with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, namely PoAs for piggery
waste, landfill gas and mini-hydro projects (the latter is not part of the World Bank operation).

As a Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME), LBP will promote voluntary coordinated actions for the
adoption of bio-digester technology in hog farms and landfill gas recovery and combustion in municipal
solid waste management projects in the country. Moreover, LBP will provide carbon finance and
investment finance for the installation of methane capture and combustion with power generation facilities
for these projects. LBP will also act as the project entity providing assistance with preparation of Project
Design Documents (PDD), inclusion/validation of subprojects and verification activities, and aggregating
project information and monitoring data to establish greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction. LBP is
committed to the development and implementation of the two PoAs in order to generate, sell and transfer
resulting certified emission reductions (CER) to the CPF, which will be arranged through new ERP As under
the existing project.

The PoA for pig farms aims to reduce environmental and social impacts and GHG emissions from animal
waste. The waste produced from the participating farms will be treated in. an enclosed anaerobic system
that will prevent the release of methane. The methane will then be flared and/or combusted for electricity
generation, thus eliminating methane .emissions and reducing the use of fossil fuels. The PoA for landfill
gas aims to reduce environmental and social impacts and GHG emissions from solid waste management.
The PoA will encourage Local Government Units (LGUs) and private developers to manage dumpsites and
set up sanitary landfills in compliance with Republic Act 9003 (Philippine Ecological Solid Waste
Management Act of 2000) and generate additional revenues from CERs. With the installation of electricity
generating equipment, GHG emissions will be reduced by destroying methane in landfill gas and replacing
fossil fuel-based electricity from the grid with renewable energy.

In 2013, Land Bank signed a participation agreement with the CPF, and subsequently a mid-term review
for the project was planned and conducted in 2014, which drew lessons from the implementation of the
project since the ERPA signed in January 2010 for the Spanish Carbon Fund. In 2014, the CPF started
preparations to negotiate a new ERPA for each PoA (pig farms and landfills) - with subproject eligibility
now covering the entire country. For this purpose, the ERPA under the Spanish Carbon Fund will be
terminated, the delivery of CERs over the new contract period will be scaled up significantly, and the
closing date of the existing project (P115080) will be extended (until 2021 depending on pending ERPA
negotiations). In addition, to support LBP in the creation of the carbon asset, and based on the lessons
learned from the mid-term review, the CADF plans to make a grant to LBP in the amount ofUSD 410,000
for activities that are linked to, and will support the success of, the CPF purchase program.

The activities targeted by the grant include (1) internal capacity building and technical support, (2)
communication and marketing, (3) subproject inclusion, monitoring and ER verification and (4) project
management. A final grant proposal was received and approved by the CADF manager in October 2014 ·
along with LBPs communication and marketing strategy. As per the proposal, the activities under the grant
will be implemented in the period 2015-2018 with the majority of expenses occurring in the first two years.
The grant will be implemented in the following four components:
Component 1: Capacity building and technical support- USD 73.583

Several levels in the LBP organizational structure need to be capacitated and trained to effectively market
and implement the two PoAs. The implementation of the PoAs is managed by the Environmental Program
and Management Department (EPMD) at LBP, which carries out and/or oversees all project cycle steps
from subproject identification to monitoring and reporting. In addition, Account Officers (front-liners) in
LBP's Lending Units and other staff in LBP's local Lending Centers need to be knowledgeable about the
program, since they are expected to help market the program along with investment loans to LBPs clients
and assist with project monitoring (e.g. they will conduct site visits and receive monitoring reports). Also,
LBP management should be well aware of the program and its many details, including often complex CDM
processes, in order to support the program implementation strategically.

(a) 15 LBP staff will be trained 3 times a year on subproject identification, assessment, inclusion and
    marketing, calculation of CERs, management of the information system and CDM database,
    preparation of project documents, monitoring and reporting.
(b) 3 LBP managers will be trained once a year on lessons learned from other PoAs and CMEs, application
    of successful approaches to PoA management, relevant technologies, and trends at the program and
    global level that would benefit the PoAs.

There are currently no established standard designs in the Philippines for methane projects in pig farms or
landfills, nor are there reliable cost estimates or investment analyses for different proje1;t types and scales;
and there is only limited availability of specialized CDM equipment like flare systems and monitoring
equipment (flow meter, data logger) and information on methane capture technology, which are all needed
to help LBP's clients make sound investment decision and join the PoAs. Moreover, LBP, being a
government financial institution, has limited knowledge, skills and expertise to evaluate and make proposals
to its clients on the commercial scaling, costing, designing and installation of appropriat1::: technologies. The
grant will therefore support the hiring of the following technical consultants to assist LBP in strengthening
its institutional capacity and expanding its portfolio of methane projects:

(c) Two consultants (one for each PoA) to assist LBP in training staff and conducting workshops for LBP
    clients, LGUs and subproject developers, subproject inclusion and verification, technical and financial
    analysis, marketing, monitoring, and other relevant topics. The two consultants will carry out the
    following tasks among others:

    •   Capacitate LBP staff in identifying potential clients to be included in the PoA,
    •   Assess and evaluate appropriate technologies for each PoA,
    •   Develop standard parameters and tools, financial models, feasibility assessments, and financial and
        technical analysis that are useful for the CME in marketing the PoAs,
    •   Explain to clients and policy-makers during workshops, training sessions and roadshows the
        different designs, technological options and operational parameters for successful subprojects, and
    •   Prepare lists of technical specifications for CDM monitoring equipment.

(d) One local consultant to review and perform quality-checks on the next 6 subproject documents (CPA-
    DDs) and train LBP staff in CDM project document preparation. In addition, the consultant will
    evaluate the first 15 already registered CDM projects, if such projects enter the LBP program.
Component 2: Marketing and communication- USD 113,160

LBP has prepared a Communication Strategy and Marketing Plan (CSMP) for the two PoAs, which
anticipates the following major activities. LBP plans to carry out targeted customer-oriented marketing
activities over the next 18 months in order to:

    •   Create brand awareness and product positioning to establish LBP as national leader in Climate
        Finance,
    •   Institutionalize LBP's services as a national program for climate change mitigation for the animal
        and solid waste management sectors including through strategic partnerships,
    •   Attract clients through online and other media, and
    •   Conduct a National Forum and regional roadshows for target clients.

The marketing program will support the production of marketing materials (brochures, posters), advertising
and sponsorships, website and social media, and development of business partnerships. In addition, LBP
will create a recognition and reward program for subprojects as well as for LBP leriding units and
program/account officers, to incentivize good performers and highlight best practices. The reward program
will be an annual event and highlight during the National Forum, which is expected to generate enthusiasm
and encourage more participants towards achieving program objectives.

Component 3: Subproject inclusion, monitoring and verification- USD 213,257

This component will support the vital CDM process that must operate without fail to ensure the generation
of marketable CERs. LBP will:

    •   Refine and further develop the existing project monitoring and information system to ensure that
        information on the performance of the subprojects is readily available for reporting and verification.
        This is particularly important for the piggery PoA as some pig farms are small and in remote
        locations,
    •   Procure monitoring devices and software (e.g. portable gas analyzer, tools etc.) for each PoA for
        use by the Program Officers during their regular visits to the project sites,
    •   Create a special lending program to help subprojects obtain CDM monitoring equipment, and
    •   Establish a revolving fund to finance the cost of subproject inclusion and verification of ERs.

The cost of CDM monitoring equipment has been recognized as a challenge for pig farm owners and a
hurdle to convince them to participate in the PoA. To encourage investment in required monitoring
equipment, LBP plans to use grant proceeds to create a special lending program in the form of a small soft
loan at zero interest to help participating farms obtain needed monitoring equipment and later repay the
loan with proceeds from selling CERs to LBP. Similarly for the landfill program, the first landfill will be
allowed access to the special lending program as incentive to participate and to facilitate its role as
demonstration project.

Under the standard sub-project agreement, subprojects will bear the cost of PoA inclusion/validation and
emission reduction verification, which shall be deducted from the proceeds of the CERs. In order to finance
the upfront cost of inclusion and verification, LBP will use grant proceeds to hire third party auditors (i.e.
CDM Designated Operational Entity) to conduct inclusion and verification activities. LBP will later deduct
from payments to its clients' for CERs the corresponding inclusion and verification costs. LBP plans to use
the collected amounts to establish a revolving fund to be used for the same purpose, if necessary.

It should be noted that any reflows to LBP from its clients will not be managed under this project and the
grant agreement. Once the special lending program and the revolving fund have achieved their purpose,
LBP plans to reallocate any returning funds to other program activities in support of the overall program
goal during the final years of the program.

Component 4: Project management (reporting and audit) - USD 10,000

LBP will manage the grant as an integral part of the existing project. Management costs will therefore not
be paid out of the grant with the exception of the costs of the required annual financial audit and reporting.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Not applicable

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
Not applicable

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (Senior Operations Officer)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies              Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment            YES        The project activities are limited to capacity building and
OP/BP 4.01                                     technical support, marketing and communication, and CDM
                                               monitoring and auditing activities. All on-going and future
                                               CDM activities that may have impacts will be covered by the
                                               Safeguards Framework for the principal project (Pl 15080).

                 .
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          NO
Forests OP/BP 4.36                   NO
Pest Management OP 4.09              NO
Physical Cultural Resources          NO
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP             NO
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement             NO
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            NO
Projects on International            NO
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas           NO
OP/BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


    A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? [YIN]                          NO

        1.    Explanation
              Based on the type of activities to be financed by this grant, the project has been categorized as
              "C".
       ii.    If Yes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS

     B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
     needed.

     Not applicable

    C. The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the appraisal-
    stage ISDS.

    Not applicable


IV.APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:                             Name: Johannes Heister
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Secretariat:
Practice Manager:                                                                                 Date: 29 January 2015




1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
