                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                             Report No.: 89938
.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           21-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Philippines          Project ID:                P145237
    Project Name:                Preparation of a program towards sustainable flood management in the
                                 Greater Metro Manila Area
    Task Team Leader:            Joop Stoutjesdijk
    Estimated Board Date:        31-Dec-2015
    Managing Unit:               EASPS
    Sector(s):                   Water, Sanitation, and flood protection – flood protection (80%); Public
                                 Administration, Law and Justice - water, sanitation and flood
                                 protection (20%)
    Theme(s):                    Environment and Natural Resources Management – water resources
                                 management (60%); Public Sector Governance – managing for
                                 development results (20%); Social Protection and Risk Management –
                                 natural disaster management (20%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       2.73                     Total Bank Financing:      0.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                             Amount
      Borrower                                                                                        0.00
      Japan Policy and Human Resources Development (PHRD) technical                                   2.73
      assistance grants program, Pillar IV
      Total                                                                                           2.73
    Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?
.


.




    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The proposed development objective is to prepare priority projects that aim to improve flood
                                                        2


    management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.
.




    3. Project Description
    The recently approved Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan proposes a large program of
    priority infrastructure to safely manage and control major flood events in the Greater Metro Manila
    Area that comprises Metro Manila and Laguna de Bay and its shore area. Among the main large-scale
    priority interventions that have been identified in the Master Plan are: (i) a high dam in the upper
    Marikina River catchment area to reduce the peak flows entering the city during typhoon and other
    extreme rainfall events; (ii) flood protection works in the Marikina River, upstream of the proposed
    Phase IV of the Pasig-Marikina River Channel Improvement Program; (iii) land raising or another
    similar development along the western shore of Laguna de Bay to protect the population against high
    water levels in the lake; and (iv) further development of a comprehensive flood forecasting system and
    monitoring and early warning system for the Greater Metro Manila Area.

    The Government of the Philippines (GoP) intends to start the implementation of the Master Plan with
    substantial investments as soon as possible. It is therefore necessary to prepare some of the large high
    priority investments, both structural and non-structural, as well as develop improved institutional
    arrangements for flood management. Such investments will be essential to make substantial
    improvements to flood management in large parts of the Greater Metro Manila Area.

    The proposed PHRD grant will finance three components, the main one related to the development of
    feasibility and design studies of priority infrastructure that will lead to substantially increased safety of
    the population during flood events and the second one related to the development of institutional
    arrangements for sustainable flood management that will support the implementation and management
    of the infrastructure to be developed under the main component, as well as the management of existing
    and other future infrastructure. A small third component relates to project management and
    administration.

    Component A – Preparation of feasibility and design studies for priority flood management
    infrastructure. Considering the work government is doing, with the financial support of JICA, under
    the Pasig-Marikina River Channel Improvement Program, the PHRD grant will finance the design of
    flood protection works in the Marikina River, upstream of the proposed Phase IV of the Pasig-
    Marikina River Channel Improvement Program. It will also finance the development of a
    comprehensive flood forecasting system and monitoring and early warning system for the Greater
    Metro Manila Area. The work to be done on the Marikina River under this proposed grant will
    complement the work done by DPWH and JICA and will improve the capacity to safely convey floods
    through the entire Pasig-Marikina River System within Metro Manila. The other infrastructure
    referred to above is expected to be designed with financial support from an Australia grant. All
    studies will have to be prepared in close cooperation. The design phase under the PHRD grant will
    include the technical and engineering studies, economic studies, and social and environmental studies,
    all in compliance with the relevant World Bank Operational and Safeguard Policies and government
    requirements, and up to a level ready for appraisal/financing by the government. DPWH will be the
    main government agency to work with the consultants on the development of the proposals for flood
    protection works in the Marikina River, but will work closely with other agencies such as MMDA,
    Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), and Local Government Units (LGU).

    The flood forecasting and early warning system will build on existing infrastructure such as the JICA-
    financed Effective Flood Control Operation System (EFCOS). EFCOS does not cover the entire
    Greater Metro Manila Area and more needs to be done within that larger area to be able to carry out
    proper forecasting and especially warning of the population. The proposed work to be carried out
                                                        3


    under this component will not lead to duplication of efforts, but will expand on all the existing systems
    to ensure that the entire Greater Manila Area is fully covered. As there will always be residual flood
    risks (and it will take time to implement the Master Plan), it is important that a good flood forecasting
    and warning system is in place for the Greater Metro Manila Area. Although DPWH is the main
    implementing agency for the proposed grant, the main agency for flood forecasting and early warning
    is the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA)
    under DOST, while MMDA is also involved in the management of existing flood forecasting systems,
    such as EFCOS. As such, the consultants will work very closely with DOST-PAGASA, MMDA, and
    other relevant agencies on the development of flood forecasting and early warning proposals.

    Multi-disciplinary teams of consultants, with expertise in engineering, resettlement, hydrology,
    instrumentation, economics, social science, environment, etc., will be recruited to prepare detailed
    feasibility and design studies for the above mentioned proposed interventions. It is envisaged that one
    consulting firm will be hired for the technical studies on the Marikina River and another consulting
    firm/institute for the social and environmental impact assessments, including the social surveys that
    will target the communities that are affected by the potential Marikina River project and that may have
    to be resettled. In addition, one consulting firm will be hired for the flood forecasting and early
    warning studies.

    Component B – Development of institutional arrangements for sustainable flood management. The
    institutional setup for flood management in the Greater Metro Manila Area is very fragmented with
    many agencies involved, often with overlapping mandates. The Master Plan recommends that there is
    a lead institution, working in partnership with other agencies and stakeholders to achieve the
    objectives of integrated flood management. The Master Plan has provided various options for the
    consideration of government, but it has requested for additional support and advice. A consulting firm
    will be recruited to develop in detail the optimal institutional arrangements for flood management in
    the Greater Metro Manila Area that would be acceptable to government. The team will include
    expertise in institutional development, change management, engineering, operation and maintenance
    (O&M), finance, etc.

    Component C – Project management and administration. Operational expenses for DPWH will be
    financed to manage the implementation of the grant and monitor the consultants and the outputs of the
    services. Fixed costs, such as staff costs, will be paid for by DPWH.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    The project location is the Greater Metro Manila Area, in particular the Upper Marikina River.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz ( EASPS )
    Victoria Florian S. Lazaro ( EASPS )
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              While the project only supports the
                                                                   preparation of engineering designs of a
                                                                   priority investment identified in the
                                                                   Metro Manila Flood Management
                                                                   Master Plan, i.e. protection works in the
4


    Upper Marikina River, and the conduct
    of environmental and social assessments
    for these priority investments, including
    resettlement studies, the policy is
    triggered since these studies are expected
    to lead to investments expected to have
    positive but also potentially adverse
    environmental and social impacts,
    including resettlement of mostly
    informal settlers, if not managed
    adequately.

    Part of this project is the conduct of
    environmental and social assessments
    and resettlement (rehousing) studies to
    precisely assess impacts and put forward
    options and mitigation measures to be
    considered in the engineering designs of
    the proposed main investment. The
    environmental and social assessments
    will be carried out by DPWH with
    technical assistance and support from
    qualified consultants to ensure that the
    Bank's and the National Government's
    environmental and social safeguard
    policies are being followed and complied
    with. The environmental and social
    impact assessment will carefully assess
    the environment and social impacts of
    the priority investment, including
    impacts from ancillary facilities as well
    as cumulative impacts, and lay out
    detailed plans for mitigation in the
    Environmental and Social Management
    Plan (ESMP), including a monitoring
    and reporting program. An institutional
    assessment and capacity building plan
    for DPWH's Environmental and Social
    Safeguards Division (ESSD) will be
    prepared as well. The ESMP will be
    properly costed to ensure that the costs
    to fully implement it get incorporated
    into any future civil works contract. The
    various options in terms of sites,
    alignments, resettlement (rehousing) will
    also be analyzed as part of the ESIA.

    A Grievance Redress Mechanism will be
    developed and be detailed in the ESMP
    and be presented to the communities
                                               5


                                                   during public consultations.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes       The ESIA will identify, if any, natural
                                                   habitats and other ecologically sensitive
                                                   areas that may be affected by the priority
                                                   investments. The project will not support
                                                   activities that would significantly
                                                   convert or degrade critical natural
                                                   habitats consistent with the policy. If the
                                                   ESIA indicates that a project would
                                                   significantly convert or degrade non-
                                                   critical natural habitats, the project
                                                   would include acceptable mitigation
                                                   measures in the ESMP. Such mitigation
                                                   measures could include, as appropriate,
                                                   minimizing habitat loss (e.g. strategic
                                                   habitat retention and post-development
                                                   restoration) and establishing and
                                                   maintaining an ecologically similar
                                                   protected area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes       The ESIA will confirm the project
                                                   impacts on forests and forest-dependent
                                                   communities, if any, in and around the
                                                   river system. As needed, the ESMP will
                                                   include measures to address impacts on
                                                   forests, forest health, and forest-
                                                   dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No        The project will not support directly or
                                                   indirectly any investments that would
                                                   trigger the policy.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes       The ESIA will closely assess the various
                                                   alternative technical options to determine
                                                   any possible cause of disturbance and
                                                   negative impacts to historical areas,
                                                   architectural land marks, and other
                                                   cultural property, which may need to be
                                                   mitigated. During construction, the
                                                   landscape of the sites may also be
                                                   affected and structural damage to old
                                                   structures may occur due to vibrations
                                                   and excavation of adjacent areas. The
                                                   ESIA will confirm impacts of priority
                                                   investments on physical cultural
                                                   resources (PCR), and where needed a
                                                   PCR management plan will be
                                                   formulated as part of the ESMP,
                                                   including chance find procedures that
                                                   will be followed during construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes       The whole of Metro Manila does not
                                            6


                                                have ancestral domains and/or
                                                Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities.
                                                However, a study done in early 2000s for
                                                another project found that there are IP
                                                communities in the upland areas of 8
                                                LGUs of Rizal Province, where a section
                                                of the upper part of the Marikina River
                                                study area is located. It is unlikely that
                                                IP communities are present, but
                                                nevertheless an identification will be
                                                carried out by the social and
                                                environment consultants early on during
                                                the implementation of the studies and if
                                                the screening confirms a presence in the
                                                river’s flood plain study area, a social
                                                assessment to comply with OP 4.10 will
                                                be incorporated in the environmental and
                                                social impact assessment and either an IP
                                                Framework and/or IP Plan will be
                                                developed, as needed.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes       The Master Plan has indicated that
                                                thousands of families, both formal and
                                                informal, are living in the flood plain of
                                                the Upper Marikina River. Although
                                                technical solutions are sought that do not
                                                require resettlement of people, the
                                                investments may cause temporary and
                                                permanent physical and economic
                                                displacement of people occupying the
                                                flood plain.

                                                A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                and/or Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                will be prepared. The RPF and/or RAP
                                                will be guided by a series of rehousing
                                                studies. The RPF and/or RAP will assess
                                                various alternatives/options that will
                                                have the least impacts on people living
                                                in danger flood zones and factor these
                                                findings in the engineering designs. In
                                                addition, impacts to potentially affected
                                                persons and planning for mitigation of
                                                the same to their housing and livelihood
                                                conditions are important aspects of the
                                                studies to be made. The outcomes of
                                                these studies will influence the decision
                                                on the final configuration of the
                                                investments, including alignments.

                                                The RPF or RAP will provide a
                                               7


                                                   sufficiently detailed analysis of the
                                                   resettlement/rehousing impacts, social
                                                   impacts, and the institutional aspects in
                                                   order to be able to provide detailed
                                                   recommendations on how these should
                                                   be taken into account during
                                                   implementation. Particular attention will
                                                   be given to the key institutions and
                                                   different government entities involved in
                                                   the resettlement/rehousing.
                                                   Interventions may include institutional
                                                   strengthening activities, development of
                                                   Peoples Plans, etc. The terms of
                                                   reference (ToR) for the preparation of
                                                   the RPF or RAP will be cleared by the
                                                   Regional Safeguard Adviser (RSA) prior
                                                   to their beginning.

                                                   An independent Panel of Experts will be
                                                   established to oversee inter alia the
                                                   preparation of the RPF and/or RAP and
                                                   provide guidance, where needed. The
                                                   Panel will include expertise in social,
                                                   resettlement, and urban planning and
                                                   development.

                                                   Identification of potentially linked
                                                   activities/projects such as those
                                                   implemented by DPWH, Metro Manila
                                                   Development Authority and LGUs will
                                                   also be carried out at the beginning of
                                                   project preparation and if it is established
                                                   that some of the activities and projects
                                                   are related, the preparation of
                                                   appropriate safeguards instrument will
                                                   be discussed with the counterparts. The
                                                   identification of linked activities/projects
                                                   will be done as one of the first activities
                                                   in the ESIA and will be carried out by
                                                   the consultants, in cooperation with
                                                   government counterparts, the Bank’s
                                                   task team supported by the regional
                                                   safeguards adviser, and the Panel of
                                                   Experts.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No        There are no dams in the direct
                                                   catchment of the Marikina River.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No       There will be no sub-projects in
7.50                                               international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No        There will be no sub-projects in disputed
                                                       8


                                                                    areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project itself is meant to produce design studies. While by itself the project is not expected to
    have social and environmental impacts, the studies will identify impacts related to future construction
    of the design interventions and incorporate mitigating measures in ESMPs and the design of the civil
    works. The future implementation of the identified priority projects may cause temporary and/or
    permanent displacement of people currently living in the flood plain of the Upper Marikina River.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project area:
    Improved flood management in the Greater Metro Manila Area is the anticipated result of expected
    future activities. This will help improve the quality of life and socio-economic well-being of
    communities that currently are perennially subjected to flooding as well as the overall environmental
    quality in the Greater Metro Manila Area.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
    impacts.
    An analysis of alternatives, in terms of type of civil works and locations, was carried out as part of the
    master plan preparation. A more detailed analysis will be carried out early on during the
    implementation of this project to determine in detail which of the infrastructure investments will have
    the least environmental and social impacts. The selected option will then be worked out up to design
    level, including tender documents.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
    assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    DPWH is familiar with the Bank Safeguards Policies. It has an Environment and Social Safeguards
    Division, primarily dedicated to the environmental and social impact management of their different
    projects. It maintains separate sets of safeguard standards depending on the funding source of the
    project it implements. The performance of ESSD, based on the recent World Bank thematic review
    for the Philippines, points to the need of putting in place a capacity building program if it is to be in
    charge of handling safeguard issues during the future implementation of the designs prepared under
    this project. ESSD will benefit by strengthening its capacity to manage and coordinate the safeguards
    principles and procedures especially related to the preparation of the environmental and social
    assessment studies and for resettlement/rehousing of affected communities living in the flood plain of
    the Upper Marikina River. The consultants that will prepare the ESIA, ESMP, and RAP, as needed,
    will work closely with ESSD during the preparation of the studies.

    An independent Panel of Experts will be established to provide overall advice and guidance during the
    implementation of the studies and endorse key proposals and to oversee the implementation of the
    social and resettlement studies and how they integrate with the technical studies. The Panel will
    include expertise in social, resettlement, and urban planning and development.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders of the project are the people that live in high risk areas in and along the flood
                                                     9


    plain of the Upper Marikina River and local officials of the impacted Local Government Units. There
    will be extensive formal (through workshops) and informal consultations with the affected
    communities, non-governmental organizations (NGO) and civil society organizations (CSO) that work
    with these communities, LGUs, government agencies, etc. to ensure that the social aspects and
    rehousing/resettlement proposals will be understood and acceptable to all parties. The Bank task team
    in close cooperation with DPWH and other agencies will implement an information campaign that
    emphasizes expectations and transparency.
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  29-Feb-2016
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               31-Mar-2016
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   31-Mar-2016
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    Philippines                                                                  31-Mar-2016
    Comments: The safeguard instruments will be prepared as part of the project, during the
                  preparation of the studies to be funded under the project. Thus safeguard
                  instruments cannot be disclosed prior to appraisal.
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  29-Feb-2016
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               31-Mar-2016
    "In country" Disclosure
    Philippines                                                                  31-Mar-2016
    Comments:
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  29-Feb-2016
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               31-Mar-2016
    "In country" Disclosure
    Philippines                                                                  31-Mar-2016
    Comments:
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                                                  10


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager       Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [ ]     No [ X ]   NA [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [ X ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ ]          No [ ]     NA [ X ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ ]          No [ ]     NA [ X ]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                                                    11


    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]         No [ ]   NA [ X ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ ]       No [ ]   NA [ X ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ ]      No [ ]   NA [ X ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ ]      No [ ]   NA [ X ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:              Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                        Date:
    Sector Manager:                Name:                                      Date:
