                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/07/2013                                   Report No.: AC7054
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P114931                  Original Project Name: Land Husbandry,
                                              Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation
Country: Rwanda                               Project ID: P147543
Project Name: Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation AF
Task Team Leader: Mark A. Austin
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 25,         Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTA2                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (44%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(25%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (12%);Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (11%);Agricultural extension and research (8%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (60%);Other rural development (14%);Rural
policies and institutions (11%);Rural markets (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             35
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
         Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The AF does not propose a change to the PDO and key performance indicators (KPI).
The PDO of the LWH is "to increase the productivity and commercialization of hillside
agriculture in target areas". The key outcome indicators for the project objective remain
the same: (i) increased productivity of targeted irrigated command areas ($/ha); (ii)
increased productivity of targeted non-irrigated command areas ($/ha); and (iii) increased
share in commercialized products from the targeted areas.

3. Project Description
The AF will be structured as an IPF for an IDA amount of US$ 40 million. The LWH
program is designed to address some of the key constraints to agricultural growth in
Rwanda: the need for larger scale, community-based infrastructure approaches rather
than household level interventions; and, the need for strong farmer mobilization,
education and support alongside these investments.

 Similarly to the original IDA financed LWH project this AF will be organized under
three components:

 Component A: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening for Hillside
Development (AF additional financing US$ 2.5 m). This component aims to develop the
capacity of individuals and institutions for improved hillside land husbandry, stronger
agricultural value chains, and expanded access to finance. This component has four
subcomponents: (i) A1: Strengthening Farmer Organizations, (ii) A2: Extension, (iii)
A3: Marketing and Finance and (iv) A4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
Building for MINAGRI and its Agencies.

 Strong ownership and engagement of farmers in land husbandry works, crop production
and marketing activities was seen as critical to success of the Government's hillside
intensification objectives. During the last three years, the project team has effectively
and successfully operationalized a participatory and bottom-up approach to enhance
community confidence and build and strengthen farmer organizations. The Additional
Financing would build on success and lessons of the institutional platform of farmer
organizations, and experiences that have been gained by the project staff and
communities. Therefore, there will be no substantive change in the objective and
approach of this component and its sub components, however, some fine-tuning will be
implemented in term of sequence of activities and costs associated with those activities to
ensure that there is adequate funding and technical assistance for strengthening of
community institutions.

 The community institutions especially SHGs and lead farmers who have gained
substantial capacity and knowledge, could be of great value to the project for scaling up
the program in other areas in the country. As part of additional financing and the
remainder of LWH program, and to ensure smooth scale up, the project team needs to: (i)
think of innovative ways of tapping this community capacity in a structured way, and put
in place an institutional framework for providing community to community services in
new areas; (ii) ensure that higher level institutions (Zones, Cooperatives and WUAs)
perform up-to their expected capacity and in a viable, inclusive and cost effective way.
Strong higher level institutions would help the project in managing community
engagement and ownership on a longer-term basis, and in increasing the productivity and
commercialization of agriculture; and (iii) expand the financial access by developing new
products from the lessons leant so far.

 Component B: Infrastructure for Hillside Intensification (AF additional financing US$
33.5 m). This component provides the essential hardware for hillside intensification to
accompany the capacity development of the first component and it has three
subcomponents as follows: (i) B1: Land Husbandry Infrastructure, (ii) B2: Water
Harvesting Infrastructure and (iii) B3: Irrigation Infrastructure.
 The proposal is to scale up land husbandry activities to new sites with priority accorded
to areas experiencing a high incidence of poverty as well as high severity of ecosystem
degradation. The additional financing would allow scaling-up land husbandry works of
the existing LWH Project on an additional 7,500 ha in the poorest regions of the country
and high priority poverty reduction area for the Government of Rwanda. Exact sites
would be confirmed as part of the additional financing preparation and implementation.

  The additional financing would assist the project to scale-up the water harvesting and
irrigation infrastructure to additional areas with high potential and significant poverty
reduction impact.

  A portion of the additional financing would also be used to conduct a technical audit of
existing and operational dams in Rwanda. The objective would be for each structure to (i)
determine water delivery performance and operation and maintenance arrangements, (ii)
detect any structural or non-structural deficit and provide recommendations for remedy,
(iii) accurately measure remaining storage volumes and determine actual siltation rates,
(iv) provide additional hydrological information to refine design assumptions at project
sites. This assignment will provide important guidance for further improving and
safeguarding existing and future dam infrastructure.

 Component C: Implementation through Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources
(MINAGRI's) SWAp structure (AF additional financing US$ 4 m). This component aims
to ensure that project activities are effectively managed within the government program.
The Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) which coordinates all World Bank
funded projects in MINAGRI has been effectively in place for the last two years and was
a result of a gradual merger of the former RSSP and LWH PIUs its performance is
satisfactory.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This AF, while maintaining the same components as the original project, will scale up
LWH interventions to new locations, in Ngoma District, Nyamagabe District and in the
Gishwati area, with the same approaches and activities as the existing LWH project. The
new sites to be covered will be confirmed using the common site selection criteria which
has been developed as part of the Common Framework for Engagement (CFE) and the
process includes: (i) social criteria (responsiveness/interest of beneficiaries; district
leadership and ownership; level of social impact, including the number of beneficiaries
on the site, the proportion of female-headed households therein, rainfall and livelihood
factors such as flood risk and drought prevalence; and the number of displaced
households relative to the site size); (ii) economic criteria (site-specific rate of return,
year-round access to markets); and (iii) technical and environmental criteria (sufficient
water harvesting potential for command size; severity of soil erosion; a moisture regime
where water harvesting and irrigation makes a difference, i.e. distribution of rainfall over
the year, coincidence of excess rainfall and drought; and the level of environmental
impact of the watershed and on downstream marshlands.
 The additional financing would allow scaling-up land husbandry works of the existing
LWH Project on an additional 7,500 ha in the poorest regions of the country and high
priority poverty reduction area for the Government of Rwanda. Exact sites would be
confirmed as part of the additional financing preparation and implementation.

  The additional financing would assist the project to scale-up the water harvesting and
irrigation infrastructure to additional areas with high potential and significant poverty
reduction impact. Approximately 500 ha command area would be targeted for
development . Feasibility and design studies are currently being conducted for 4 new sites
with tender documents ready for bid in the first half of 2014. While the exact type, shape
and size of the water harvesting and irrigation infrastructure is not yet known, focus
would be on gravity systems with pressurized secondary pipes that allow later conversion
to drip or sprinkler irrigation if required. In line with the projects current approach,
hardware investments would be accompanied by training and capacity building for water
user associations as well as by engaging service providers for initial operation and
maintenance of primary infrastructure.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01 is triggered due to potential adverse environmental impacts of dams, irrigation
systems, and radical terracing.

 OP 4.04 is triggered due to potential impacts on natural habitats on target sites as well
as downstream wetlands and water bodies, and the vegetation cover in the catchments.

 OP 4.36 is triggered due to planned afforestation of catchments and protection of the
existing catchment forests, which will (positively) affect quality and health of forests. No
commercial logging is planned.
 OP 4.11 is triggered due to possibility of chance finds of physical cultural resources
during earthworks for dam and irrigation infrastructure.

 ESMF together with subsequent ESIAs address potential environmental impacts
covered under OP 4.01, 4.04, 4.36, and 4.11, and describe mitigation measures to
minimize negative impacts and utilize opportunities to maximize positive impacts of the
project. The ESMF will be re-disclosed for the purposes of this AF prior to project
appraisal.

 OP 4.09 is triggered due to potential induced increase in the use of agro-chemicals
associated with intensified agriculture, although the organic market is one of the primary
LWH potential outlets. A PMP has been prepared for the original project and disclosed in
2009 and will be re-disclosed prior to AF appraisal.

  O 4.12 is triggered by the land taking, permanent and temporary for the project
infrastructure. The safeguards instruments developed for the original LWH project cover
involuntary resettlement as well as compensation for temporary restriction of access to
land during implementation of terracing activities. An RPF was prepared for the original
project and disclosed in 2009; it will be re-disclosed prior to AF appraisal. The project
has also prepared RAPs for the sites identified during project implementation. The RPF
will also guide the preparation of RAPs for the new sites.

 OP4.37 is triggered since pre-feasibility studies concluded that at some sites the
optimum dam height may exceed 15 meters. For dams lower than 15 meters, the project
has developed the national Small Dam Safety Guidelines, which were disclosed in
Rwanda and in Bank InfoShop on May 1, 2012. In addition, the project has engaged the
independent Panel of Experts to oversee the engineering proposals for such dam sites.

  OP 7.50 is triggered since the project may affect quantity and quality of international
waterways in the Nile Basin and Lake Tanganyika Basin. Riparian notifications were
issued in 2008 and no-objection responses were obtained. The AF proposes activities of
which other riparians have already been notified. Based on the assessment done for the
original project riparian notifications, there are no additional effects on the water quantity
or quality of the additional financing. No additional riparian notifications are required.

 The original LWH took framework approach to safeguards instruments, with
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and Pest Management Plan (PMP) have been disclosed by the Bank
and Rwanda MINAGRI and cover all the program sites (phases one and two). The project
has developed ESIAs and, when applicable RAPs for each site identified for investment
under LWH (Nyanza-23, Gatsibo-8 and Karongi 12 and 13 sites). ESIAs and RAPs were
also consulted upon, cleared by REMA and WB, and publicly disclosed. The ESMF and
RPF provide sufficient coverage to guide preparation of ESIA and RAPs for the new
sites, once they are identified.
 The main environmental safeguards issues for the Project relate to (i) hydrological
impact of water harvesting, water abstraction and changes to water outflows from the
dams and irrigation systems, changes in water table and soil salinity, changes in water
quality and eutrophication and siltation of water bodies, and associated impacts on
downstream aquatic habitats and biodiversity, (ii) radical terracing and other earthworks
in the command area and associated impacts on soil as well as potential increase in the
use of agro-chemicals and spread of agricultural weeds; (iii) afforestation of steep slopes,
establishment of no-use areas on the most fragile slopes and other land husbandry
measures and associated impacts from potential technical or institutional failure of these
measures, and (iv) human health and safety impacts from waterborne diseases.

 The key social safeguard issues arise from permanent and temporary land-taking that is
required for establishment of water reservoirs, development of primary and secondary
water distribution channels, and temporary restriction of access to farm land due to
construction of terraces.

 Negative impacts, if any, are related to both permanent and temporary land acquisition
associated with land husbandry measures for hillside agriculture in selected sites (e.g.
establishment of reservoirs, development of primary and secondary water distributions,
and construction and maintenance of terraces). These issues have been addressed in the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that was disclosed in accordance with OP 4.12.
The RPF provides for impact on all groups of vulnerable and marginalized men and
women, including returning and returned refugees, people affected by HIV/AIDS,
orphans and the elderly.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Indirect project impacts include increased use of agro-chemicals (although the project
supported crops will targets the organic market niche, therefore, agro-chemical use
increase is expected to be modest), and social changes associated with shift to irrigated
agriculture and consolidation of farming and catchment management efforts in target
areas.

 Long term impacts include water abstraction and changes to the hydrological regime,
and changes in land use and land cover in the catchment and the command area (e.g.
afforestation in the catchment, and shift to high value crops in the command area).

 Cumulative impacts, particularly on hydrology, are possible through future development
of other hillside irrigation schemes within the same watershed, and through development
of irrigated agriculture in downstream lowland marshes. The cumulative impacts under
the LWH project itself, are expected to be negligible due to (i) wide distribution of the
selected pilot sites, (ii) small size of the irrigation schemes, (iii) low levels of water
abstraction, (iv) and environmental management measures for ensuring adequate
outflows, limiting agro-chemical pollution, soil erosion and water losses.
 Cumulative impacts of hillside and lowland irrigation schemes on downstream wetlands
and marshlands are of concern since marshlands in Rwanda have been extensively
converted to agricultural uses. Based on official statistics, 94,000 ha of the total 168,000
ha of marshlands has been converted. (US AID 2008).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Infrastructure-only alternative: The original GoR design of the LWH program centered
almost exclusively on the infrastructure (hardware) aspect of hillside intensification and
only modest attention was given to farmer group formation and institutional capacity
building. This alternative was rejected as the preliminary technical mission in November
2008 concluded that the transformational nature of the land husbandry and irrigation
activities called for a holistic approach, involving extensive participatory processes
addressing the potential social impacts of the project (see Component A) as well.

 Micro-irrigation alternative: Although not part of the Government's original design, the
Project considered numerous micro- scale (pump) irrigation models as an alternative to
the dam-reservoir-conduit model. This alternative was rejected during the technical
mission and ensuing discussions with Government, as would not help meet the objectives
of the LWH. Namely, commercialized horticultural production requires year-round
production and hence storage of water. The current situation does not allow for year-
round production as there is no water in the dry season. Furthermore, such a highly
decentralized approach and large number of schemes would also limit the opportunities
for environmental oversight. Finally, the micro schemes could not have the same flood-
control benefits as the reservoir model.

 Supply-only focus: The original LWH model proposed by Government did not consider
marketing and post-harvest activities in its design. This alternative was rejected in favor
of the current design that addresses the critical constraints to marketing the envisioned
output under LWH land husbandry and irrigation activities, since the gaps in the
downstream value chain would render the LWH upstream investments unprofitable and
unsustainable (with corresponding adverse environmental and social impacts).

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Borrower capacity for both environmental and social safeguards implementation was
determined as effective. During implementation, the project performance on safeguards
has been rated as satisfactory. The SPIU has been staffed with full time staff: an
environmental specialist and two social specialists, who are well familiar with WB
safeguards policies and requirements for their implementation. The project includes
training and other environmental and social management capacity development measures
under Component A.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with communities at the LWH sites, local authorities and national
stakeholders were launched in 2008 parallel with site identification and pre-feasibility
studies during the development of the LWH concept and funding proposal. Consultations
were carried out by the Consultant's social specialist and rural sociologist, working
alongside his engineering and environmental staff in the form of community meetings,
individual interviews and focus groups. Such consultations are a continuous process, to
ensure that compensation is done to the satisfaction of PAPs, grievances are addressed in
a timely manner and that feedback is collected to inform project design for each site. The
consultations revealed that while the community members are keen to see the project
implementation to begin, their understanding of the project and resulting changes is
limited, and continuous liaison with the affected communities will be necessary to
disseminate information, collect feedback, and manage expectations.

 All environmental safeguards documents are cleared by the Rwanda Environmental
Management Authority (REMA) and the Bank. ESMF was disclosed on November 9,
2009 and RPF – on July 1, 2009. The proposed mitigation measures and their monitoring
plans are an integral part of the project design and costs. Site-specific Environmental and
Social Impact Assessments together with the Environmental and Social Management
Plans, Dam Safety Plans and Resettlement Action Plans are to be disclosed upon specific
site identifications prior to commencement of works on the site.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/23/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/23/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/23/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/23/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/23/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/23/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/23/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/23/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/23/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
  provisions for certification system?
  OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        Yes
  been made for public awareness and training?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Mark A. Austin                            10/14/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Svetlana Khvostova                        10/10/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Svetlana Khvostova                        10/10/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     10/18/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Severin L. Kodderitzsch                   10/16/2013
  Comments:
