                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                       Report No.: 83147
 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
Country:      Senegal                              Project ID:    P143605

Project Name: Taiba Ndiaye Independent Power Producer Project
Task Team                Demetrios Papathanasiou and Manuel Berlengiero
Leaders:
Estimated Appraisal Date:                             Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTG2                                  Lending Instrument: Partial Risk Guarantee
Sector:         Thermal Power Generation (100%)
Theme:          Infrastructure Services for Private Sector Development (100 %)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             Yes [ ]    No [x]
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD million)
Total Project Cost :         166.00                      Total Bank Financing:
Total Cofinancing:                                       Financing Gap:
                                Financing sources                                       Amount
Borrower/Recipient (US$m.):                                                                 0
IDA (US$m.):                                                                              40.00
IFC (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):
         Private sector and Debt Financiers
                                                                     TOTAL              166.00
Environmental Category:              A-Full Assessment
Is this a transferred project?                Yes [ ]                No [x]
Is this a repeater project?                   Simple [x]             Repeater [ ]

 2. Project Development Objectives

 The project development objective is to increase the power generated by Independent Power
 Producers
 3. Project Description

 The project consists in the construction and operation of a greenfield thermal power plant and auxiliary
 installation with an installed capacity of 96 MW and a guaranteed capacity of 70 MW. Four of the five
 engines will operate in continuous mode; the fifth one will serve as backup during maintenance or abnormal
 operations. The plant will run continuously, with an annual availability rate of 91% for a total production of
 558 GWh.

 Taiba Ndiaye will be using HFO as its fuel for the first years of its operation, as the Government is planning
 to have natural gas available in the country in sufficient quantities in coming years. The Heavy Fuel Oil
 (HFO) will be trucked-in from Dakar mainly with private transportation vehicles (up to about 70 vehicles per
 day, 11 fuel delivery trucks per day). Once unloaded, the heavy fuel will be treated by centrifugation before


                                                       1
being stored in tanks planned for that purpose. This mechanical processing will help improving the fuel
quality by extracting the residues (sludge) and to enhance reliability for an optimum functioning of the
engines. A combined cycle system will allow recycling the heat generated by the combustion engines to
generate steam and power a steam turbine generator, allowing an efficiency gain of 4% to 6% of the total
output of the engines.

The power plant has a footprint of 4.5 hectares and will be connected to the existing Tobene 220/90kV
substation owned and operated by SENELEC which is being refurbished and is located less than 100m away
from the project site.

Power will be sold to SENELEC on the basis of a 20 year contract. This contract can be renewed according
to future energetic challenges facing Senegal. This power plant project is part of more ambitious local
industrial development plans, initiated by SENELEC in 2011 over an area of 50 ha, of which includes the
Tobene power plant.

The project will be developed by Tobene Power SA (TP), a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), incorporated in
December 2011 under the laws of Senegal. It will be owned [90 percent] by Melec PowerGen Services S.A.
(MPG), a subsidiary of Matelec Group of Lebanon, and [10] percent by IFC InfraVentures.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

The project will be implemented in the Taiba Ndiaye commune (Tivouane District about 90 km north-east of
Dakar) on a 4.5 ha surface area, and more than 500 m away from the nearest village of Miname. The site is
located in the ‘’Northern Coast’’ groundwater system which is composed of both permeable sandy and
limestone layers; the water table is about 50 m, and there is no surface water body in the surrounding areas.
Therefore, the only concern will be the pollution of the aquifers through the incidental infiltration of
pollutants during the exploitation, namely in case of failure of the sewage/used oil treatment system On
biodiversity aspects, only three partially protected plant species and two protected bird species (the
red-billed hornbill and the African Grey Hornbill) have been identified in the influence area of the
project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Maman-Sani Issa, Sr. Environmental Specialist, AFTN2
Salamata Bal, Sr. Social Development Specialist, AFTCS

6. Applicable Performance Standards (PS)

Performance Standards (PS)                                                                     Triggered
PS 1. Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                    YES
PS 2. Labor and Working Conditions                                                               YES
PS 3. Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                                               YES
PS 4. Community Health, Safety and Security                                                      YES
PS 5. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                                              YES
PS 6. Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources            NO
PS 7. Indigenous People                                                                           NO
PS 8. Cultural Heritage                                                                           NO




                                                     2
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is a category A. Notwithstanding, the environmental analysis revealed no large scale or
irreversible significant negative impact either during the construction or the operation phase. The
environmental and social adverse impacts of medium magnitude which suggest specific mitigation measures
and caution throughout the project lifecycle, as of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
findings, are related to: (i) air pollution and potential health related risks due to dust and exhausts emissions
during construction; (ii) increasing of road traffic related accident risks during the construction and operation
phase in case of inappropriate information and signalization; (iii) water resources pollution with used oil and
wastewater during the operation as a result of accidental spill and leakages or mishandling; (iv) emission of
substantial quantity of greenhouse gases (CO2, NO2 and Sulfur) during operation phase; (v) occupational
diseases because of no observance or compliance with safety work conditions and standards; (vi) risk of
accidental fires or explosion with socio-economic damages and losses on-site and in the surrounding
communities.

With respect to land acquisition, the process for acquisition of parcels of land was managed by SENELEC
from 2011, as part of the acquisition of a total area of 50 ha earmarked for development. The Project site is
4.5 ha, representing less than 10% of the total acquired land. SENELEC’s land acquisition, which took place
prior to IFC’s involvement in the Project, resulted in economic displacement for 140 affected people
engaged in agricultural activities (fruits trees, manioc, peanuts, beans, millet etc) on the site. There were no
persons physically residing on the acquired land however there were four very early stage constructions with
basic foundations. As part of the supervision of this Project, a verification of livelihood restoration will take
place on a sample of the affected people.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The project design integrated pollution prevention and management mechanism composed of: (i) an effluent
treatment system including drainage, storage, flocculation and coagulation before releasing; (ii) sludge and
hazardous waste handling mechanism; (iii) domestic waste disposal mechanism; (iv) an overall emergency
preparedness mechanism including firefighting, oil spills, incidental leakages of sewage, explosion.
Nevertheless, throughout the operation phase, noise impact on the stakeholders and the potential cumulative
effect of the NO2, which computerized emission appeared higher than tolerable limits, must remain of
concern and be adequately monitored and reported.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
A multicriteria analysis including the ‘’no project’’ option, concluded that the construction of a thermal
power plant powered with a combination of heavy fuel oil (HFO) and combined cycle is the current best
compromise taking into account technical, economic, social and environmental sustainability in the country
context. However, using the railways which cross the project area (2km away of the project site) for the
transportation of HFO instead of transporting by trucks from Dakar could be an additional alternative with
additional added value on the economic and safety management sides.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The environmental and social management of the project will be carried out considering two complementary
approaches: (i) a transactional approach through the implementation, monitoring and reporting of the
mitigation measures of the preparation and construction phases as set forth in the Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) approved under the ESIA; (ii) a systemic approach through the implementation,

                                                       3
monitoring and reporting of the environmental and social action plan (ESAP), agreed on between the
IFC/Bank and the Borrower throughout the operation phase to the expiration of the Guarantee.

In essence, the ESMP provides: (i) a mitigation plan including measures to be implemented by the project for
each phase, in order to comply with the Senegalese regulations, standards and international best practices,
and detailed procedures to monitor measures, associated costs and corresponding responsibilities;; (ii) an
environmental oversight and monitoring plan; (iii) a capacity building and communication mechanism.

In summary, an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) was approved through the ESIA
and convened to be in place at the early stage of the project implementation. It is composed of:
     the mitigation measures of the preparation and construction phase;
     the installation and maintenance of functional air quality monitoring system;
     quantification of GHG emissions in accordance with internationally recognized methodologies and
       good practices;
     the emergency preparedness and response plan including environment, health and safety (EHS)
       issues;
     the designation of an EHS and social professional responsible of the management of the ESMS;
     the hiring of a third party qualified independent expert for the annual verification of the monitoring
       and evaluation information prior their sharing with the other stakeholders (Bank, Government,
       communities);
     the setting up of a Health and Safety Committee provided with sufficient resources, and operated in
       compliance with legal requirements.

The project developer, Tobene SA., has an experience of environmental and social management of such
infrastructure in the country as referred to its Kounoune Thermal Power Plant, which is currently under
operation. But it is worthy to mention that the latest Bank visit to Kounoune revealed some deficiencies with
regards to failure of the wastewater and used oil management system which are being addressed by
Kounoune, and recent failure of the air quality monitoring equipment; these issues are well addressed in the
ESMP for the Taiba Ndiaye Project. Furthermore, there are outside the fence issues such as : (a) the 500m
buffer zone required by the GoS which was not secured as the Decree regulating such area has expired and
has not been renewed by relevant authorities; and Kounoune could not stop the anarchic building of
residential properties within this buffer zone; (b) the installation by the SENELEC of approximately 100MW
of emergency generation leased which resulted in considerable air pollution within the Kounoune plant
beyond WBG guidelines; noting that prior to these generators, the power plant air emission were well within
WBG air quality limits. Although these issues have been escalated to the GoS, by the sponsors and
Kounoune's Lenders, no concrete actions has been undertaken. IFC has informed the sponsor at a very early
stage that we will not accept the situation with the encroachment of the buffer zone to be replicated in Taiba
Ndiaye and that at a minimum the required buffer zone from the hazard assessment which is approximately
379m will need to be secured. Tobene Power has agreed to this and has beacons to demarcate the 500m
buffer zone (Evidence of demarcation was visible during IFC Broad community support verification in
September); and will also have a second demarcation for the 379m. The community was also informed that
no residential properties could be built within the buffer zone and that only economic activities could take
place.

The Project is located in a sparsely populated area where the population density is between 50 and 100
inhabitants per km2. Agricultural activities (fruit trees (particularly mangoes), manioc, peanuts, beans, millet
etc) are reported as the main source of livelihoods in the Rural community of Taïba Ndiaye.

The process for acquisition of parcels of land was managed by SENELEC from 2011, as part of the
acquisition of a total area of 50 ha earmarked for development. The Project site is 4.5 ha representing less

                                                       4
than 10% of the total acquired land. The land acquired by SENELEC falls under the national domain
category allowing expropriation to take place for public utility services. However, both the law on land
acquisition dated July 1976 and the December 2008 “guidelines on the legal instruments to secure the land
rights of citizens? enable any occupant of a parcel within a national domain land to be compensated for their
efforts and investment given that access to national domain land is free

SENELEC’s land acquisition, which took place prior to IFC’s involvement in the Project, resulted in
economic displacement for 140 affected people engaged in agricultural activities (fruits trees, manioc,
peanuts, beans, millet etc) on the site. There were no persons physically residing on the acquired land
however there were four very early stage constructions with basic foundations. A special government
committee sanctioned by order was put in place in August 2011 - (“Arrêté portant création de la Commission
Administrative d'Evaluation des Impenses dans le cadre de l'extension de la centrale de Tobène - Taïba
Ndiaye?) to work on the land acquisition process and evaluate compensation amounts. The committee in
consultation with the affected people reviewed the official compensation scale which is dated 1994 to bring
more in line with current market price. Additional compensation of 300,000 CFA (roughly 600 USD) per
person, corresponding to approximately 8 months of minimum agricultural wage was awarded as
compensation for the temporary loss of income due to loss of land. Standing assets were also compensated.
Alternative land and monetary compensation was provided by the rural authorities for the four affected
people that had began foundation works on the Project site. The compensation process by SENELEC was
carried out in consultation with the affected people while public consultations indicate communities’ wishes
for complementary compensation from Tobene Power for the loss of cultivated land. Full compensation to
affected people was carried out between March and April 2012. During the IFC’s appraisal in February 2013
it was observed that agricultural activities were still ongoing at the Project site despite affected people having
received compensation. Alternative agricultural land is available within the community. As recommended in
the ESIA, Tobene Power will inform the community of the anticipated start of construction to ensure that all
farmers harvest their crops prior to land clearance activities and cease all activities on the land; the public
hearing for the Project will be an opportunity to do so, and followed with another formal communication.

The Project will result in loss of pedestrian access currently used by the community and as such Tobene
Power committed to constructing a new path around the site to ensure continued unrestricted movement for
the community.

The regulatory framework clearly spells out the environmental permitting procedure and the
obligations of project developers with regards to the implementation of the environmental and
social management plan (ESMP). The Directorate of Environmental Assessment and Control
(‘Direction de l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classes’’ - DEEC) has the overall
responsibility of enforcing the environmental assessment procedure through the approval ESIAs
and the monitoring of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). Further, at country
level, there is sufficient capacity (laboratories, firm, etc.) for the implementation of the approved
mitigation measures of the proposed project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As part of the ESIA, a comprehensive stakeholder engagement was undertaken to meet the requirement of
PS1 and included individual as well as group interviews to obtain views on the project from the local
communities, and the local, regional, and national authorities; more specifically Rural Community of Taïba
Ndiaye; village chiefs and notable of Mbayenne, Keur-Mallé, and Minam Diop; women and young girls;
regional and national technical services departments, etc. These consultations took place in August and
September 2012 as part of the ESIA process. The Project has been welcomed in the community both for job
creation, development of the region and increase access to electricity. No objections to the Project have been

                                                        5
raised during the ESIA stakeholder engagement process. No grievances have been received to date. A
community grievance mechanism will be put in place to allow community to lodge their grievances. Tobene
Power will maintain a register of complaints during construction and operation phases including actions
taken to address such complaints.

The ESRS and ESAP were prepared by IFC, in collaboration with the Bank safeguards team, per the
requirements of OP 4.03. The Bank/IFC ESRS and ESAP are available at the IFC website:
http://ifcext.ifc.org/ifcext/spiwebsite1.nsf/651aeb16abd09c1f8525797d006976ba/c398d03a1bfa063085257b
870060c962?OpenDocument

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                              6/16/2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                           7/23/2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
                                                                                     October 2013
Executive Directors
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                           7/9/2013
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan/Vector Management Plan
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Comments:
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Resources, the respective issues are to
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or ESAP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by
 the project decision meeting)
PS1. - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [ x ]     No [ ]       N/A [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ ]        No [ ]      N/A [ ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the ESAP incorporated in Yes [ x ]     No [ ]       N/A [ ]
the credit/loan?
PS 2. – Labor and Working Conditions


                                                     6
Does a Human resources policy has been agreed on as part of the     Yes [ x ]   No [ ]    N/A [ ]
ESMS ?
PS 3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Does the EA adequately address pollution prevention, control and Yes [ x ]      No [ ]    N/A [ ]
abatement issues?
Is a separate PMP/VMP required?                                     Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
If yes, has the PMP/VMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP/VMP                Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [x ]
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project
team include a Specialist?
PS 4. Community Health, Safety and Security
Does the EA adequately address communities and workers              Yes [ x ]   No [ ]    N/A [ ]
exposure to hazards and safety issues ?
Has an Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) been Yes [ x ]           No [ ]    N/A [ ]
prepared in stand-alone or as part of the ESAP ?
PS 5. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     Yes [ ]    No [ x ]   N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan ?                                    Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
PS 6. Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
Does the project result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ ]    No [ x ]   N/A [ ]
natural habitats or threatening of endangered/iconic species?
Have Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) been prepared                   Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
Does the project design include satisfactory mitigation measures    Yes [ x ]   No [ ]    N/A [ ]
acceptable to the Bank ?
PS 7. Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected            Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [x ]
Indigenous Peoples?
PS8. –Cultural Heritage
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes []    No [ ]    N/A [ x]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public
place in a form and language that are understandable and            Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Performance Standards
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to performance standards ?
Have costs related to safeguard measures been included in the       Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to         Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
performance standards ?

                                                   7
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project   Yes [X]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
legal documents?

D. Approvals

 Task Team Leaders:                     Demetrios Papathanasiou &
                                        Manuel Berlengiero
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Advisor:           Alexandra Bezeredi
 Sector Manager:                        Meike van Ginneken




                                                      8
