                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                                              Report No.:AC7159

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/10/2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Sierra Leon            Project ID: P153805
Project Name: Western Area Power Generation Project
Task Team Leader: Carol Litwin / Tomoko Matsukawa
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30,     Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2015
2015
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending Instrument: Guarantee
Sector: Energy and mining
Theme: Thermo Power
IBRD Amount (US$m):
IDA Amount (US$m):
GEF Amount (US$m):
PCF Amount (US$m):
Other financing amounts by source:
IDA Guarantees: Up to US$ 40 million
Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing              Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [ ]                  No [X]

B. Project Objectives

The project development objective is to increase the power generated by independent power
producers and mobilize private capital.

Progress toward the PDOs will be assessed through the following indicators:
    Amount of electricity generated by the project (GWh/year);
    Indirect project beneficiaries1 (number)
    Private sector capital mobilized (amount, US$)

.




1
 Direct Project Beneficiaries has been substituted with indirect project beneficiaries based on the nature of the
proposed operation.
C. Project Description

The proposed operation consists of an IDA payment guarantee back-stopping payment
obligations of the western area power generation project (the Project) to mitigate the risks of the
low creditworthiness of EDSA as a sole power off-taker, as well as the risk of non-performance
by GoSL of its contractual obligations including its guarantee of EDSA’s off-take performance.
This guarantee will enable private investment in and facilitate the financing of the project. The
paragraph below describes the Project and the proposed IDA guarantee.

The Project. The project comprises the development, financing, construction and operation by
an independent power producer (IPP) of a green-field thermal plant running on heavy fuel oil
(HFO) with 56 MW installed capacity on a build-operate-transfer basis. The IPP, CEC SL, has
been established as a special purpose private company by the CEC Africa Investment Ltd (50.1%
equity) and TCQ Power Ltd (49.9% equity). The project might be extended at a later stage to
reach a total capacity of 128 MW.

The project comprises the following three main components:

   (i)     a power station with 7 generating units run by medium speed diesel reciprocating
           engines using HFO rated at approximately 8 MW nominal output each;
   (ii)    transmission interconnection including a 33 kV indoor substation at the project site
           with 33kV transmission lines connecting the power plant to the Ropoti substation
           and sequentially to the Blackhall Road and Wellington substations of the existing
           distribution network; and
   (iii)   a fuel supply facility comprising a 1.2 km pipeline from the landing jetty to the
           project site and fuel storage tanks at the site.

In addition, a water system will be installed for storage and treatment of water to be consumed
on site. The project will be situated on Government owned land about 4 km east of the center of
Freetown. The site is currently occupied by the Government and commercial premises. A lease
agreement for the site is currently being negotiated. Construction of the power plant will be
undertaken under a turn-key engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contract.

A competitive bidding process for the EPC contract is underway. Shortlisting has been
completed and the bidding documents has been issued. Fuel will be procured through
international competitive bidding as there is currently only one supplier for HFO in Sierra Leone.
The IDA team will review the overall procurement for the project, to ensure that general
principles of industry-wide standards of economy, efficiency and transparency for this scale and
timing of procurement are followed.

Project Costs. The total project financing requirements for the first phase of 56 MW are
estimated at US$125.1 million, of which the construction works are estimated at US$ 71.2
million including the estimated EPC cost at US$47.3 million as well as substation investments of
US$10 million. Other financing requirements include working capital requirements, fuel
inventory, pre-funded debt service reserve and financing costs.
Contractual Framework. The project will sell power to the EDSA, as the exclusive off-taker,
under a long-term power purchase agreement (PPA). A preliminary PPA was signed in May
2014 by the project sponsors and the Government for a term of 20 years from the commercial
operation date for the first 56 MW phase2, whereby the GoSl and the grid operator (EDSA) are
jointly liable for off-taker performance. A final PPA will need to be signed by EDSA being the
off-taker, whereby the GoSL is envisaged to retain its contractual obligations as a guarantor and
concession grantor. The preliminary PPA contains provisions typical for a concession/BOOT
agreement and specifies government support provisions which include, among others, the
obligation to make a request for an IDA guarantee to backstop on-going PPA payments from the
off-taker. The allocation of commercial, technical and political risks between the EDSA/GoSL
and the project company under the preliminary PPA is largely consistent with industry standards
in a limited recourse project financing in similar countries, whereby project development,
financing, construction delays/cost overrun, plant availability, O&M are under the responsibility
of the IPP.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The project is located 4 km east of the center of Freetown on an existing industrial site. Part of
the site is used for small-scale farming. The preparation of a RAP by the National Power
Authority (NPA) is ongoing. No residents inhabit the project site. The site is located 500 m
south from the Sierra Leone River Estuary, which is a Ramsar site and 200 m west of
Wellington Creek. The Thermo Power Plant will be air cooled so that negligible amounts of
water will be used and no increase of water temperature in the estuary is expected.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The insitutional capacity of CEC Africa SL with regard to Safety, Health and Environmental
(SHE) aspects will be assessed during appraisal. However, the mother company CEC has
considerable experience in SHE. The SHE aspects will be implemented by the Owner’s
Engineer, the EPC Contractor and the plant Operator.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Robert Robelus, Consultant - Environmental Specialist (GENDR)
Demba Balde, Snr. Social Development Specialist (GSURR)




2
    And 25 years door-to-door for the three phases in total.
II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                           Yes          No       TB
                                                                                           D
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental
                                                                    X
and Social Risks and Impacts
It is being proposed that the project being categorized as Category A, requiring an ESIA
and an ESMP Construction and an ESMP Operation. The client proposes to prepare an
Environmental, Social and Health Impact Assessment (ESHIA). The proposed project
meets the criteria in OP 4.03 for application of the Performance Standards. The
Environmental Protection Agency of Sierra Leone (EPA-SL) requires the preparation of a
Scoping Report. The client CEC SL has already prepared a Scoping Report in which IFC’s
comments have been included. The ESHIA still has to be prepared. The main potential
environmental impacts are impacts on air quality and noise, risk of hydrocarbon pollution
from the hydrocarbon transport and storage facilities and incineration of hazardous wastes.

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                X
The labor and working conditions as outlined in PS 2 need to be elaborated in the ESHIA.

PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                  X
Pollution prevention and response to accidents involving pollutant releases will be central
concerns in the ESHIA. Spill prevention plans and emergency response plans will be
prepared in association with the ESHIA. WBG EHS Guidelines and good international
industry practices will serve as references for development of the ESMP.

PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                      X
Emergency Response Plans will need to be prepared as part of the ESHIA and the
potentially affected communities will need to be made aware of them.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement          X
A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) needs to be prepared and implemented in compliance
with PS 5.

PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable
                                                                                   X
Management of Living Natural Resources
There are no sensitive biodiversity areas located in the project area. PS 6 is not triggered.

PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                        X
No groups that meet the definition in PS7 have been identified in the project area.

PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                    X
No cultural heritage issues have been identified. A “Chance Find Procedure” needs to be
included in all contractor contracts.

OP 7.50: Projects on International Waterways                                     X
OP 7.50 is not triggered since the Project is not located near any International Waterways.
III. SAFEGUARDS PREPARATION PLAN

A. The disclosure of the ESHIA and RAP are anticipated before July 31, 2015 and the PAD-
   stage ISDS would be prepared:

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: NA

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing3 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: The
   ESHIA Scoping report is finished, while the RAP for the project site is under preparation.
   The ESHIA report suitable for disclosure is anticipated before July 31, 2015. The RAP will
   be finished and disclosed at the same time, if not before.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                             Name: Carol Litwin                                                  Date
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards                           Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                                            Date
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                               Name: Meike van Ginneken                                            Date
      Comments:




3   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
