                                                                                       84783
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: December 1, 2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Solomon Islands                         Project ID: P146816
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any): P100311
Project Name: Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy Project, Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Tendai Gregan (Energy Specialist, EASNS)
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 2013       Estimated Board Date: 20 March 2014
Managing Unit: EASNS                             Lending Instrument: IDA Credit & IDA Grant
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (60%), public sector governance (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 13
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$3.3 million (Project Implementation Agency)
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X]                   No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes [ ]       No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

To improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of the SIEA.

3. Project Description:

Progress under the original Project (P100311) has been encouraging in terms of financial
performance of the SIEA, from virtually insolvent in 2011 to posting an audited solid profit in
2012 and a strengthening of SIEA management, with the successful re-appointment of a General
Manager, a Commercialization Manager (Chief Financial Officer) and a professional director to
the SIEA Board. However, the SIEA needs to further strengthen the existing generation capacity
and system reliability.

The Additional Financing activities will support a significant program of capital investment of
the SIEA, which will contribute to improving power system reliability in Honiara, where 90% of
the country’s power is produced and consume. The SIEA's exact capital expenditure program is
not yet finalized, but it is known that it is assessing around US$70 to US$75 million in
investments, comprising: a) $20m for 10 MW of diesel generation; b) $11 million for outstation
generation and distribution networks; and c) $39 to 45 million for network upgrades on the
Honiara grid, including major new connections such as transmission line for the Tina River
Hydropower project.

Proposed new activities

The Additional Financing, totaling US$13.0 million over a 3 year period, would support the
following components of the parent project:

 1. Component 1, Strengthening Management. Capacity Building ($2.7 million, of which
 $2.0 million is IDA Grant and $0.7 million IDA Credit). Additional financing under this
 component will finance the following activities:
           a) Technical Assistance and training on dispatch and control, system planning,
               integration of renewables and Independent Power Producers;
           b) Provision of engineering services (owner’s engineer) for project design and
               supervision (to mid-2017);
           c) Capital projects managers from 2014 – 2017; and
           d) Finance and Due Diligence Technical Assistance (legal, finance officer,
               procurement officer, for upcoming Power Purchasing Agreements, e.g., Tina
               River Hydro and/or Savo Geothermal).

 2. Component 3, Technical Operations. Capital investments for improving the reliability
 and efficiency of the Honiara power grid ($10.2 million IDA Credit). Four priority network
 investments would be financed to enhance the capacity of distribution transformers, lines and
 substations on the Honiara grid in order to enable it to meet existing and growing power
 demands more efficiently, provide better quality and quantity of electric power for productive
 uses, and reduce power system losses. Specifically, additional financing under this component
 would finance the following:
           a) Upgrading of the transformer capacity at Ranadi, the city’s main industrial zone,
              by adding one 5MVA, 33kV/11kV transformer and a second 33kV switchboard
              at Ranadi;
           b) Construction of a new system control room and dispatch centre at Ranadi;
           c) Installation of a 12.5MVA transformer and upgrading of the switching
              arrangements at Lungga Power Station;
           d) Construction of a 33kV/11kV Substation at Kola’a Ridge, including a 1x7.5
              MVA transformer; and
           e) Relocation of the second power circuit to supply the residential area to the south
              of Honiara Airport (Feeder 12 area) by building a new overhead power line and
              an underground circuit around the airport that links the East Honiara Substation to
              the Feeder 12 area.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
Project is located in Honiara city, Solomon Islands. Except for short power line extension and
laying of underground cable around the east end of the airport runway, the rest of the
investments will be carried out within the existing operating sites.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Anil Somani (Environmental Safeguards Consultant)
Mary C. K. Bitekerezo (Senior Social Development Specialist)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes   No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     x
Except for a short, new, overhead power line and underground
power cable to facilitate the relocation of Feeder 12 from Lungga
Power Station to East Honiara substation, to supply the residential
area to the south of Honiara International Airport, the rest of the
construction is within the boundary of the existing power plant and
transformer stations.
Minor impacts from dust, noise, possible soil erosion, etc. are
expected during construction but can be easily mitigated through
good management practices. During operations stage, the new
transformers are expected to contribute low-level humming noise.
The noise level is expected to be well within the norm. An ESMF
has been prepared to address the potential environmental and social
impacts. Even though the project footprint is known projects design
and other details are not available.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                  x
As most of the work will be carried out within the existing sites, and
as there are no natural habitats in the area, the Policy is not
triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           x
No forests will be impacted by the proposed works.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      x
The use of pesticides is not envisaged
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       x
The proposed work will be carried out within the boundaries of the
existing sites. No physical cultural resources are expected. However
a chance find clause will be included in the contract, in case such a
resource is unearthed.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                x
There are no known Indigenous Peoples (IPs) as defined by the
policy found in the project area of influence. This project is located
in an urban area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          x
The policy is not triggered as the new overhead power line to
facilitate the relocation of Feeder 12 from Lungga to East Honiara
and underground power circuit from the Lungga Power station, to
supply the residential area to the south of Honiara International
Airport will be positioned by the side of the public road, within the
road easement. As such there is no land acquisition or involuntary
resettlement. All other works will take place within the boundaries
of the existing facilities for which land was leased to the Solomon
Islands Electricity Authority as early as 1971.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    x
The project will not finance any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                            x
The project will not support any activities on International
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                     x
There are no known disputed areas in the project area of influence.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project will cause no major social or environmental impacts, and the minor impacts that it
will have can be readily mitigated and resolved. The environmental impacts of the project are
expected to be mostly construction related resulting from dust, soil erosion, minor drainage
issues, and disposal of excess excavated materials from drilling of pole holes and ditch for laying
underground cable. Operational impacts are expected to be limited to a very low humming sound
from transformers.

There is no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement arising from the proposed activities since
activities will take place within the confines of the existing facilities on land leased by the
Solomon Islands Electricity Authority. One proposed sub-project — the extension of the
overhead Feeder Line 12 from Lungga to the Honiara East substation — will be carried out
within the public road right of way / easement and no new land acquisition or impacts are
envisaged. To meet with the Civil Aviation Safety requirements, the power cables crossing the
eastern end of the runway will be buried underground, outside the airport boundary fence.

The project is located in an urban area and no Indigenous Peoples (IPs) as defined under OP4.10
were found in the project area of influence. Communities from the area(s) of the sub-projects
have been consulted to ensure broad community support.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

The project would contribute to improving the reliability and efficiency of electricity supplies,
and support economic growth. Without the project, people and businesses will experience an
increase in the frequency and duration of power supply interruptions, on a power system that
already has high levels of outages. No potential indirect and or long term impacts are anticipated
due to future activities in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The construction and operations related impacts of this project will be mitigated through good
management practices as per guidance provided in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that has been prepared and disclosed both in country and at the World Bank
Infoshop. An ESMF was chosen because even though the locations of the projects are known,
design and other details for the projects are not yet available. This ESMF has a screening
checklist which will be used to assess each proposed sub-project for any environmental and
social impacts. An ESMP which provides specific mitigation measures for any identified impacts
will be prepared for each of the sub-projects in the Additional Financing.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The key stakeholders are electricity consumers in Honiara. The public consultation process
commenced on 29 October 2013, and used media coverage through newspapers, radios,
information posters and public meetings, regarding potential Environmental and Social issues
relating to the proposed network upgrades and the specific activities of this project around
Honiara, in both English and Pidgin. In addition, the project has established wider outreach to
other key stakeholder groups including SIWA, Telecom, Pan Pacific, Solomon Island National
University (SINU), Ministry of Communication and Aviation (MCA), Seventh Day Adventist
Authority (SDA) and Market Vendors.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                              November 5, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          December 3, 2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                           December 3, 2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ X ]    No [ ]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     An ESMF has been prepared by the
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?               Borrower and reviewed and
                                                             approved by the EAP Regional
                                                             Safeguards Secretariat.
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ X ]    No [ ]      N/A [ ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes [ X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ X ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Tendai Gregan                                11/18/2013
 Environmental Specialist:           Anil Somani                                  11/18/2013
 Social Development Specialist       Mary Bitekerezo                              11/18/2013
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):
 Approved by:
 Sector Manager:                     Michel Kerf                                  02/08/2014
   Comments:
