                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      ADDITIONAL FINANCING

                                                                                                      Report No.:
                                                                                                   93462
Date ISDS Updated: 12119/2014

Date OriginaliSDS Approved/Disclosed: 4118/20 13

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Proiect Data
 CountrY:                           Solomon Islands             ProJect ID:          PIS2709
                                                                Parent Project       Pll4987
                                                                ID:
 Proieet Name:                      Additional Financine for Solomon Islands Raoid Emolovment Proiect (REP)
 Parent Prolect Name:               Raoid Emi>10Yiilent Prcileci7REPl
 Task Team Leader:                  Sollva M. Sultan
 Estimated Aonraisal Date:          December I0, 2014            Estimated Board Date: March 31,2015
 Managing Unit:                     EASNS                        Lending Instrument:       Project Investment
                                                                                           FinancinR (SPF Grant)
 Sectortsl:                         Other social services (90%); Public administration-Other social services (10%)
 Theme(s):                          Social safety nets (50%); Conflict prevention and post conflict reconstruction
                                    (20%); Other social protection and risk management (200.4); City-wide

 Is this project processed under OP
                                    infrastructure and service deliverv (10%)

 Resnonse to Crises and Emernencies ?
                                     !;70  (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.QO (Rapid Yes  I
 Financin" tin USD Million\
 Total Proiect Cosc               14.00                        I Total Bank Financin~t:    4.00
 Financin2Gan                     I o.oo                      l
           Finaneiii2Source                                                                Amount
           Borrower
           IDA CRW Credit                                                                      2.5 million
           IDA CRW Grant                                                                        1.5 million
           SPF Grant
           Total
 Environmental Assessment            B- Partial Assessment
 Cat..,orv:
 Is this a Reneater Prolect?         No


Background

The Solomon Islands is a fragile state and is vulnerable to conflict. The country has been rebuilding its
economy which was severely affected by the economic downturn in the late 1990s/early 2000s and the
subsequent tension and ethnic conflicts which arose out of the crisis. The country continues to be fragile
as evidenced by recent riots and tensions from the slow response to the recovery efforts during the recent
flooding.

As a small Pacific island state, Solomon Islands is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Not only is
it prone to earthquakes it is also at risk to cyclones. In April 2014, the Solomon Islands experienced
severe flooding caused by an unprecedented tropical depression induced heavy rains which battered the
country from April 1-5, 2014. The rainfall was deemed to be rarer than a one"in-100 year event. The
flooding resulted in the loss of lives, homes and businesses and had a devastating i_mpact on the capital
city of Honiara and Guadalcanal Province which were declared disaster zones.
The Government of Solomon Islands (SIG) requested the World Bank to lead a Damage and Loss
Assessment (DaLA) in coordination with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), European Union (EU)
and UN partners. The assessment estimates that total damage and loss was equivalent to US$107.8
million, which is about 9.2% of the country's GOP while priority recovery and reconstruction needs were
estimated at US$56 million. The needed reconstruction exceeds the capacity of the SIG and would place a
significant strain on the country's economy. The SIG requested the World Bank and other donors for
financial support.

Crisis Response Window. To cover the funding shortfall required for the identified priority recovery and
rehabilitation needs, the SIG requested to tap into the Crisis Response Window (CRW) under IDA. On
behalf of SIG, the Bank submitted a US$10 million proposal to the Bank's Executive Directors, which
has been approved, with the following allocations:

            a. US$2.0 million towards Development Policy Operation 2 ($4-6 million in total) to help
               the government cover the costs incurred in responding to the flooding;

            b. US$4.0 million towards the Rural Development Program 2 (US$9 million total budget),
               which would allow the operation to respond to the increased needs in the flood -hit rural
               areas; and

            c. US$4.0 million towards the Rapid Employment Project Additional Financing (entirely
               financed from CRW) to rehabilitate tertiary roads in flood hit areas in Honiara.

The REP AF will scale up all the existing components of the project. In addition, it will finance a new
subcomponent (Part I A (iii)), namely the improvement and maintenance of urban and peri-urban roads in
and around Honiara to reinstate critical access for small urban communities to the main roads and to
basic socio-economic services. The bulk of the AF will go to this new sub-component. The rehabilitation
of these roads is essential in enabling the city of Honiara to resume all commercial and social activities
undertaken before the flooding and contribute to the overall recovery efforts in the country. In addition,
the Closing Date of the project will be extended from June 30,2015 to December31, 2016.

Activities to be financed by the AF will slightly shift the focus and purpose of activities under MID
Subcomponent lA from short-term employment generation to improving the quality of secondary and
tertiary roads to make them more resilient against future severe weather events. Activities under the AF
will still generate an additional 120,000 labor days, and provide short-term employment for
approximately 1,500 people.

The proposed changes to the PDO will also be incorporated into the existing grant agreements under the
project: SPF TF095966 and PRIF TF096620.

Application of Para.J2 ofOPlD.O. The AF was processed applying para. 12 ofOP!O.O which allows for
condensed processing procedures. . The AF meets the eligibility criteria for applying condensed
procedures: (i) Solomon Islands is a fragile state and (ii) is in urgent need of assistance due to a natural
disaster(flooding in April2014). This approach was endorsed by the Country Director.

2. Project Objectives

Parent Project Development Objective (PAD): The project development objective is "to assist targeted
vulnerable urban populations in the Recipient's territory to: (i) increase their incomes through the
provision of short term employment; and (ii) improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment
skills that are valued in the workplace and society."

                                                     2
Clrange in PDO. The AF will expand the scope of activities under REP. A new subcomponent I A( iii)
will be added to the Project Description. As a result, the PDO will be amended as follows: "To assist
targeted vulnerable urban populations in the Recipient's territory to (i) increase their incomes through the
provision of short term employment; (ii) improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment
skills that are valued in the workplace and society; and (iii) improve their access to services and markets
through repaired, more climate resilient roads and access infrastructure."
3. Project Description

The Rapid Employment Project (REP) was processed as an emergency project to provide short term
employment and pre-employment training to vulnerable groups at the time when ethnic conflicts, brought
on by the global financial crisis, were high in the country.

The project has three components:

I.      The project has three main components:

        Component 1: Rapid Employment Scheme (RES), designed to provide short-term employment to
        unemployed residents of Honiara through labor based public works.                It comprises two
        subcomponents:

        Sub-component M:._Road Repair and Maintenance Scheme executed by the Ministry of
        Infrastructure Development (MID), which includes:

                    i.   Carrying out of labor-based road repair and maintenance works of the unpaved
                         urban and peri-urban roads in and around Honiara;

                   ii.   Provision of technical assistance and training to build the capacity of local works
                         contractors and of MID

        Sub-component 1B- Urban Works and Services is implemented by the Honiara City Council
        (HCC) which is responsible for sub-project activities such as street cleaning, brushing and
        clearing, development of community access infrastructure,;

        Component 2: Pre-Employment Training (PET), provides basic life skills training to REP
        beneficiaries to prepare them for RES and for future employment opportunities.

Component 3: Project Management Support, provides technical support to the implementing agencies,
HCCandMID.


Summary of Activities under Additional Financing



2.      The proposed additional financing will scale up the three components of REP as described below,
and start implementing an additional subcomponent Al(iii).

3.     Sub Component lA - Road Repair and Maintenance Scheme (USS2,770,000). A new
subcomponent is being added. under the Road Repair and Maintenance scheme, namely, the
'improvement and maintenance of urban and peri-urban roads in and around Honiara'. Activities under

                                                     3
 this subcomponent are different from the road repair and maintenance activities previously carried out
 under REP in two ways. Firstly, the primary focus of the activities will shift from labor-genemtion to
 developing more climate resilient roads th~t can be accessible to vulnerable communities in all weather
 conditions. Secondly, the AF activities will entail a mix of labor- based and machine based operations.
 The envisaged total length of road improvements is expected to be approximately 12 kilometers (roads
 made more climate resilient), with a further 10 kilometers of maintenance and spot improvements. Works
 contracts for the roads will come to a total of US$2,240,000 and the remaining US$530,000 will go
.towards the procurement of goods and services, including equipment, materials, and technical
 supervision.

4.      Sub Component lB- Urban Works and Services Scheme (US$645,000). Under the proposed
AF this sub-component will continue to fund street cleaning activities for an extra year (until the proposed
revised closing date), 5 additional concrete pedestrian access paths, and repairs to two schools. This is
expected to genemte an additional 50,000 labor days, and the community infrastructure will benefit an
additional 7,000 people.

5.    Component 2 -Pre-Employment Training (US$165,000). The proposed AF will continue pre-
employment training and job and social service referml services through the extended term of REP.

6.       Component 3 -Project Management Support ($420,000). The proposed AF will cover
incremental project management costs for the additional 18 months. This would include the costs of rental
and utilities, operating costs, staff, monitoring and evaluation, especially associated with project closure.



4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

The project focuses on Honiara and its surrounding peri-urban areas.

The Solomon Islands is a fragile state and is wlnerable to conflict. The country has been rebuilding its
economy which was severely affected by the economic downturn in the late 1990s/early 2000s and the
subsequent tension and ethnic conflicts which arose out of the crisis. The country continues to be fragile
as evidenced by recent riots and tensions from the slow response to the recovery efforts during the recent
flooding.

As a small Pacific Island state, Solomon Islands is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Not only is
it prone to earthquakes, it is also at risk to cyclones and tsunamis. In April 2014, the Solomon Islands
experienced severe flooding caused by an unprecedented tropical depression induced heavy rains which
battered the country from April 1-5, 2014. The rainfall was deemed to be rarer than a one-in-100 year
event. The flooding resulted in the loss of lives, homes and businesses, damages to existing
infrastructures including roads. Honiara and Guadalcanal Province were declared disaster zones.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists ..

Ms. Ly Thi Dieu Vu, Environmental Consultant
Mr. Roberto Tordecilla, Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered




                                                     4
Safeguard Policy        Tril!!!ered?   Exolanation (Ootionall
Assessment (OP/BP                      generating activities (road repair, stormwater drainage cleaning,
4.01)                                  construction of concrete access paths, street cleaning and landscaping)
                                       contribute to make the city cleaner and more attractive. The proposed
                                       investments under the AF project (repairing and improving tertiary roads
                                       damaged by the flood) is expected to make the roads less dusty in dry
                                       weather and less muddy in rainy weather. Better road surface also help to
                                       reduce gas emissions from vehicles. The proposed investments under the
                                       AF are small scale in nature and thus the potential impacts and risks would
                                       be limited to dust, noise, traffic and ground disturbance, and occupational
                                       health issues. These potential impacts are marginal, localized, temporary
                                       and manageable.

                                       An Environmental and Social Management Guidelines (ESMG) bas been
                                       developed and applied for the parent project. It contains specific
                                       environmental mitigation measures applicable for each type of physical
                                       activities financed by the project. The ESMF was updated in October 2012
                                       and reviewed again andre-disclosed in March 2014 taking into account the
                                       experiences from parent project implementation. Since the types of AF
                                       project investments are the same as under the parent project, the existing
                                       ESMG is deemed adequate to address any potential environmental and
                                       social safe!!Uards imoacts which mav arise under the AF.
 Natural Habitats       No             As the project will be implemented in already developed urban areas
 (OP/BP 4.04)                          including streets, roads and local communities, the Project will not cause
                                       anv impacts on any natural habitats.
 Forests (OP/BP         No             The Project will not cause any impacts on forests or involve deforesiJltion
 4.36)                                 as sub-projects will be imolemented in urban areas.
 Pest Management        No             No chemicals will be used in the projects for pest control
 (0P4.o9)
 Physical Cultural      No             Excavation would be very limited within the existing road base. Materials
 Resources (OP/BP                      used for road repair and rehabilitation will be purchased from local
 4.11)                                 suppliers, no borrow plts or quarries will be open under the project.
                                       Therefore OP 4.11 is not triggered.
 Indigenous Peoples     No             OP 4.10 was not triggered under the original project, and under subsequent
 (OP/BP4.10)                           AF operations, since il has been assessed and reconfirmed that no
                                       Indigenous Peoples reside in and around Honiara. The project has targeted
                                       urban and peri-urban communities in Honiara mostly made up of migrants
                                       during the last 4 years, and the AF activities will take place in the same
                                       geographical locations as the parent project.
 Involuntary            Yes            The exact details of road sections to be rehabilitated are not yet available at
 Resettlement                          this stage. While unlikely, some structures or crops may be affected and, in
 (OP/BP 4.12)                          some cases, small portions of land may be acquired. The project has
                                       developed a Resettlement Policy Framework which forms part of the
                                       ESMG for the project. This will provide guidance to the project in
                                       addressing issues related to land acquisition for Right of Way (RoW)-
                                       related issues.
 Safety of Darns        No             The AF Project activities would not affect any existing dam or depend on
I (OP/BP 4.37)                         the safety of any existing dam.
 Projects on            No             The AF Project will not be implemented in areas of international waterways
 International                         or use water resources from international waterways
 Waterways (OP/BP'
 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed   No             The AF Project will not be implemented in disputed areas.
 Areas (OP/BP 7.60)



                                                        5
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues nnd Their Management

A.  Sum1m1rv ofkzy sa(eJ!IIImfs i.ssues
 I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe :my potential
 lm·gc scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 Both the parent project's activities (road repair, stonnwatcr drainage cleaning, construction of concrete access
 footpaths in urban settlements, street cleaning, landscaping activities. and small scale community environmental
 improvement initiatives) and the AP's proposed investments (repairing and rehabilitating tertiary roads damaged
 by the flood) are small~scale. The potential negative environmental impacts associated with these investments are
 small-scale, mostly sitc~spccific and manageable. The Project would not cause any large scale, significant or
 irreversible impacts.

 The parent project has brought about positive social and environmental impacts through short-term employment
 provision, improved local sanitation, roadside vegetation control and waste collection. Additional positive impacts
 are expected with the proposed activities under the AF as rehabilitated roads will be safer for people in rainy
 weather, more sustainable roads will allow continued access to services nnd markets in poor weather conditions.
 Improved drainage will reduce flooding risks.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
 in the proJect area:
 It is hoped that the demonstration cfTects of some of the REP activities related to urban regeneration and
 environmental improvements will lead to some positive changes in the cleanliness of areas and communities where
 REP groups are not directly active or working. This could include greater awareness about not putting garbage into
 undcsignatcd areas everywhere, keeping streams clean, and recycling.

 In addition to providing short-term employment and pre-employment training, the AF will build on the positive
 impacts which REP has made in several key areas: (i) visible improvement to the urban environment from the
 street cleaning activities which in tum created a sense of pride and interest in urban regeneration and
 environmental protection; (ii) concrete steps and footpatl1s provide better access to main roads and thereby to
 schools, clinics, markets and workplaces in many vulnerable communities (also provided an escape route during
 the April 2014 flash floods); (iii) stronger community ownership and involvement as a result of group based work
 approach and community level investments; and (iv) greater citizen-state accountability and legitimacy of local
 institutions responsible for delivery due to the provision of regular public services in Honiara.
 3. Describe anv proiect alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
 NIA

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safcgunrd policy issues. Pro\'idc nn assessment of
 borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 In compliance with the World Bank's OP 4.01, and the Solomon Islands Government's own requirements, an
 ESMG was prepared by tl1e Government to serve as tlte Environmental Assessment (EA) for the project. The
 ESMG provides detailed guidance on the mitigation measures to be employed to address potential negative impacts
 oftlte proposed physical works. In addition, sufficient training has been provided to the project personnel for the
 efTective implementation of the ESMG. The ESMG was reviewed again in March 20 I 4 and found to he adequate.
 The project is in compliance with the ESMG.

 The ESMG also includes simple guidelines and technical matrices (e.g. list of environmental mitigalion measures
 for each type of physical activities, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Screening Checklist, Land Occupier
 Consent Form, etc.) to facilitate the preparation of simplified Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for civil
 works contracts managed by MID and for Community Group Agreements managed by HCC. To date, subproject
 Environmental Management Plans (EMP) have been prepared and incorporated into bidding document and civil
 works contracts and community contracting managed by MID and HCC on a regular basis. Bidding documents and
 civil work contracts include items for safety gear and equipment. Environmental, health and safety topics arc also
 incorporated in the Pre-Employment Training curriculum (Component 2 of the Project). Acceptable mitigation

                                                         6
measures have been applied at construction sites and the observed level of environmental impacts are marginal.

The ESMG also includes an RPF to address the project's impact on land use and on livelihouds as well as a
consultation matrix to guide the project's consultations with communities. In addition, the project has also
established a GRS to seek feedback from community groups and project stakeholders. This has been assessed as
effective during a review carried out in September 2013. The GRS flowchart and form were updated once more
during the 9" ISM, and a re-orientation for PIU staff made to update staff skills for the management of the GRS.

 The implementing agencies have acquired and developed the basic knowledge and skills to apply the World
 Bank's safeguard policies during four years implementation of the parent project. Therefore, their capacity. is
 adequate to manage safeguards in the AF project.

 5. Identify !be key stakeholders and describe tbe mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
 policies with an emohasis on ootentiallv affected oeoo1e.
 Consultations at various levels were conducted during project preparation and in the development of the ESMG.
 Consultations were held with line agencies (Ministry of Lands, HCC and MID), civil society, NGOs, youth,
 community and settlement groups, ward councillors and ward advisory committees. These consultations were
 summarized in the ESMG. These types of consultations are done regularly and routinely during implementation as
 well as in the identification, selection and preparation of the subproject activities under the AF.


B•

..!!! Vas the     1                    : prior to                                            Yes
     >ate               :by the 3ank                                                      4/lSf. 13
                                                                                          10/IJ      ,.,
     >ate
     >ate'                  1to~~------------------~------~•~or.a~:t1~,~3~-----1
     Date a{                                              .
     Daleo{.                •to

     ~0:~to th~~~~r:lte of
                                                    .. ~the         .; of
                                                                                             N/A
                                           I

~th                   Action .         I prior
                                                                                             nla
      late o 'receipt by the Bank
      late o                                                                                 '1120
      late•                 1to.

      late of
      >ate (){!             • to   ,

     Was th'                      I orior to
     Date ol' receiot bv the Bank
     Dateol
     Date 01              1 to.




        rte 1               I(Q'
 Pest                      Plan:
       as th                       I prior to '

     )ate
      >ate ol' receipt by the Bank
           ol
     Jate'                  1 to



                                                              7
  Re-dlsclosure
  Date ofin-country re-disclosure
   Date ofsubmission to lnfoShof!_
• If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the respective issues are
to be addressed and disclosed as part or the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure or any or the above documents is not expected please explain why:


C      Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tile Corporate Levd (to be filled In wllen tlte JSDS Is finalized by the
      project decision meeting)
OPIBP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-atone EA (including EMP) report?                                    Yes
Ifyes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and                      Yes
approve the EA rej)9rt?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's                             Yes
lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a fonn and                    Yes
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
All Safe£uard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been                     Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to Safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? .                 Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring                     Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and                      Yes
the same been ad_equately reflected in the project legal documents?

Ill. A rovals
 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                      Sonya M. Sultan
 Environmental Specialist:              Ly Thi Dieu Vu
 Social Development Specialist:         Roberto Tordecilla

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Surhid Gautam for Peter Leonard                             \127ft!.(
            Comments:
                                 ~ \1-(0UlS..                      ~lL
                                                                           ~~ tE-)f-
                                                 tl'(t"-> ;-
    Sector Manager (Acting):            Jan Weetjens                                                 tL/I0/ 1'1
            Comments:




                                                               8
