                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 83113

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        15 November 2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Solomon Islands       Project ID:                  P112613
 Project Name:               COMMUNITY RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE AND DISASTER RISK
                             IN SOLOMON ISLANDS PROJECT (P112613)
 Task Team Leader:           Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy
 Estimated Board Date:       10-Feb-2014
 Managing Unit:              EASNS
 GEF Focal Area:             Climate change
 Sector(s):                   Envir & natural res (30%); Central government
                             administration (30%); Water supply (30%), Social
                             prot & risk (10%)
 Theme(s):                   Climate change (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                             Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       9.1                      Total Bank Financing:       7,3 (GEF)
 Total Cofinancing:        1.8                      Financing Gap:              0.00
   Financing Source                                                                    Amount USD m
   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.0
   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                            7,3
   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                          1.8


   Total                                                                                        9.1
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       Yes
 project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)

The project development objective (PDO) is to “to increase the capacity of selected rural
communities to manage natural hazards and climate change risk?. The project would
achieve this objective by strengthening government capacity in disaster and climate risk
management, and implementing disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation
investments in selected communities in up to four provinces including Guadalcanal and
Temotu which are included in the pilot phase (PHRD grant).


3. Project Description
To be revised based on the appraisal PAD

The components for the CRISP project are:

Component A – Integration of climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction in
government policies and operations (Total US$0.82 million including taxes and
contingencies)

1.     The objective of this component is to support policy development, capacity building
and institutional strengthening aimed at integrating governance and operational processes for
CCA and DRR.

2.      Component A will include three sub-components: (i) development of a national
integrated CCA and DRM framework, (ii) strengthening institutional capacity for aligning
DRM and CCA, (iii) assist sector Ministries and the Provincial Governments, which may
include MECDM, Ministry of Land Housing and Survey, (MLHS), Ministry of Agriculture
and Livestock (MAL), Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS), to mainstream
DRM and CCA in sector planning and investments. This component will support policy
development, capacity building and institutional strengthening by: integrating governance and
operational processes for CCA and DRR; strengthening MECDM's CCA and DRR roles and
responsibilities; and supporting more climate and disaster resilient planning and
implementation capacity in selected Ministries and Provincial authorities. Support will be
provided to the Permanent Secretary and the executive team of MECDM to review the
organizational structure and capacity requirements to better integrate the role and
effectiveness of its various Divisions, both nationally and provincially.

3.      The component will provide for: (i) a Senior Policy Advisor to support the policy
dialogue, provide technical assistance and mentoring for the project coordinator: (ii)
consultant services to strengthen the capacity of the MECDM for DRM/CCA mainstreaming;
and (ii) carrying out training and capacity building including travel costs related to south -
south exchanges.

Component B – Strengthening of climate and disaster risk information and early warning
systems (Total US$1.44 million including taxes and contingencies)
     4.     The objective of this component is to establish an early warning network for
     volcanic/seismic hazards1 and start the establishment of a national risk information platform.

     5.      Component B will include two sub-components: (i) establishing an early warning
     network for volcanic/seismic events (as tentatively identified in the Solomon Islands Country
     Assessment by GFDRR in 2009); and (ii) establishing the foundations of a national risk
     information system, that can be applied under CRISP to assess disaster and climate change
     effects for sectors and investment planning, and expanded under other programs. The latter
     activity will include creating protocols and standards for sharing climate and disaster risk
     information and other existing mapping data between ministries and regional organizations;
     undertaking quantitative and qualitative risk assessments and mapping; as well as limited and
     targeted acquisition of geo-spatial data for Guadalcanal and Temotu Provinces (and up to two
     more provinces to be identified by the PCC). By providing information to the communities to
     better understand the risks, this component would also support the development of risk
     management plans (Component C) for selected communities and areas in Guadalcanal and
     Temotu provinces to facilitate communities to design and subsequently implement their own
     adaptation and risk reduction measures.

     6.        The component will provide for: (i) consultant services to strengthen the capacity of
     the MECDM for disaster risk assessment and early warning systems; (ii) goods, equipment,
     software and geo-spatial data for disaster risk information and early the warning system; and
     (iii) training and capacity building.


     Component C – Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction investments (Total
     US$5.96 million including taxes and contingencies).

     7.     This component aims to support both structural and non-structural disaster risk and
     adaptation investments at the community and provincial level. It will be implemented in
     collaboration with the Rural Development Program (RDP) and the Provincial Governments of
     the target Provinces. The identification, prioritization and implementation of community
     investments will integrate the lessons learned from the pilots conducted under the PHRD
     grant.

     8.     Component C will include three sub-components: (i) risk analysis, design, advisory
     and supervision services of rural infrastructure investments and disaster/climate risk
     management plans, (ii) development and implementation of community-led rural investment
     projects, (iii) development and implementation of provincial-led rural investment projects.
     The component will support the implementation of provincial and community-level climate
     change adaptation and disaster risk reduction investment activities and engineering works to
     increase resilience of selected communities in Guadalcanal and Temotu Provinces and up to
     two more provinces to be identified by the Project Coordination Committee (PCC).
     Community based disaster risk management and climate change adaptation plans will be


1
    Noting that there are eight volcanoes in Solomon Islands, of which four have been recently active
developed using RDP, community-based disaster risk management (CBRDM), vulnerability
and adaptation (V&A) participatory approaches. These plans will include priority structural
risk reduction sub-projects (e.g. community shelters, improved water supply and storage
systems, earthquake retrofit strengthening or cyclone strengthening of buildings, foundation
raising for flood alleviation, shoreline protection systems..) , as well as non-structural
measures (e.g. disaster preparedness, evacuation and recovery plans and drills for landslides,
earthquake, tsunami or volcanic hazards, hazards mapping and risk zoning, improved land use
planning).

9.     The component will provide for: (i) engineering, consultant services for risk analysis,
design and supervision of rural infrastructure investments and consultants or NGOs for
community based DRM/CCA plans, (ii) additional operating costs that may be incurred by
RDP or Provincial Governments to assist with project implementation, monitoring and
supervision; and (iii) community and provincial investments including technical assistance,
small works, goods, and equipment.


Component D - Project management and monitoring & evaluation (Total US$0.90 million
including taxes and contingencies)

10.   This component aims to provide efficient and effective management support for the
implementation of the project.

11.     Component D will include two sub-components: (i) project coordination and
management, (ii) project monitoring and evaluation. The Project Management Unit (PMU)
based in MECDM will be responsible for the day to day operations including procurement,
accounting, development and application of key performance indicators and monitoring and
evaluation. In light of the limited capacity of the Ministry, the PMU will be supported by a
senior policy advisor and an M&E advisor, who will undertake an evaluation of the M&E
reporting and conclusions at mid-term or when approximately 50% of the budget has been
disbursed, and near the end of the project. In addition, key equipment and works contracts
will be managed and supervised through specialists engaged to provide technical assistance to
MECDM and other government implementing agencies. Community-led investments under
Component C will be undertaken in close collaboration with RDP and the Provincial
Governments and will use the existing provincial implementation structures i.e. RDP’s
Provincial Support Unit (PSU) or Provincial Government. The PMU procurement officer and
financial management officer will work closely with RDP and Provincial Governments on all
fiduciary aspects of the project. The PMU project coordinator will monitor implementation
process and CRISP may supplement resources i.e. additional Community Helpers, PMU-
based engineers and environmental specialists, as required.

12.     The component will provide for: (i) project coordination and fiduciary consultant
support services to strengthen MECDM (procurement and finance officer, financial advisor,
project assistant, (ii) support to the steering committee (mainly workshops), (iii) goods and
equipment (computers, office furniture and equipment, vehicles); (iv) training for PMU staff;
(v) financial and technical audit; and (vi) incremental operating costs to assist with project
implementation and monitoring.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Selected communities and areas in Guadalcanal and Temotu provinces

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ly Thi Dieu Vu ( EASVS )
Ann McLean, Social Safeguards Consultant (EASNS)

6. Safeguard          Trigg Explanation (Optional)
Policies              ered?
Environmental         Yes    The potential negative impacts would mainly occur during
Assessment OP/BP             construction phase. These are increases in dust and noise level,
4.01                         pollution related to waste and wastewater generation, disturbance
                             to daily domestic and production activities etc. These are mostly
                             localized, at low or moderate level and can be avoided or
                             mitigated effectively.

                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                             has been prepared and served as an EA instrument. The ESMF
                             consider the project’s potential social and environmental impacts
                             and set a mechanism for impacts screening, mitigation and
                             monitoring during project implementation phase. Environmental
                             Codes of Practices (ECOP) are also introduced in the ESMF for
                             application during construction phase to mitigate potential
                             negative social and environmental impacts of sub-projects.
Natural Habitats      Yes    The project may have limited negative impact on natural habitats
OP/BP 4.04                   (e.g. rivers, waterway), given the nature of the sub-projects and
                             the fact that the exact location is not known.

                             Sub-projects that would affect natural habitats could be eligible
                             provided that the benefits outweigh the negative impacts and that
                             mitigation measures are put in place in accordance with OP/BP
                             4.04. Sub-projects that would significantly convert or degrade
                             critical natural habitats will not be supported. A screening
                             mechanism for sub-project impacts on natural habitats is
                             included in the ESMF

Forests OP/BP 4.36    No     The Project is not envisaged to significantly affect forest, forest
                             health or forest-dependent communities because of the small
                             scale nature of the sub-projects, which are mainly small
                             community infrastructure.
Pest Management OP No        The Project does not involve in pest control or lead to increase
4.09                         use of pesticide.
Physical Cultural      Yes   The Project may encounter and/or find PCR during
Resources OP/BP              implementation from excavations during construction phase. A
4.11                         chance find protocol has been included in the ESMF to address
                             cases of chance find.
Indigenous Peoples     Yes   Triggered as per policy. The population is 95% Melanesian, 3%
OP/BP 4.10                   Polynesian and a little over 1% Micronesian. Over 80% of the
                             population relies substantially on land for subsistence. Policy
                             requirements, especially concerning consultation and benefit
                             sharing will be embedded in project design and policy advice
                             under Component A. As the Indigenous Peoples are the
                             overwhelming majority of the population, no IPP is required.
                             Social assessment will be performed as part of sub-project
                             consultation and design to address issues of vulnerability due to
                             poverty, gender, age, infirmity or ethnicity.
Involuntary            Yes   Construction of structural disaster risk and adaptation
Resettlement OP/BP           investments at the community and provincial levels may require
4.12                         access to land or may impact livelihoods. The project will
                             develop a participatory approach to get broad community
                             support of the sub-projects, and access to communal or private
                             lands is expected to be largely through voluntary donation.

                             A Resettlement Policy Framework (annex to the ESMF) has
                             been prepared by the Project in case involuntary resettlement is
                             unavoidable.

                             As development of policy and process is an important
                             component of the project under Component A, this policy is also
                             triggered to guide incorporation of resettlement and land
                             acquisition principles into standard operating procedures of the
                             line agencies engaged in DRR and DRM. The RPF provides
                             guidance in integrating resettlement principles in the
                             development of policy that will regulate implementation of sub-
                             projects under Component C.
Safety of Dams         No    No dam will be affected by the Project. There will be no works
OP/BP 4.37                   of which safety depends on any existing dams.
Projects on            No    The Project does not have impacts on any international
International                waterway.
Waterways OP/BP
7.50
Projects in Disputed   No    The Project is not implemented in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to be beneficial to the population at large. The potential negative
environmental impacts are mostly related to construction and these are manageable. If
resilience planning indicates relocation of key infrastructure to secure areas, some tensions
and anxieties could result, but will be planned with participation of affected persons and
counterbalanced by avoided risk.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project would contribute long term to water, food, sanitation, communications and energy
security, and to reducing climate change and disaster risks to physical and social
infrastructure. Since women predominate in the subsistence sector, and will be consulted and
empowered in design and management of village sub-projects, they will be the main
beneficiaries of subsistence sector improvements.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Experience from the Rural Development program has been taken into account in creating
forward and backward linkages in the institutional arrangements for this project, recognizing
synergies between the NGO and the commercial sectors and planning capacity building that
will extend to the Provincial DMOs. Participatory approaches will be used in the community
led investment activities. Selection criteria for sub-projects will include screening to avoid
and minimize adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
acceptable to IDA. The ESMF sets out procedures for effective management of social and
environmental impacts including impacts on natural habitats, land acquisition/resettlements,
and physical cultural resources. The procedures include environmental screening, impact
identification and selection of mitigation measures to be implemented at various stage of sub-
project preparation. The Borrower will build safeguards principles into Standard Operating
Procedures to improve sustainability of outcomes. Weaknesses in Borrower capacity are
addressed through provision in the PMU of a Project Coordinator, a Finance Officer,
Procurement Officer, engineering expertise and an Environmental Officer who will work with
counterparts to build skills and experience in the IA as the project progresses.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key institutional stakeholders will be Ministry of Environment Climate Change, Disaster
Management and Meteorology, the National Disaster Management Office, Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Ministry of Infrastructure
Development, Ministry of Communications and Aviation Rural Development Ministry of
Development Planning and Aid Coordination, Ministry of Provincial Government and
Institutional Strengthening, Ministry of Women, Youth and Children. These agencies will be
consulted to contribute to an Integrated National Framework to support mainstreaming CCA
and DRR across sectors. Provincial Governments will confer under the Provincial
Government Strengthening Program. Grass-roots stakeholders in the selected sub-projects
under Component C Community led rural investment projects will participate through the
screening, options assessments and implementation planning for local level investments.
Community consultations will be managed through the Subproject Implementation
Committees and will include all sectors of the community with particular efforts to ensure the
effective participation of women and youth. These processes will aim secure broad
community support and to avoid adverse impacts to individuals of communities. Policy advice
will include integration of social and environmental safeguards into the standard operating
procedures of the IA.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  22 October 2013
Date of In country Disclosure                                                30 October 2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               30 October 2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors


Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  22 October 2013
Date of In country Disclosure                                                30 October 2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               30 October 2013


Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  n/a
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               n/a
"In country" Disclosure n/a
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]        No [ ]   NA [ ]
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural            Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the          Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ ]      No [ ]   NA [ X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]      No [ ]   NA [ ]
framework (as appropriate) is currently is being prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]      No [ ]   NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy
Environmental Specialist        Ly Thi Dieu Vu
Social Specialist               Ann Mc Lean
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Peter Leonard
Approved By:
Sector Manager:   Name: Michel Kerf   Date: November 19, 2013
