                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information

Date prepared/updated: 10/03/2013 and                   Report No.: 82492
updated on 10/10/2013
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Solomon Islands                    Project ID: P147541
Project Name: Rapid Employment Project
Task Team Leader: Sonya Woo
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 8, 2013   Estimated Board Date: N/A. CD Approval.
Managing Unit: EASNS                        Lending Instrument: Recipient Executed
                                            Trust Fund
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (60%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
(25%); Other urban development (15%)
Financing amounts by source:
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Borrower/Recipient               0.00
PRIF (US$m.):                    1.29
Environmental Category: B ─ Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project objectives remained unchanged in the Additional Financing (AF). The
proposed AF will support activities that scale-up the project’s impact and development
effectiveness through the provision of additional short-term employment opportunities
for the vulnerable poor, including youth and women in Honiara. Secondary benefits
would also accrue to neighborhoods and the general urban population from the expansion
of the community infrastructure investments financed by the project.

3. Project Description

The original Rapid Employment Project (REP or “project”) has 3 Components: (i) Rapid
Employment Scheme (RES) provides short-term temporary employment opportunities
for the vulnerable urban poor through labor-based public works. This component consists
of 2 Sub-Components: Sub-Component 1a: Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance is
implemented by Ministry of Infrastructure Development (MID), and Sub-Component 1b:
Urban Works and Services is implemented by Honiara City Council (HCC). The
Component would finance activities that have a high labor to non-labor ratio (an average
of 50 percent) that would optimize wage transfer. Combined, these two sub-components
will generate approximately 500,000 labor days over the life of the Project; (ii) Pre-
Employment Training (PET) provides basic skills training to REP beneficiaries that
facilitates their effective participation in the RES, and provides additional training on
other basic financial and general skills that are valued in the workplace and society at
large; and (iii) the project supports incremental project management costs for the two
implementing agencies, MID and HCC. This involves technical assistance to both
agencies; project staff in the areas of works supervision, community mobilization,
financial management, procurement; independent monitoring of project progress and
results; and incremental operating costs associated with the management and operation of
the project.

The proposed Additional Financing would be for the following (established) Components
implemented by the HCC amounting to US$1.29 million:

       Sub-Component 1B: Urban Works and Services (US$1.09 million). Financing
       will be used to support: (a) the payment of wages in the form of Sub-Grants to the
       vulnerable poor that are engaged in the implementation of community
       infrastructure sub-projects generating an additional 100,000 person days of work
       (US$0.44 million); and (b) the procurement of goods (materials, tools and safety
       gear) that is required to implement the sub-projects (US$0.65 million); and

       Component 3: Incremental Project Management (US$0.2 million). Financing will
       be used to support staff supervision costs and technical assistance (consulting
       services) to strengthen HCC’s capacity to effectively design and oversee the
       implementation of the Urban Works and Services Scheme as well as incremental
       operating costs (IOCs) incurred by HCC.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project focuses on Honiara and its surrounding peri-urban areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Ms Ly Thi Vu, Environmental Consultant
Mr Roberto Todecilla, Social Development Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project’s activities (road improvements, storm drainage improvements, erosion
control and urban sanitation) funded under the Rapid Employment Scheme (Component
1) have found to yield positive environmental outcomes overall given the waste cleaning
and routine maintenance nature of the works in the road and transport sectors as well as
other benefits, including short-term labor opportunities and training.

Given the labor intensive and small-scale nature of the project and non-use of heavy
equipment, the World Bank’s implementation support team have only identified and
documented minor (non-significant), temporary and site specific environmental issues,
such as increased dust levels, vegetation disturbance and erosion related to intensive
labor works. For the most part, these issues have been localized and effectively managed
through relevant measures documented in the Environmental and Social Management
Guidelines (ESMG). Mitigation measures have included the use of simple technology,
such as nets and stacks to prevent soil erosion as well as the inclusion of vegetation
replanting activities as a part of sub-project implementation. In addition, the project has
routinely supported the use of protective clothing or safety for community groups and
workers. As the type and location of investments proposed under the AF will be similar
to those of the parent project, no additional unforeseen adverse impacts are expected, no
additional safeguard policy would be triggered and therefore the project’s rating remains
unchanged (Environmental Category B).

Potential and anticipated social safeguards issues under the AF mainly revolve around, in
the first instance, land acquisition for Right of Way (RoW) and incidental temporary
effects of works; and in the second instance, grievances related to beneficiary selection
and payment. However, to date, there has been no ROW-related issue reported. To this
end, the project has adopted a strategy of prioritizing sub-projects within existing RoW
arrangements (to the extent possible) to minimize issues related to land acquisition,
which can be complex and lengthy in Solomon Islands given the objectives of the project.
This is consistent with the principles and measures stated in the project’s Resettlement
Policy Framework.

While all beneficiaries of the project are indigenous to the Solomon Islands, they are not
considered to be "indigenous" within the meaning of OP 4.10. The context of the project
is urban (covering the most urbanized and populous area in the Solomon Islands) with a
highly transient and migratory population. All beneficiaries are able to fully participate
in the project through the various mechanisms included in the Consultation Plan.
Furthermore, the minor and adverse effects of project activities will be managed through
the implementation of the ESMG including the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Therefore, a specific instrument for this safeguard was not required under the parent
project and the policy is not triggered under the AF.

Future implementation support missions will continue to monitor the satisfactory
implementation of the project’s safeguards compliance and follow-up on any corrective
action, as necessary, should the project encounter such an issue in the future. The last
Environmental Safeguards Training carried out by the World Bank was provided in
September 2012; and a Social Safeguards Training aimed at enhancing the project team’s
familiarization of the RPF and ESMG was carried out in September 2013.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

Previous analyses have shown risk of conflict in and around Honiara due to high levels of
poverty and unemployment, a lack of community cohesion, political marginalization and
dissatisfaction, and other socio-cultural and civic factors. The project specifically aims to
address some of these underlying causes that led to the previous tensions by expanding
services in certain areas of the city and enhance the inclusion of marginalized groups in
short-term employment activities. The project also seeks to strengthen these links by
building the capacity of MID and HCC to support and work with vulnerable
communities, and in particular, women and youth groups. During the Appraisal of the
AF operation, some concerns were voiced by the Government regarding the possibility of
encouraging further in-migration in response to the employment opportunities created
under the project. However, it was agreed that given the short-term nature of the works,
this would be unlikely but it was further agreed that the project would continue to
monitor developments in terms of both targeting and possible sources of tensions in areas
within the city. The project’s communications and community liaison officers have
designated responsibilities to consult with community groups on a regular basis. In
addition the project’s Grievance Redress System (GRS), Social Accountability and
Governance Review that was carried out in August 2013 as well as the Semi-Annual
Progress Survey provides alternative avenues for the project to routinely monitor and
collect information and proactively take corrective action as issues arise.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Prior to the REP, one of the two implementing agencies (MID) had acquired some
experience with environmental and social safeguard policies through its experience with
the Asian Development Bank's safeguards frameworks and procedures, which are similar
to those of the Word Bank’s.
Given that the parent project has been under implementation for more than 3 years, the
implementing agencies have acquired and developed the basic knowledge and skills in
applying the World Bank’s safeguards policies. In compliance with World Bank OP4.01
and the Solomon Islands Government’s own requirements, an ESMG has been prepared
by the Government to serve as the Environmental Assessment (EA) for the project. Given
the relatively simple labor based activities that are being proposed under the AF, the
ESMG contains tangible and detailed actions to be taken by HCC to address each type of
potential adverse impact during project implementation and maintenance. The ESMG
also includes simple guidelines and technical matrices to facilitate the preparation of
simplified Environmental Management Plans (EMP) to be incorporated into the
Community Group Agreements for each subproject to be funded under the AF.

To date, the project has prepared EMPs in accordance with ESMG and procured relevant
safety gear for each of the sub-projects financed. The ESMG was recently updated to
cover additional measures designed to enhance the environmental sustainability of sub-
projects financed under the project. Given that the type of sub-projects to be financed
under the AF will remain unchanged from the parent project, and satisfactory safeguards
compliance of the project overall, it is expected that the ESMG and current measures
adopted will be sufficient to address potential environmental impacts and risks of the AF
operation and that no additional specific actions would be required.

The ESMG also includes a RPF to address the project’s impacts on land use and on
livelihoods as well as a consultation matrix to guide the project’s consultations with
communities. In addition, the project has also established a GRS to seek feedback from
various community groups and stakeholders. Workshops with the implementing agencies
have been conducted to review and improve the system as a part of the World Bank’s
Safeguards Training conducted in September 2013.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

During the preparation of the project and ESMG, consultations and meetings were held
with line agency stakeholders (Ministry of Lands, Honiara City Council and Ministry of
Infrastructure Development), civil society, NGOs, youth, community and settlement
groups. Meetings were also convened with Ward Councilors and Ward Advisory
Committees (as representatives of communities). A summary of these consultations are
recorded in the ESMG. These types of consultations have continued under
implementation, and will continue during the identification, selection and preparation of
the sub-project activities under the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/18/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/01/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/21/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/18/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/01/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/21/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Sonya Woo                                 10/14/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ly Thi Vu                                 10/14/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Roberto Tordecilla                        10/14/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Michel Kerf                               10/14/2013




  Comments:
