                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                          Report No.:   89154
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          4 June 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Solomon Islands      IProject ID: PI47005      I
 Project Name:                Community Governance and Grievance Management Project
 Task Team Leader:            Daniel Marcus Evans
 Estimated Board Date:        N/A
 Managing Unit:               LEGJR
 Sector(s):                   Public Administration, Law and Justice
 Tbeme(s):                   Judicial and oilier dispute resolution mechanisms; access to law and
                             justice; conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction; gender.
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (In USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        3.08                     Total Bank Financing:    13.08
 Financing Gap:
   · Financing Source                                                                          Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                0.00
    IDA Grant                                                                                         0.00
    Total                                                                                             3.08
  Environmental Category: B
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred        Yes
  project?

  2. Project Development Objective(s)
  The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen commwiity grievance
  management capabilities and enhance the effectiveness of linkages with government in
  targeted communities.
3, Project Descl'iption
The project will initially begin in two provinces, and will be extended to a further two provinces by the
end of the project as indicated in the table below. The additional two provinces will be selected by the
implementing agency, the Ministry of Provincial Government and Institutional Strengthening
(MPGIS), based on agreed criteria including capacity (staffing and the ability to meet recurrent
allowance/salary costs) and willingness to engage. Within each province, it is anticipated that ten
communities will be selected in the first year of participation and an additional ten communities will
be selected in the second year of participation, in which Community Officers (COs) will be recruited.
Communities will be selected by participating provincial governments based on factors including
accessibility, willingness of communities to host COs, existing community institutions with which the
COs would work, population coverage and similar ongoing assistance from other donor-financed
programs etc.

                              Table 1: Intended Coverage and Phasing

 Financial year                                  2014/15    2015/16     2016/17    2017/18      Total
 Participating provinces                            2           2          4          4           4
 Community Officers                                20          40         60         80           80

    A.      Project Components

The components of the Community Governance and Grievance Management Project are as follows.

Compoueu/ 1: Revitttliziug Gm•emmeiii·COitlltlllltily Liukages (US$$889,414.00)

The objective of this component is to revitalize linkages between government and target
communities. Both provincial and central governments regard COs as valuable in supporting and
strengthening their outreach and extension activities. Necessarily, given the role of COs, this will be
achieved primarily through working with t'clcvant departments of participating provinces, but linkages
will also be fostered with central government agencies responsible for policing, land and natural
resources and local development financing. This objective will also be achieved by assisting
participating provincial government to fulfill key responsibilities associated with the selection,
contracting, remuneration, coordination, reporting, petformance management and supervision of COs.

A feature of this component will be a facilitated process, led by participating provincial
governments, to engage with communities in order to reacl1 a common understanding around
how COs work, tailored to the local context, and how they will interact with relevant community
institutions and actors and with government authorities. Through this process, it is expected that
provincial govemmcnt staff, assisted by the project, will work with communities to as.sess the most
significant problems facing communities (including the nature of disputes and gender-specific issues)
and how well existing grievance management mechanisms are responding to these issues. Agreement
would then.be reached on how COs operate within their host community, i.e. who they will interact
with locally, what disputes and grievances they would focus on, how they will be expected to behave
and what kinds of accountability, locally, and with government would be defined, so as to tailor COs
activities to particular contexts. As part of this process, provincial goveminont staff, assisted by the
project, will collect baseline data on the use of and satisfaction with existing community grievance
management mechanisms as well as satisfaction with current government-community linkages.

This component would also support the provinces to raise public awareness of the roles and
responsibilities of COs in the context of existing community governance arrangements so as to ensure
that COs, local interlocutors and provinces are held accountable for their actions, including
mechanisms for community feedback and grievance redress. Under this component, the relevant
provincial department will be provided with the necessary office and communication equipment to
enable them to effectively carry out their roles.

Component 2: Strengthening tile Capabilities of Community Officers and Local Autl10rities
(US$1,237,290.00)

The objective of this component Is to ensure that COs and the local actors with whom they
interact are adequately equipped with the knowledge, skills and tools to perform their agreed
roles. To ensure the relevance and impact of capacity development investments, it is envisaged that
the project will employ a learning-by-doing approach through the provision of short-term training
largely involving on-the-job mentoring. This will be planned and implemented by MPGIS in
collaboration with provincial governments. A standard training package will be prepared and delivered
principally through regular support and supervision visits to host communities involving a number of
provincial and central government officials. In addition, group training events will take place in
provincial capitals involving all COs within the province. Certain training activities may be extended
to include relevant provincial government staff, civil society including local actors (e.g. chiefs and
leaders) and local representative bodies that exist in some provinces such as Ward Development
Committees and Councils of Chiefs.

The project will support the sharing oflessons learnt across provinces (and potentially with
neighboring countries, e.g. BougainvilleiPNG), for eKample by cross-provincial visits and joint review
activities. Job·related equipment (e.g. uniforms, mobile phones/two-way radios, office supplies) would
be provided to COs under this component to enable them to effectively undertake their roles and apply
the skills promoted under the project.

Component 3: Project Management, Evaluation and Learning (US$944,380. 00)

The objective of this component is to provide support to MPGIS to effectively implement the
project, to ensure that it is carried out in accordance with government and Bank processes and
guidelines and contributes evidence-based policy guidance to government. The responsibilities of
MPGIS will include: (a) the coordination of the project with national and provincial stakeholders; (h)
the management of the project, including technical, financial, procurement, social and environment
safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, communications, and grievance redress; (c) project monitoring
and reporting, periodic, at mid-term and completion; (d) annual project audits and performance
reviews; and (e) through periodic workshops and seminars, sponsoring the exchange of project
learning and policy dialogue across national and province government and local authorities. Activities
supported under this component will include: (a) the establishment of a PMU within MPGIS including
the requisite equipment and operational budgets to facilitate PMU activities; (b) the mid-term review
including associated assessments; (c) the establishment of a Project Monitoring System and two
beneficiary surveys (at mid-term and completion) and (d) annual audits of project accounts.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)
The project will commence in rural areas in Makira Ulawa and Renbel provinces. Specific
communities have not yet been selected. Two further provinces will be selected for extension of the
project in 2016117.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Beverley Ann McLean (Consultant); Social Specialist (LEGJR)

6. Safeguard Policies ·                  Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 I     Yes          The project will have no physical
                                                      impacts. This policy is triggered because
                                                      it is the umbrella policy that guides the
                                                      triggering of the other environmental and
                                                      social safeguards policies. No separate
                                                      instrument will be prepared or disclosed.
                                                      The key messages of this policy on
                                                      environmental and social assessment will
                                                      be incorporated into the design of the
                                                      project. This includes awareness creation
                                                      on the basic policy principles, addressing
                                                      the concerns of the vulnerable groups of
                                                      people, etc., and the training for COs and
                                                      other change agents in Solomon Islands
                                                      for the purposes of promoting
                                                      environmental and socialsustainability of
                                                      development interventions.
Natunil Habitats OP/BP 4.o4              No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes          The policy is triggered. Solomon Islands
                                                      population is considered Indigenous
                                                      People (IPs) based on the requirements of
                                                      OP4.10. Since the overwhelming
                                                      majority of project beneficiaries would
                                                      fall under this OP 4.10 definition of
                                                      indigenous peoples, no stand-alone
                                                      Indigenous Peoples Plan is required.
                                                      However, elements of an IPP in this case
                                                      derived from a simple Social Assessment
                                                      (SA) proportional to both the positive
                                                      and negative impacts of this project, that
                                                      has been prepared and disclosed, are
                                                      integrated into the design of the project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      NO           The policy is not triggered since the
                                                      project will have no physical/resettlement
                                                      impacts, but will provide support to
                                                      establish arrangements, through COs,
                                                      that assist communities to manage
                                                      conflicts that undermine community
                                                      security, development and social
                                                            cohesion. Even though one key area of
                                                            conflict is land disputes over tenure and
                                                            ownership, this will be addressed under
                                                            OP 4.01 as indicated under the provisions
                                                            of footnote 8 ofOP 4.12. '·
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impads:
The project does not mise any issues under safeguard policies and will have no physical impacts. The
social risks associated with the project consist of: {a) possible difficulty in reconciling the tensions
between customary law with state law and human rights principles in the kinds of conflict that COs
will typically encounter; {b) challenges in the selection of COs with the required mediation and
reconciliation skills who have the confidence of the community, and in particular finding and
supporting female candidates with the willingness and ability to operate in. the face of potential
cultural hostility and even physical threat; and {c) possible difficulty in securing the buy-in of some
local authority figures where there has been abuse of position to gain personal advantage, especially
from development projects, particularly natuml resource development. All these are provided for
under OP4.01 and integmted in the project design.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project presents an opportunity to support the development and expansion of conflict management
mechanisms that are lawful, objective and perceived as equitable, and which are sensitive to local
kastom and leadership and connected to the wider provincial administmtive framework. Outcomes of
conflict management/avoidance could be considembly improved in particular for women and youth.
3. Describe any projed alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
 impacts.
None.
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 No safeguards plans or frameworks are required for this project. Informing project design,
 comprehensive free informed prior consultation with local leaders, men, women and youth was
 undertaken during the evaluation of the precursor Royal Solomon Islands Police Force-initiated CO
 pilot and during project preparation. This has included nine communities in live Provinces in October
 20 II for the evaluation of the CO pilot project and 86 rural communities for the earlier 'Justice
 Delivered Locally' project. Subsequent consultations have taken place with all nine Provincial
 Governments, and with civil society stakeholders. The process Confirmed broad community and
 official support for the project. A SA has been undertaken as part of project prepamtion. Findings from
 the SA and consultations have been taken into account in the project design, particularly the inclusion
 of safeguards principles and management of grievances in planned community outreach activities and
CO training. MPGIS and the provincial governments have constrained fiscal and personnel resources.
Though provincial governments have undertaken to appoint, pay and support COs, competing
demands for provincial budgets present some risk of under-resourcing for the CO function. The
project contains components and a budget to support capacity building for COs, provincial
governments and MPGIS.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key institutional stakeholders include the Implementing Agency, MPGIS, and provincial governments
that will host and resource the CO program. The Ministries of Lands, Housing and Survey; Mines,
Energy and Rural Electrification and Meteorology, Environment and Conservation will be consulted
on awareness raising and CO training on management of disputes arising from development projects
involving land and natural resources. Local level leaders and communities and beneficiary
stakeholders will continue to be consulted and will participate in the formulation with COs of
agreements about key local issues to be addressed and how COs will operate in their areas. In agreeing
on the mode of operation with beneficiary communities, care will be taken to ensure that the grievance
mechanism is available to all groups in communities. The SA lias been disclosed through the lnfoShop
and locally through advertisements in the main daily newspaper and signboards in relevant provinces.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other (Social Assessment)
Date of receipt by the Barik -Social Assessment             .     2 June 2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20 June 2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the n/a
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure                                             Week commencing 30 June2014
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  nla
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               n/a
"In country" Disclosure
If tbe project triggers tbe Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of tbe Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
n/a

C Compliance Monitoring Indicators altlte Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [      1     No [X]   NA [ ]
OPIBP 4.04 ·Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or            Yes [   1     No [X]   NA [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ ]   No [ ]     NA [X]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [X]
property?
OP/BP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy fiameworklprocess Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes [ l        No [ ]     NA [X]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and Yes [ l      No [ l     NA [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome Yes [ l        No [   l   NA [X]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it Yes [ l       No [   l   NA [X]
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety ofDams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [ ]        No [ l     NA [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ l        No [ l     NA [X]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [ l        No [ l     NA [X]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Tbe World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-countrY in a public       Yes [X]      No [ l     NA ( ]
place in a fbrm and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [X]       No [ ]     NA ( ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included In   Yes [X]       No [ ]     NA [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include Yes. [X]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [X]           No [ ]     NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
ltcg;l documents?


III. API' ROYALS

Task Team Lcadc1·:              Nnme: Daniel Marcus Evans
Approved By:
Regional Safcguants Adviso1·:
Sector Manager:
