                                                                                                   92808
                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     ADDITIONAL FINANCING


Date ISDS Updated: 11/3/2014

Date Original ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 4/18/2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                          Solomon Islands             Project ID:         P152709
                                                               Parent Project      P114987
                                                               ID:
 Project Name:                    Additional Financing for Solomon Islands Rapid Employment Project (REP)
 Parent Project Name:             Rapid Employment Project (REP)
 Task Team Leader:                Sonya M. Sultan
 Estimated Appraisal Date:        December 10, 2014           Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2015
 Managing Unit:                   EASNS                       Lending Instrument:        Project Investment
                                                                                         Financing (SPF Grant)
 Sector(s):                       Other social services (90%); Public administration-Other social services (10%)
 Theme(s):                        Social safety nets (50%); Conflict prevention and post conflict reconstruction
                                  (20%); Other social protection and risk management (20%); City-wide
                                  infrastructure and service delivery (10%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Yes
 Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (In USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:              4.00                        Total Bank Financing:      4.00
 Financing Gap                    0.00
           Financing Source                                                              Amount
           Borrower
           IDA CRW Credit                                                                    2.5 million
           IDA CRW Grant                                                                     1.5 million
           SPF Grant
           Total
 Environmental Assessment          B- Partial Assessment
 Category:
 Is this a Repeater Project?       No


Background

The Solomon Islands is a fragile state and is vulnerable to conflict. The country has been rebuilding its
economy which was severely affected by the economic downturn in the late 1990s/early 2000s and the
subsequent tension and ethnic conflicts which arose out of the crisis. The country continues to be fragile
as evidenced by recent riots and tensions from the slow response to the recovery efforts during the recent
flooding.

As a small Pacific island state, Solomon Islands is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Not only is
it prone to earthquakes it is also at risk to cyclones. In April 2014, the Solomon Islands experienced
severe flooding caused by an unprecedented tropical depression induced heavy rains which battered the
country from April 1-5, 2014. The rainfall was deemed to be rarer than a one-in-100 year event. The
flooding resulted in the loss of lives, homes and businesses and had a devastating impact on the capital
city of Honiara and Guadalcanal Province which were declared disaster zones.

                                                       1
The Government of Solomon Islands (SIG) requested the World Bank to lead a Damage and Loss
Assessment (DaLA) in coordination with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), European Union (EU)
and UN partners. The assessment estimates that total damage and loss was equivalent to US$107.8
million, which is about 9.2% of the country’s GDP while priority recovery and reconstruction needs were
estimated at US$56 million. The needed reconstruction exceeds the capacity of the SIG and would place a
significant strain on the country’s economy. The SIG requested the World Bank and other donors for
financial support.

Crisis Response Window. To cover the funding shortfall required for the identified priority recovery and
rehabilitation needs, the SIG requested to tap into the Crisis Response Window (CRW) under IDA. On
behalf of SIG, the Bank submitted a US$10 million proposal to the Bank’s Executive Directors, which
has been approved, with the following allocations:

            a. US$2.0 million towards Development Policy Operation 2 ($4-6 million in total) to help
               the government cover the costs incurred in responding to the flooding;

            b. US$4.0 million towards the Rural Development Program 2 (US$9 million total budget),
               which would allow the operation to respond to the increased needs in the flood –hit rural
               areas; and

            c. US$4.0 million towards the Rapid Employment Project Additional Financing (entirely
               financed from CRW) to rehabilitate tertiary roads in flood hit areas in Honiara.

The REP AF will scale up all the existing components of the project. In addition, it will finance a new
subcomponent (Part 1A (iii)), namely the rehabilitation and improvement of tertiary roads in and around
Honiara to reinstate critical access for small urban communities to the main roads and to basic socio–
economic services. The bulk of the AF will go to this new sub-component. The rehabilitation of these
roads is essential in enabling the city of Honiara to resume all commercial and social activities undertaken
before the flooding and contribute to the overall recovery efforts in the country. In addition, the Closing
Date of the project will be extended from June 30, 2015 to June 30, 2016.

Activities to be financed by the AF will slightly shift the focus and purpose of activities under MID
Subcomponent 1A from labor intensive road repair and maintenance activities to a focus on repairing and
strengthening the quality of tertiary roads damaged by severe weather events. Activities under the AF will
still generate an additional 120,000 labor days, and provide short-term employment for approximately
1,500 people.

The proposed changes to the PDO will also be incorporated into the existing grant agreements under the
project: SPF TF095966 and PRIF TF096620.

Application of Para. 12 of OP10.0. The AF was processed applying para. 12 of OP10.0 which allows for
condensed processing procedures and retroactive financing of up to 40%. The AF meets the eligibility
criteria for applying condensed procedures: (i) Solomon Islands is a fragile state and (ii) is in urgent need
of assistance due to a natural disaster (flooding in April 2014). This approach was endorsed by the
Country Director.

2. Project Objectives

Parent Project Development Objective (PAD): The project development objective is “to assist targeted
vulnerable urban populations in the Recipient’s territory to: (i) increase their incomes through the



                                                     2
provision of short term employment; and (ii) improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment
skills that are valued in the workplace and society.”

The AF will expand the scope of Sub-component 1A from labor generation to also rehabilitate and
upgrade tertiary roads in and around Honiara. A new subcomponent 1A(iii) will be added to the Project
Description. As a result of this new activity, the PDO will be amended as follows: “To assist targeted
vulnerable urban populations in the Recipient’s territory to (i) increase their incomes through the
provision of short term employment; (ii) improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment
skills that are valued in the workplace and society; and (iii) access services and markets through improved
infrastructure.” Proposed Project Development Objective (AF): Under the Additional Financing (AF), the
project development objectives will be amended as follows:


3. Project Description

The Rural Employment Project (REP) was processed as an emergency project to provide short term
employment and pre-employment training to vulnerable groups at the time when ethnic conflicts, brought
on by the global financial crisis, were high in the country.

The project has three components:

Component 1: Rapid Employment Scheme (RES), designed to provide short-term employment to
unemployed residents of Honiara through labor based public works. It is comprised of two
subcomponents: 1A-Road Repair and Maintenance executed by the Ministry of Infrastructure
Development (MID), and 1B-Urban Works and Services implemented by the Honiara City Council (HC);

Component 2: Pre-Employment Training (PET) which provides basic life skills training to REP
beneficiaries to prepare them for RES and for future employment opportunities; and

Component 3: Incremental Project Management.

Summary of Activities under Additional Financing

The REP AF will finance the rehabilitation of tertiary roads in Honiara which provide critical access for
small urban communities to the main roads. The rehabilitation of these roads is essential in enabling the
city of Honiara to resume all commercial activities previously undertaken before the flooding and
contribute to the overall recovery efforts in the country. The activities to be financed by the AF will shift
the focus and purpose of activities under Subcomponent 1A Roads Repair and Maintenance Scheme.
Subcomponent 1A, as originally designed, funded labor intensive road repair and maintenance activities
with the objective of generating short term employment.

Sub Component 1A – Road Repair and Maintenance Scheme (US$ 2,835,000). The AF will use
existing REP modalities to channel funds to improve pavement and drainage systems of the roads in order
to reduce the recurrent maintenance burden. The AF activity will entail a mix of labor based and machine
based operations. The envisaged total length of road improvements is expected to be approximately 25
km and the length of roads maintained 30 kms.

Sub Component 1B – Urban Works and Services Scheme (US$ 645,000). This component will
continue to fund street cleaning activities for an extra year (due to the extension of the project closing
date), 5 additional concrete pedestrian access paths, and repairs to two schools. This should lead to 50,000
additional labor days.

                                                     3
Component 2 – Pre-Employment Training (US$ 165,000) Pre-employment training and job and social
service referral services will continue through the extended term of the REP in order to maintain
continuity of services to the vulnerable residents of Honiara. The additional financing will cover the
procurement of goods and services, including trainers and materials.

Component 3 – Project Management ($355,000). The proposed one year extension of the closing date
and the management of work during that time will require additional financing to cover rental and
utilities, operating costs, staff, monitoring and evaluation, especially associated with project closure, and
TA related to preparation of a follow on project.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

The project focuses on Honiara and its surrounding peri-urban areas.

The Solomon Islands is a fragile state and is vulnerable to conflict. The country has been rebuilding its
economy which was severely affected by the economic downturn in the late 1990s/early 2000s and the
subsequent tension and ethnic conflicts which arose out of the crisis. The country continues to be fragile
as evidenced by recent riots and tensions from the slow response to the recovery efforts during the recent
flooding.

As a small Pacific Island state, Solomon Islands is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Not only is
it prone to earthquakes, it is also at risk to cyclones.

In April 2014, the Solomon Islands experienced severe flooding caused by an unprecedented tropical
depression induced heavy rains which battered the country from April 1-5, 2014. The rainfall was
deemed to be rarer than a one-in-100 year event. The flooding resulted in the loss of lives, homes and
businesses, damages to existing infrastructures including roads. Honiara and Guadalcanal Province were
declared disaster zones.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Ms. Ly Thi Dieu Vu, Environmental Consultant
Mr. Roberto Tordecilla, Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

 Safeguard Policy      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental         Yes            The project’s overall environmental impacts is positive as employment-
 Assessment (OP/BP                    generating activities (road repair, stormwater drainage cleaning,
 4.01)                                construction of concrete access paths, street cleaning and landscaping)
                                      contribute to make the city cleaner and more attractive. The proposed
                                      investments under the AF project (repairing and improving tertiary roads
                                      damaged by the flood) is expected to make the roads less dusty in dry
                                      weather and less muddy in rainy weather. Better road surface also help to
                                      reduce gas emissions from vehicles. The proposed investments under the
                                      AF are small scale in nature and thus the potential impacts and risks would
                                      be limited to dust, noise, traffic and ground disturbance, and occupational
                                      health issues. These potential impacts are marginal, localized, temporary
                                      and manageable.

                                      An Environmental and Social Management Guidelines (ESMG) has been


                                                      4
 Safeguard Policy       Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                                        developed and applied for the parent project. It contains specific
                                        environmental mitigation measures applicable for each type of physical
                                        activities financed by the project. The ESMF was updated in October 2012
                                        and reviewed again and re-disclosed in March 2014 taking into account the
                                        experiences from parent project implementation. Since the types of AF
                                        project investments are the same as under the parent project, the existing
                                        ESMG is deemed adequate to address any potential environmental and
                                        social safeguards impacts which may arise under the AF.
 Natural Habitats       No              As the project will be implemented in already developed urban areas
 (OP/BP 4.04)                           including streets, roads and local communities, the Project will not cause
                                        any impacts on any natural habitats.
 Forests (OP/BP         No              The Project will not cause any impacts on forests or involve deforestation
 4.36)                                  as sub-projects will be implemented in urban areas.
 Pest Management        No              No chemicals will be used in the projects for pest control
 (OP 4.09)
 Physical Cultural      No              Excavation would be very limited within the existing road base. Materials
 Resources (OP/BP                       used for road repair and rehabilitation will be purchased from local
 4.11)                                  suppliers, no borrow pits or quarries will be open under the project.
                                        Therefore OP 4.11 is not triggered.
 Indigenous Peoples     No              OP 4.10 was not triggered under the original project, and under subsequent
 (OP/BP 4.10)                           AF as urban communities in Honiara are being targeted.
 Involuntary            Yes             The exact details of road sections to be rehabilitated are not yet available at
 Resettlement                           this stage. While unlikely, some structures or crops may be affected and, in
 (OP/BP 4.12)                           some cases, small portions of land may be acquired. The project has
                                        developed a Resettlement Policy Framework which forms part of the
                                        ESMG for the project. This will provide guidance to the project in
                                        addressing issues related to land acquisition for Right of Way (RoW)-
                                        related issues.
 Safety of Dams         No              The AF Project activities would not affect any existing dam or depend on
 (OP/BP 4.37)                           the safety of any existing dam.
 Projects on            No              The AF Project will not be implemented in areas of international waterways
 International                          or use water resources from international waterways
 Waterways (OP/BP
 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed   No              The AF Project will not be implemented in disputed areas.
 Areas (OP/BP 7.60)

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of key safeguards issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe any potential
 large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 Both the parent project’s activities (road repair, stormwater drainage cleaning, construction of concrete access
 footpaths in urban settlements, street cleaning, landscaping activities, and small scale community environmental
 improvement initiatives) and the AF’s proposed investments (repairing and rehabilitating tertiary roads damaged
 by the flood) are small-scale. The potential negative environmental impacts associated with these investments are
 small-scale, mostly site-specific and manageable. The Project would not cause any large scale, significant or
 irreversible impacts.

 The parent project has brought about positive social and environmental impacts through short-term employment
 provision, improved local sanitation, roadside vegetation control and waste collection. Additional positive impacts
 are expected with the proposed activities under the AF as rehabilitated roads will be safer for people in rainy
 weather, more sustainable roads will allow continued access to services and markets in poor weather conditions.


                                                         5
Improved drainage will reduce flooding risks.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
It is hoped that the demonstration effects of some of the REP activities related to urban regeneration and
environmental improvements will lead to some positive changes in the cleanliness of areas and communities where
REP groups are not directly active or working. This could include greater awareness about not putting garbage into
undesignated areas everywhere, keeping streams clean, and recycling.

In addition to providing short-term employment and pre-employment training, the AF will build on the positive
impacts which REP has made in several key areas: (i) visible improvement to the urban environment from the
street cleaning activities which in turn created a sense of pride and interest in urban regeneration and
environmental protection; (ii) concrete steps and footpaths provide better access to main roads and thereby to
schools, clinics, markets and workplaces in many vulnerable communities (also provided an escape route during
the April 2014 flash floods); (iii) stronger community ownership and involvement as a result of group based work
approach and community level investments; and (iv) greater citizen-state accountability and legitimacy of local
institutions responsible for delivery due to the provision of regular public services in Honiara.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In compliance with the World Bank’s OP 4.01, and the Solomon Islands Government’s own requirements, an
ESMG was prepared by the Government to serve as the Environmental Assessment (EA) for the project. The
ESMG provides detailed guidance on the mitigation measures to be employed to address potential negative impacts
of the proposed physical works. In addition, sufficient training has been provided to the project personnel for the
effective implementation of the ESMG. The ESMG was reviewed again in March 2014 and found to be adequate.
The project is in compliance with the ESMG.

The ESMG also includes simple guidelines and technical matrices (e.g. list of environmental mitigation measures
for each type of physical activities, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Screening Checklist, Land Occupier
Consent Form, etc.) to facilitate the preparation of simplified Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for civil
works contracts managed by MID and for Community Group Agreements managed by HCC. To date, subproject
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) have been prepared and incorporated into bidding document and civil
works contracts and community contracting managed by MID and HCC on a regular basis. Bidding documents and
civil work contracts include items for safety gear and equipment. Environmental, health and safety topics are also
incorporated in the Pre-Employment Training curriculum (Component 2 of the Project). Acceptable mitigation
measures have been applied at construction sites and the observed level of environmental impacts are marginal.

The ESMG also includes an RPF to address the proj ect’s impact on land use and on livelihoods as well as a
consultation matrix to guide the project’s consultations with communities. In addition, the project has also
established a GRS to seek feedback from community groups and project stakeholders. This has been assessed as
effective during a review carried out in September 2013. The GRS flowchart and form were updated once more
during the 9th ISM, and a re-orientation for PIU staff made to update staff skills for the management of the GRS.

The implementing agencies have acquired and developed the basic knowledge and skills to apply the World
Bank’s safeguard policies during four years implementation of the parent project. Therefore, their capacity is
adequate to manage safeguards in the AF project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations at various levels were conducted during project preparation and in the development of the ESMG.
Consultations were held with line agencies (Ministry of Lands, HCC and MID), civil society, NGOs, youth,


                                                        6
 community and settlement groups, ward councillors and ward advisory committees. These consultations were
 summarized in the ESMG. These types of consultations are done regularly and routinely during implementation as
 well as in the identification, selection and preparation of the subproject activities under the AF.


B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                         Yes
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         4/18/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     10/1/2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     10/21/2013
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure                                                    4/23/2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      4/22/2014
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
                                                                                           N/A
    the EA to the Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                         n/a
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         4/18/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     10/1/2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     10/21/2013
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure                                                    4/23/2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      4/22/2014
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
 Pest Management Plan:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
 * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the respective issues are
 to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C.    Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
     project decision meeting)
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                Yes
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and                 Yes
 approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                        7
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's                          Yes
 Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and                 Yes
 language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
 NGOs?
 All Safe2uard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been                  Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                Yes
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring                  Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and                   Yes
 the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

III. A rovals
 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                    Sonya M. Sultan
 Environmental Specialist:            Ly Thi Dieu Vu
 Social Development Specialist:       Roberto Tordecilla

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
         Comments:
                                      Peter Leonard   AY 4               "'1.
                                                                          _____   __.,-
                                                                                           11/i1f9
 Sector Manager (Acting):             ]an Weetjens                                        4 4 / / 1 ) / ~y-
         Comments:




                                                           8
