                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                              Report No.: 87774
Date ISDS Updated: 23/03/2014

Date Original ISDS Approved/Disclosed:

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                           Solomon Islands           Project ID:          P149652
                                                              Parent Project       P114987
                                                              ID:
 Project Name:                    Additional Financing for Solomon Islands Rapid Employment Project (REP)
 Parent Project Name:             Rapid Employment Project (REP)
 Task Team Leader:                Sonya M. Sultan
 Estimated Appraisal Date:        April 25, 2014             Estimated Board Date: N/A CD Approval
 Managing Unit:                   EASNS                      Lending Instrument:         Project Investment
                                                                                         Financing (SPF Grant)
 Sector(s):                       Other social services (100%)
 Theme(s):                        Social safety nets (60%); Conflict prevention and post conflict reconstruction
                                  (25%); Urban services and housing for the poor (15%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid No
 Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (In USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:              1.55                       Total Bank Financing:       1.55
 Financing Gap                    0.00
           Financing Source                                                              Amount
           Borrower
           IDA Credit
           SPF Grant                                                                         1.55
           Total                                                                             1.55
 Environmental Assessment          B- Partial Assessment
 Category:
 Is this a Repeater Project?       No

2. Project Objectives

Parent Project Development Objective (PAD): The project development objective is to assist targeted vulnerable
urban populations to: (i) increase their incomes through the provision of short term employment; and (ii) improve
their knowledge, experience and basic employment skills.

Proposed Project Development Objective (AF): The project development objectives of the Additional Financing
(AF) remain unchanged from its parent project.

3. Project Description

The project is made up of three components:
Component 1: Rapid Employment Scheme (RES), designed to provide short-term employment to
unemployed residents of Honiara through labor based public works. It is comprised of two sub-
components: 1A-Road Repair and Maintenance executed by the Ministry of Infrastructure Development
(MID), and 1B-Urban Works and Services implemented by Honiara City Council (HCC), which is


                                                        1
responsible for sub-project activities such as street cleaning, brushing and clearing, development of
community access infrastructure, and drain clearing.
Component 2: Pre-Employment Training (PET), which provides basic life skills training to REP
beneficiaries to prepare them for the RES, and for future employment opportunities.
Component 3: Incremental Project Management. This involves technical support for both implementing
agencies, HCC and MID, and incremental operating costs associated with the management of the project.


The proposed AF for US$ 1.55 million will enable the continuation, scale up and improvement
of successful components of the project. The activities planned under the AF are summarized
below:

       Sub-Component 1B: Urban Works and Services (US$820,000). Existing street cleaning
       activities will continue at the current scale under this sub-component, and expand to include a
       wider set of urban regeneration activities. This will include landscaping and greening of public
       spaces such as parks, or school playgrounds, and environmental protection for the community
       access infrastructure built by the project, through slope protection and tree planting. The AF will
       support the recruitment of 2,000 individuals over the next 14 months, to be organized into 100
       Community Groups, and is expected to generate a total of 110,000 extra labor days. The AF will
       support the following expenditures: (i) payment of wages under sub-grants to community groups
       engaged in urban regeneration activities (US$470,000); and (ii) procurement of goods and
       services (equipment, transport and safety gear) required for cleaning activities and the
       environmental awareness campaign (US$ 350,000).

       Component 2: Pre-employment Training (US$ 385,000). The AF will extend the life of PET
       by one year to June 30, 2015 and provide training to an additional 1,500 persons, comprising at
       least 50% women and youth recruited from the most vulnerable communities in Honiara. In
       addition, the AF will finance piloting of a Referral Service to complement the training delivered
       to make REP ‘graduates’ aware of further training or adult education opportunities, social
       services they can use, and potential employment opportunities in Honiara. The PET team will be
       slightly restructured to ensure that staff can provide coaching and mentoring services to REP
       participants. The AF will be used for the procurement of goods and services (US$320,000) and
       for the payment of stipends to trainees (US$ 65,000).

       Component 3: Project Management (US$ 195,000). In order to handle the substantial
       additional project management load as result of the expanded scope of the project under the AF,
       the AF will finance the a Works supervisor (or CLO if deemed more appropriate), an
       Administrative Assistant and a Deputy Project Manager (national) for REP-HCC. The last
       position will also develop management capacity with a view to Phase 2 of REP and long term
       sustainability. HCC will also assign an environmental campaign coordinator with a suitably
       amended job description (to be paid for by HCC) to implement the new environmental activities.
       The AF will be used for the procurement of goods and services (US$145,000) and for training of
       staff through a South-South Exchange (US$ 50,000).

       Technical Assistance (US$150,000): Bank Executed on Behalf of the Recipient. A total of
       $150,000 is proposed to be set aside, to be managed by the Bank on behalf of the Solomon
       Islands Government, to finance technical inputs and analysis related to the preparatory work for a
       follow on project to REP. The work, that has been jointly identified with SIG, includes: (i)
       improving the targeting of urban poor and vulnerable populations; (ii) assessing the employment
       generation potential of, and modalities for, community involvement in the next phase of REP;
       (iii) exploring mechanisms to ensure sustainability of REP outcomes, including through stronger

                                                   2
        links with urban management efforts; and (iv) exploring institutional arrangements for the next
        phase of REP. The AF will be used for



4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

The project focuses on Honiara and its surrounding peri-urban areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Ms. Ly Thi Vu, Environmental Consultant
Mr. Roberto Tordecilla, Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

 Safeguard Policy       Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental          Yes             The project’s activities (road improvements, storm draining improvements,
 Assessment (OP/BP                      and construction of concrete access paths in urban settlements) and what is
 4.01)                                  proposed under the AF (street cleaning and landscaping activities) may lead
                                        to some minimal environmental impacts. Given the proposed works are
                                        very small scale in nature, the potential impacts are likely to be limited to
                                        dust, traffic disturbance, ground disturbance and occupational health issues.
                                        These potential impacts are likely to be marginal, localised, and temporary.
                                        An Environmental and Social Management Guidelines (ESMG) has been
                                        developed and applied for the ongoing parent project. The ESMF was
                                        updated in October 2012 and reviewed again in March 2014.
                                        The existing ESMG is deemed adequate to address any potential
                                        environmental and social safeguards impacts which may arise under the AF
                                        since the types of investments planned are the same as under the parent
                                        project.
 Natural Habitats       No              As the project sites will be implemented in already developed urban areas
 (OP/BP 4.04)                           including streets, roads and local communities and use construction
                                        materials from licensed dealers, the Project would not cause any impacts on
                                        any critical natural habitats.
 Forests (OP/BP         No              The Project will not cause any impacts on forests or involve deforestation.
 4.36)
 Pest Management        No              No chemicals will be used in the projects for pest control
 (OP 4.09)
 Physical Cultural      No              The focus will be on cleaning and landscaping activities, so no known
 Resources (OP/BP                       physical cultural resources will be affected.
 4.11)
 Indigenous Peoples     No              OP 4.10 was not triggered under the original project, and under subsequent
 (OP/BP 4.10)                           AF as urban communities in Honiara are being targeted.
 Involuntary            Yes             An RPF forms part of the existing ESMG for the project. This will provide
 Resettlement                           guidance to the project in addressing issues related to land acquisition for
 (OP/BP 4.12)                           Right of Way (RoW)-related issues.
 Safety of Dams         No              The AF Project activities would not affect any existing dam or depend on
 (OP/BP 4.37)                           the safety of any existing dam.
 Projects on            No              The AF Project will not be implemented in areas of international waterways
 International                          or use water resources from international waterways
 Waterways (OP/BP
 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed   No              The AF Project will not be implemented in disputed areas.
 Areas (OP/BP 7.60)

                                                         3
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of key safeguards issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe any potential
 large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The project’s activities (road improvements, storm draining improvements, and construction of concrete acce ss
 footpaths in urban settlements) and what is proposed under the AF (street cleaning, landscaping activities, and
 environmental protection initiatives around the community access infrastructure built by the project, through slope
 protection and tree planting) are likely to have minimal environmental impacts. The types of investments under the
 AF will be similar to the current project; hence, no additional unforeseen adverse impacts are expected and no
 additional safeguard policies triggered. For this reason, the project remains categorized as and Environmental
 Category B project, and the existing ESMG is considered to be adequate to manage any potential negative impacts
 associated with the AF project physical investments.

 The project has brought about positive social and environmental impacts through short-term employment
 provision, improved local sanitation, vegetation control and waste collection. Negative impacts from the small
 infrastructure provision (Component 1B) and roads repairs (Component 1A) under the parent project are mostly
 localised, temporary, short-term, and minimal, such as increased dust levels, traffic disturbance, occupational
 health issues related to intensive labor works. The positive benefits of the project have outweighed the temporary
 negative impacts of the project. The potential negative impacts are managea ble under the project’s Environmental
 and Social Management Guidelines (ESMG) which was updated in 2012 and reviewed again in March 2014. It has
 also been re-disclosed locally and through the Infoshop on April 23, and April 22, 2014 respectively.

 Potential social safeguards issues for AF are likely to be related to grievances about beneficiary selection and
 payment for work done. Efforts have been made to address this by putting in place a Grievance Redress
 Mechanism under the parent project, which was found to be effective during a review in September 2013.
 Feedback is regularly received from various project stakeholders, particularly from targeted youth and women
 beneficiaries, and as a result of the Bank review, improvements in the flow and resolution of complaints were
 made. An orientation for staff on the GRS was conducted in September 2013.

 OP 4.10 was not triggered under the original project, and under subsequent AF as urban communities in Honiara
 are being targeted. The context of the project is urban (covering the capital city) with a highly transient and
 migratory population. All groups living in Honiara are able to participate in the project if they meet the entry
 requirements, and all REP beneficiaries are able to fully participate in the project through the various mechanisms
 included in the Consultation Plan.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
 in the project area:
 It is hoped that the demonstration effects of some of the REP activities related to urban regeneration and
 environmental protection leads to some positive changes in the cleanliness of areas and communities where REP
 groups are not directly active or working. This could include greater awareness about not throwing garbage
 everywhere, keeping streams clean, and recycling.

 Some of the other positive indirect impacts of REP, already identified in the MTR, and that the AF hopes to
 reinforce, include: (i) improved access in Honiara through the small infrastructure subprojects and improvement of
 the road network; (ii) greater civic pride and a growing momentum for urban regeneration efforts; (iii) improved
 social cohesion and social networks through the formation of groups for REP activities; (iv) increased participation
 and responsiveness of Ward Counsellors in response to the needs of their constituents; and (v) generation of useful
 information regarding infrastructure needs and connectivity requirements of poorer urban communities, which will
 be useful to the city in its strategic urban planning.
 In terms of potential indirect negative impacts, there has always been a concern that REP, through the provision of
 short-term employment, may generate more in-migration into the city, from the government side. However, on-
 going monitoring through the project shows that there is no indication that REP is attracting new migrants to the

                                                         4
 city. The employment is too short a duration, and the wages are too low to generate such a pull factor.

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
 N/A

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
 borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Given that the parent project has been under implementation for almost 4 years, the implementing agencies have
 acquired and developed the basic knowledge and skills to apply the World Bank’s safeguard policies. In
 compliance with the World Bank’s OP 4.01, and the Solomon Islands Government’s own requirements, an ESMG
 was prepared by the Government to serve as the Environmental Assessment (EA) for the project. The ESMG
 provides detailed guidance on the mitigation measures to be employed to address potential negative impacts of
 physical works. In addition, sufficient training has been provided to the project personnel for the effective
 implementation of the ESMG. The ESMG was reviewed again in March 2014 and found to be appropriate. The
 project is in compliance with the ESMG.

 The ESM also includes simple guidelines and technical matrices to facilitate the preparation of simplified
 Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for civil works contracts managed by MID and for Community Group
 Agreements managed by HCC. To date, subproject Environmental Management Plans (EMP) are being prepared
 and incorporated into bidding document and civil works contracts and community contracting managed by MID
 and HCC on a regular basis. Bidding documents for the civil work contracts include items for safety gear and
 equipment. Environmental, health and safety topics are also incorporated in the Pre-Employment Training
 curriculum (Component 2 of the Project). Acceptable mitigation measures have been applied at construction sites
 and the observed level of environmental impacts are marginal.

 The ESMG also includes an RPF to address the project’s impact on land use and on livelihoods as well as a
 consultation matrix to guide the project’s consultations with communities. In addition, the project has also
 established a GRS to seek feedback from community groups and project stakeholders. This has been assessed as
 effective during a review carried out in September 2013, and a training on GRS was also provided at the time to
 update staff skills for the management of the GRS.

 A potential safeguard issue under the parent project relates to land acquisition for Right of Way (RoW) for the
 construction of small scale community infrastructure (under Component 1B). RoW issues have been mitigated
 through a strategy of prioritizing subprojects within existing RoW arrangements. However, if any RoW issues
 should arise, as outlined in the original Project Document, government procedures and Bank policies (as outlined
 in the RPF) would be applied. The RPF includes a compensation matrix that would address the differences
 between government and Bank procedures. MID and HCC believe that acquisition and compensation issues are not
 likely to arise and so far (4 years into the project), no such issue has been raised.

 Given the AF will involve any small-scale infrastructure construction, the RoW issue is not likely to arise and it is
 the Bank Task Team’s assessment that the updated ESMG will be sufficient to address any potential environmental
 or social impacts and risk that may arise in the AF project.

 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
 policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 Consultations at various levels were conducted during project preparation and in the development of the ESMG.
 Consultations were held with line agencies (Ministry of Lands, HCC and MID), civil society, NGOs, youth,
 community and settlement groups, ward councillors and ward advisory committees. These consultations were
 summarized in the ESMG. These types of consultations are done regularly and routinely during implementation as
 well as in the identification, selection and preparation of the subproject activities under the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:


                                                          5
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                         n/a
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         4/18/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     10/1/2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      3/31/2010
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure                                                    4/23/2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      4/24/2014
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
                                                                                           N/A
    the EA to the Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                         n/a
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         4/18/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     10/1/2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      3/31/2010
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure                                                    4/23/2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      4/24/2014
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
 Pest Management Plan:
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    Re-disclosure
    Date of in-country re-disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
 * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the respective issues are
 to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C.    Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
     project decision meeting)
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and                  Yes
 approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's                          Yes
 Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and                 Yes
 language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
 NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been                  Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                Yes

                                                        6
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring   Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and    Yes
 the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

III. Approvals
 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Sonya M. Sultan
 Environmental Specialist:          Ly Thi Vu
 Social Development Specialist:     Roberto Tordecilla

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator: n/a
         Comments: (transferred project)
 Sector Manager (Acting):         Denis Jean-Jacques
                                  Jordy
         Comments:




                                                         7
