                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                            Report No.: j 92941


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         jNovember24, 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Somalia             jProject ID: Pl4997l       I
 Project Name:                Somalia Capacity Injection Project
 Task Team Leader:            Alex Appiah-Koranteng
 Estimated Board Date:        December 17,2014
 Managing Unit:               GGODR
 Sector(s):                   General Public Administration (65%); Other Social Services (10%);
                              Public Administration Financial Sector (25%).
 Themc(s):                    Administrative and Civil Service Reform (60%; Other Public Sector
                              Governance ( 40%).
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       40.0                     Total Bank Financing:
                                                                              I
 Financing Gap:
   Financing Source                                                                           Amount
   BORROWERIRECJPJENT                                                                             0.00
   Somalia Multi-Pa1iner Fund                                                                 40.00.00
   Total                                                                                          40.0
 Environmental Category:      c
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objectivc(s)
 The project development objective is to strengthen the staffing and institutional capacity of selected
 line mini,·tries and central agencies to perform core government functions.

 Core goverrunent functions include: (i) Policy and strategy management (planning,
 implementation and M&E); (ii) Financial management (budgeting, accounting and auditing);

                                                                                                      1
(iii) Procurement management; and (iv) Human resource management.

3. Pro,ject Description
The project will have three main technical components and will adopt a phased and flexible approach
with the objective to gradually increase the number of beneficiary ministries. The project components
aim at: ( 1) supporting the recruitment and placement of a small number of highly qualified advisors
and civil servants; (2) strengthening the government's framework for civil service management and (3)
developing management capacities at the center of government to strengthen policy coordination and
development, and monitoring.                                      ·

A limited number of core institutions will benefit from the capacity injection modality and related
support as of the first phase of operation. A mechanism for prioritizing and sequencing will be
established to allow government to make adjustments to the list of beneficiary institutions and respond
to changes Ill priorities. The ministries receiving support under the Bank project will be
complementary to those targeted under the UNDP project. The selection of additional priority
institutions wil! be based on criteria defined in Annex 2.

The project components and activities will be implemented over a five-year time period, which is
broken down in two operational phases. A first operational phase (20 15 - 20 16) will focus on
generating some quick '\vins to help build confidence in Somalia's on-going transition process and
demonstrate concrete life improvements for Somali people in the short-term. These short-term gains
will be strategically aligned with the project's long-term capacity development and change
management objectives (see Box 4 for further detail). The operational phase will also provide the
groundwork for improved civil service management, e.g. by advising on policy options in the area of
pay and pension reform. However, support to implementation of new policies, scaling up of capacity
injection and further strengthening of common functions in line ministries will be covered in the
second operational phase (201 7-20 19).

The project will be implemented in close collaboration with UNDP. Together, the \VB and UNDP
have designed complementary approaches m suppmi of the govemment's flagship program on
institutional capacity development. Flexibility in project implementation and the partnership \Vith
UNDP will enable quick responses to any issues that will emerge during project implementation. Sec
Annex 7 on World Bank- UNDP division oflabor.


PROJECT COMPONENTS

Component 1: Developing capacity for key cross-cutting government functions (US$13 million)

This component will support the injection of core staffing capacity into key government ministries,
departments and agencies through the government's capacity injection modality (CIM). Capacity
injection will focus on advisory, managerial and technical staff to fill urgent capacity gaps identified
by the government. Component 1 will have two subcomponents: (l) Supporting harmonized and
government-led capacity injection in priority institutions; and (2) Providing specialized training and
coaching support for new recruits and their teams.

Sub-Component 1.1 Supporting ·harmonized and govemment-led capacity injection in priority
institutions

This sub-component will suppmi the following activities: (i) recruitment, placement and management
of qualified Somalis in critical functions in targeted institutions at the federal government and

                                                                                                      2
Puntland state government levels, with focus on the most important staffing pnontJes of the
government; (ii) provision of shmt-term and long-term technical assistance to develop recruitment and
placement modalities and to establish and operate appropriate management structures; (iii) suppmt to
the development, application and monitoring of a harmonized pay scale; (iv) support to recruitment
unit in perfonning recruitment functions, including advertisement, headhunting, selection and on-
boarding; (v) conducting regular performance monitoring of CJM staff and (vi) unde11aking a regular
audit to review and monitor whether recruitment is carried out in compliance with the policies and
procedures established for the program, including diversity and equal opportunity.

Sub-component 1.2 Providing specia/izet/ training and coaching support for new recruits and their
teams

The sub-component will support the following actlVltJes: (i) development and implementation of
training modules for short-term training of senior advisors and managers of the civil service; (ii)
specialized short-term training courses for staff performing common functions in FM, procurement,
HRM and policy management; (iii) development and implementation of a young graduate scheme; (iv)
provision of supp011 to existing training institutions at the Federal level and in Puntland including
partnership arrangements with governance and public administration institutions in other countries to
develop cun·icula and training modules, establish certification and evaluation and implement training~
of-trainers programs (v) provision of long-term training to develop cadres of professionals in FM,
procurement, HRM and policy management; (vi) provision of coaching, mentoring and training and
development advisory services to civil servants.


Component 2: Strengthening the frameworks and procedures for civil service management
(US$11.25 million)

The component seeks to facilitate solutions of the Federal Government and Puntland State of Somalia
to manage and implement its civil service and capacity development agenda. The project •.viii support
interventions for strengthening civil service management capacity of government and development of
related frameworks. Component 2 will have four subcomponents: (I) Supporting priority ministries in
re-organization and change management; (2) Strengthening basic frameworks for civil service
management; (3) Civil service work force management; and (4) Strengthening the Ethical Foundation
ofthe Civil Service.

SuhwComponent 2.1: Supporting Priority Ministries in Re-organization and change management

This sub-component will support the following activities: (i) Conduct basic organizational assessments
of targeted institutions to define mandates, functions and institutional responsibilities; (ii) Conduct
skills and personnel mix assessments and develop staffing plans; (iii) Develop and implement change
management plans to implement agreed changes to improve organizational and staff performance.
This sub-component will be implemented af1er competent teams have been formed in target ministries
and agencies to support organizational assessments and implementation of change management plans.
Due to capacity constraints and the fragility of Somali public sector institutions, the approach to
organizational assessments will provide government with a menu of options including the application
of simple assessment tools designed to overcome basic challenges, deliver mandates and contribute to
the functionality of government.

Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening Basic Frameworks for Civil Service Management

The sub-component will support the FGS and Puntland state government to develop basic policy
management frameworks and regulations for the civil service. The following activities will be funded:

                                                                                                     3
(i) development of a public sector pay and grading policy and an implementation plan; and (ii)
development of a public sector pension policy and implementation plan.

Sub-Component 2.3: Civil Service Work Force Management

The sub-component will suppmt the following activities: (i) Conducting a human resource audit across
the civil service to identify gaps in critical and strategic positions that are vacant or filled temporary by
unqualified and absentee staff that may need to be redeployed, retired or removed from the payroll; (ii)
Establishing credible personnel management data system, strengthening controls on the payroll
process and the management of civil servants including professional development and retirement; and
(iii) development of a severance policy and procedures of administration, and implementation plan.

Sub-component 2.4 Strengthening the Ethical Foundation of the Civil Service

The sub-component will provide support to the following activities: (i) promote dialogue and
discussion on ethical standards for public service, (ii) develop a civil service code of ethics to define
principles and standards civil servants are expected to apply, (iii) ensure ethical standards are reflected
in the revised civil service legal and regulatory framework; (iv) mainstream the code of conduct in the
minist1y-level change management processes and integrate related training modules in the various
training programs including leadership training; (iv) support the establishment of adequate
mechanisms for enforcement, accountability and complaints, i.e. for dealing with illegal or unethical
practices within the civil service (v) develop and implement a communication strategy to disseminate
and socialize the code of conduct among civil servants, civil society, business community and
international partners.


Component 3: Strengthening Policy Management, Coordination and Monitoring Capabilities at
the Centre of Government (US$7.75 million)

The Federal Government and Puntland State Government seek to significantly improve their ability to
develop policies and oversee policy and program implementation at the Cabinet level. The prQject will
selectively target its supp01i towards capacity development in key areas of policy development and
monitoring. Component 3 will have two subcomponents: (1) Strengthening capacity for aid
coordination, and monitoring and evaluation of the Somali Compact; (2) Developing basic policy
management capabilities; and (3) Strengthening leadership for change and delive1y.

Sub-Component 3.1: Strengtheuing Capacity for Aid Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation
of the Somali Compact

The sub-component will provide supp01t to the following: (i) Strengthen the capacity of the Aid
Coordination Unit (ACU) in the Ministry of Finance (Federal Government) to serve as efficient and
effective Secretariats of the SDRF; (ii) Strengthen the technical capabilities of the ACU including that
of the Ministry of Planning ofPuntland State to collect, curate, analyze and publish aid data in an open
and accessible format and record aid against the government's chati of accounts; (iii) Strengthen M&E
capacity in government to enable the FGS and international cotmmmity to track progress of
implementation of the compact including its peacebuilding and statebuilding priorities; (iv) Strengthen
the statistics depmiments of the ministries of planning at both federal government and Puntland state
govemment levels to enable them to collect and analyze data, measure PSG outcomes, write reports
and disseminate appropriate information.




                                                                                                           4
Sub-Component 3.2: Developing Basic Policy Management Capabilities

The sub-component will suppm1 the following activities: (i) Establish a policy coordination and
monitoring oversight unit in the Office of the Prime Minister of the FGS and the Office of the
President ofPuntland and stren~:,rthen the Cabinet Office of the Government of Puntland; (ii) Establish
policy planning units in targeted ministries and agencies and develop their policy analysis and
management capability; (iii) Strengthen the capacity development units in the Office of the Prime
Minister of the federal government and that of the Office of the President of Puntland in the areas of
staffing, training, office equipment and technical assistance to improve perfOrmance of their functions.

Sub-component 3.3: Strengtheniug leadership for change am/ delivery

To help target ministries accelerate the implementation of internal change and delivery of results this
sub-component will strengthen collaborative leadership at various [eve!. It will support the following
activities: (i) facilitate high-level review or retreat sessions at the top-level of government to build trust
and consensus on priority reforms, strengthen a focus on results and resolve issues between agencies
and across government, (ii) build capacity of ministry-based reform teams to implement rapid results
initiatives to advance organizational change processes and delivery of short-term results, (iii) !ink
rapid result initiatives to the tracking of progress at the centre of government (see sub-component 3.2),
(iv) design and implement a leadership development training and networking program for Ministers
and Permanent Secretaries/Director Generals with a focus on promoting a new Civil Service culture,
(v) support the institutionalization of leadership training to ensure sustainability.


Component 4: Project Management and Coordination (US$6 million)

This component will support the management, coordination and monitoring and evaluation of project
activities. It will fund the following two subcomponents: (I) Project management; and (2)
demonstrating results.

Sub-Compo11ent 4.1 Project Management

This subcomponent will support the following activities: (i) establish a central Project Coordination
Unit in the Prime Minister's Office at the federal government level and in the Office of the President
at Puntland state government level; (ii) Fund the salaries of key staff including Coordinators, Financial
Management, Procurement and M&E Specialists; (iii) Build the capacity of institutions responsible for
direct implementation of project activities; and (iv) Provide procurement of limited office equipment,
furniture and essential logistics for managing the project.

Sub-Component 4.2 Demonstrating results

This subcomponent will support the following activities: (i) Develop capacity for regular monitoring
and evaluation at different implementation levels of the project, including writing and disseminating
reports on progress of implementation; (ii) finance an independent M&E consultant for verification of
results and qualitative assessments of progress (e.g. improvements in line minist1y cap<~city).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project wil! be implemented in Mogadishu in Somalia and in Garowe in Punt land.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                                                                                                            5
Mary C. K. Bitekerezo
6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01       No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No
Pest Management OP 4.09                   No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No
lnvoluntmy Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard L<!sues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A. The project will focus on providing capacity development and advisory services to public
institutions. Therefore there IS no social safeguards related risk that may resu 1t ti·om the
implementation of this project. However due to the fragile nature of the state, there may arise
challenging group dynamics between staff hired under the project and those already existing in the
civil service. Therefore measures to address such challenges like continuous team building activities,
etc .. will be included in the project. The project will also conduct analytical comparative study on
pensions as a basis to developing an evidence-based pension policy for Somalia in the second phase of
the project with intentions of promoting equity among govemment staff irrespective of age or gender.

The project Category is C and no safeguards policies are triggered. The project activities will not
include any civil works or utilization of materials that pose any environmental risk. All Bank advice
and guidance will promote inclusion of all of all safeguard measures

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
NIA
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NIA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide au
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A


                                                                                                        6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   N/A
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues arc to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
01'/BP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?      Yes [     l     No I I   NA [X]
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes   r   l     No [ l   NA [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [     I     No [ I   NA [X]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [     J     No [ J   NA [X]
property?
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [          l     No [ l   NA [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [     l     No [ l   NA [X]
Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                                                         7
OPIBP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA    [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA    [X]
these constraints?
Does the proj ect finance commercia l harvesting, and if so, does it   Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA    [X]
include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ ]            No [ ]      NA [X]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Yes [ ]       No [ ]      N A [X]
arrangements been made for publ ic awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes        []      No [ ]      NA [X]
Bank's lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes      []      No [ ]      NA [X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA [X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA [X]
the proj ect cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes   []      No [ ]      NA [X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed w ith        Yes [ ]       No [ ]      NA [X]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader:               Name: Alex Appiah-Korateng
Approved By:                                           7   /)
Practice Manager:               Name : Guenter Ht)e1~1                       Date:
                                                                                     12/()f J 2D it,
                                                  I    &    I




                                                                                                             8
