                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6966


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Somalia                              Project ID: P146006
Project Name: Somalia PFM Capacity Strengthening Project
Task Team Leader: Winston Percy Onipede Cole
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTME                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (90%);Other public
sector governance (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):             0
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        0.00
        State and Peace Building Fund                                   4.50
                                                                        4.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is "to establish systems for more transparent and
accountable management and use of public funds".

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will catalyze the PFM reform action plan with the objective of laying the foundation
for longer-term reforms by strengthening controls around the basic Ministry of Finance and
Planning functions.

 Component 1: Public Financial Management Reform Oversight
 The reform oversight and implementation structure will provide policy directions for
strengthening the PFM systems, will take periodic stock of progress by ensuring that key
milestones in the PFM reform strategy are on track, and will take concrete action where required.
Annual public PFM Forums will be organized as part of the communication strategy. Pooling of
all support within a unified PFM reform program will enhance coordination and provide a forum
for structured dialogue with development partners.
 With the crisis over the past decade depleting PFM capacity; PFM Subject Matter Experts
(SMEs) will provide technical assistance services with a clear capacity building and exit strategy,
with skill transfer arrangements (hand-holding approach) embedded within government
structures.

 Beyond the availability of good laws and institutional structures, PFM improvement requires
capability at the level of individual PFM practitioners. The PFM Education and Training
Program will build capacity at the individual level to obtain the required knowledge, skills,
abilities and other characteristics. The main targeted participants are planning and budget
officials, procurement officers, accountants and internal and external auditors. To ensure
sustainability, the education program will be constituted as a PFM Academy within local
universities.

 As reforms progress, and in anticipation of spending on social services, Public Expenditure
Tracking Surveys (PETS) will be undertaken. Advocacy networks for the Campaign for Good
Governance (CGG), comprised of relevant non-state actors, will be trained to undertake
independent policy and budget analysis, revenue watch, and expenditure tracking. The results of
the PETS will form part of the annual PFM forum and will form part of the information used to
judge public perceptions about PFM performance.


 Component 2: Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS)

 The SFMIS is computer based software that facilitates the management of financial
information. It is operated from computer terminals (to be procured) that are connected to
software and databases housed on a number of servers (to be procured). The system will be
housed in the premises of Ministry of Finance and Planning where a building /floor/wing will be
rehabilitated and equipped with the required infrastructure (cables, electricity, light, new
windows) to accommodate the servers, and fitting of air conditioned, dust-free rooms with access
control.

 The system will be user-friendly, robust and secured. It will focus on capturing budget, treasury
functions, payroll, tax collection and financial reporting. This will be preceded by business
process reviews and development and implementation will be through an inter-ministerial task
force that will own the Statement of User Requirements (SOUR) including a Standard Chart of
Accounts (SCoA).

 The SFMIS will provide a system with adequate audit trails to identify administrative
accountability in processing transactions. Improved timeliness and accuracy of transaction
processing together with comprehensiveness of financial reports with the adoption of Treasury
Single Account will also improve management decision and make key fiscal data available to the
public to hold government accountable for the use of public funds.

 Component 3: Expenditure Control, Procurement, Accounting and Reporting (ECPAR)
 Business processes will be re-engineered to strengthen existing processes such as
requisitioning, purchase orders, invoicing, payment authorization/approval, accounting and
reporting. Improved business processes could for example increase total tax revenue without
necessarily increasing the tax rate by collecting actual tax payable efficiently.

 The evolving business processes for budgeting, commitment controls, procurement, internal
controls, accounting and reporting will initially be issued as Treasury Circulars or Ministerial
Orders and later codified in Financial Regulations (FR) and a Comprehensive Operating
Procedures Manuals (COPM) to support the PFM Law.

  Establishing a Treasury Single Account (TSA) in the Central Bank through which all revenue
collections and authorized payments are made with regular bank reconciliation will lend
credibility to the completeness and accuracy of financial reports for decision making and
accountability. The TSA will support the extent of consolidation of government cash balances
(including those for extra-budgetary funds and external assistance controlled by third-parties)
and this will further improve the predictability in the availability of funds for commitment of
expenditures and general cash management by avoiding the situation of piling up debts or
borrowing whilst there are idle cash balances. Cash handling which pose high risk of leakages
will be avoided through direct 'bank' transactions.

 Stores Regulations are outdated with no well-functioning procurement system in place. The
objective is to put in place a modern but appropriate institutional and legal framework based on
the current Somalia context that will increase value for money in the use of public resources and
allow broader participation of the private sector and transparency in the procurement process.
Initially, emphasis will be placed on linking procurement plans with budget, work plans, and
disbursement schedules to ensure availability of funds to support the award and payments of
contracts in ensuring effective implementation of the budget.

  Good quality in-year financial reports and annual financial statements are not produced. The
project will provide a system of accounting that reflects accurately and in accordance with
internationally acceptable accounting standards, the flow of transactions and the year-end
position of financial resources of the FGS in a timely manner. A simple accounting procedures
manual will be prepared to guide the preparation of annual financial statements. Practical
training will be conducted for recognition and measurement of elements of financial statements
and preparation of prescribed financial statements and the relevant disclosure notes in
accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS cash basis).

  Budget and commitment controls will be introduced to curb build-up of arrears through
embedded system control features of the SFMIS. Also, strengthening controls, streamlining
business processes and applying internationally acceptable standards and practices will improve
fiscal discipline and promote transparency and accountability.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be carried out with Somali counterpart institutions in the Capital Mogadishu.
The only physical activities that are foreseen are the procurement of electronic hardware
(computer terminals, serves) and small scale, indoor works to refurbish and retrofit office space
and server rooms to accommodate the hardware.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
TBD

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    An environmental screening is carried out by default for every Bank financed project to
determine the environmental category and design an adequate assessment and management
response.

     The works that might be carried out under this project are expected to have no or negligible
environmental or social implications and no negative impacts. They will be confined to existing
structures, be simple and non-hazardous in nature, restricted to very basic, small scale
refurbishment, painting, cabling and possibly the installation of new doors and windows in areas
encompassing several rooms only, within existing buildings in the property of, and used by the
Somali Government.

      No specific safeguards instruments would be required to manage or mitigate the anticipated
impacts, but the team will proactively manage the small works by helping the Borrower to
prepare a simple EMP.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
    The project will not be implemented in or near natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
    The project does not involve forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
    The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
    The project does not affect or involve physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
    The project does not involve land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
    N/A
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
    N/A
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
    The project will not be implemented in an area that is disputed between two or more Bank
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
members.


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   08/15/2013

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Not applicable

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                 Mr Winston Percy Onipede Cole                                               09/30/2013
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                                    11/19/2013
      Comments: comments from Victor Bundi Mosoti (LEGEN)refers
    Sector Manager:                   Ms Patricia Mc Kenzie                                                       12/04/2013
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
