                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 93455
Date prepared/updated: April 7, 2014

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Somalia                                      Project ID: P150374
                                                      Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Urban Investment Planning Project
Task Team Leader: Roland White
Estimated Appraisal Date: 14 July, 2014               Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: AFTU1                                  Lending Instrument: RETF (Small Grant)
Sector: Urban Transport, Water Supply, Solid Waste Management, Sub-National Government
Theme: Other Urban Development, Municipal Government, Decentralization
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
                      US$ 4.90M

Environmental Category: B – Limited Assessment
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X ]                  No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]      No [ X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The PDO is: “To provide (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for,
selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities in South-Central Somalia,
Puntland and Somaliland, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of
participating agencies.”

3. Project Description:
The UIPP comprises a “project to prepare a project”. The main project, called the Urban
Development Project (UDP), has a currently estimated budget envelope of US$86.11m
(excluding currently unspecified contingency amounts), intended for support by the MPF.
Pursuant to relevant Bank Operating Procedures, which specifically allow for such situations,
and given that the project has an environmental safeguard categorization of B, the activities to be
supported under the UDP will include both detailed project design and implementation. In brief
they constitute the rehabilitation and upgrading of primary and secondary/community roads and
the renovation of the BRA administrative building in Mogadishu, a potential combination of the
upgrading of intra-city roads and/or bridge-building in Garowe, the enhancement of solid and
liquid waste management and water supply in Hargeisa, the extension and institutionalization of
the Local Development Fund, and institutional strengthening activities focused on the three
municipalities and the Hargeisa Water Authority. All of these projects are expected to have
moderate to significant environmental impacts, equivalent to Category B. These activities have
been identified through a process of technical work and dialogue the Bank Task Team has
undertaken during a number of visits to the three cities and are described in the Project
Information Document for the UDP and in the Aides Memoire produced after each visit.

Preliminary preparation, which includes feasibility studies and preliminary design for the main
infrastructure activities under the SUDP and a range of institutional assessments, will be
undertaken under the UIPP – i.e. the project which forms the subject of this assignment - also to
be supported by the MPF. The output of the technical work undertaken under the UIPP will
provide the basis for the preparation of the UDP. It should be noted that final design work itself
– e.g. detailed engineering design, social and environmental impact assessments, exploratory
drilling and preparation of bidding documents – will not be undertaken as part of the UIPP.
They will be undertaken as part of the UDP, and funding to cover these costs will be included in
the project documentation and proposals relating to that operation.

Overall, the UIPP will support two basic types of activity:

   1. feasibility and preliminary design studies for the physical investments that will supported
      by the UDP, and institutional assessments of the agencies that will execute these
      investments to provide an informational and analytic base for the preparation of
      institutional strengthening activities that will be supported by the UDP. In order to
      facilitate the quick execution of these activities in the fragile and conflict affected
      environment of the Somali territories, they will be executed by the Bank pursuant to OP
      10 (para 12)
   2. provision of technical assistance to enhance the capacity of the Somali executing
      agencies to prepare and implement the UDP effectively and efficiently and to mitigate
      fiduciary and safeguards risk. These activities will be client executed.

These activities are described on a component-by-component basis below.

Project Component Description

Mogadishu (US$ 1.56m). Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the primary roads will
be undertaken to assess whether the selection of the three roads by the BRA is the most efficient
use of roads funds in relation to the roads already being upgraded with Turkish assistance, survey
these roads, take soil core samples along the roadway to determine the existing sub-base and
base materials of the roads, determine the standards for roads construction, locate the options for
road material quarries, locate options for the asphalt and concrete batching plants, assess the
labor pool available in Mogadishu vis-à-vis roads construction, provide cost estimates and
identify potential environment and social impacts that will be assessed in UDP. For the
secondary/community roads, the activities will focus on a dialogue with communities to
determine the priority works to be undertaken in each of the 16 Districts in Mogadishu, to
determine optimum implementation modalities, and provide cost estimates. As regards the BRA
administrative building renovation, the work will comprise a review of the structural integrity of
the building, the BRA design work done thus far, and the cost estimates and phasing plans
developed by BRA engineering and architectural staff and consultants.

        Environmental and social due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via
two main types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data
and issues that would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement
of project outcomes, and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the
subsequent design process; (ii) the development of an environmental and social management
framework, which would constitute a generic tool for managing social and environmental risks
related to urban investments, regardless of funding source, in the Somali territories for use by
entities such as local governments and water utilities.

        At the institutional level, an assessment will be undertaken of the BRA and the Ministry
of Public Works (MoPW) of the FGS in order to provide an informational and analytic
foundation for the detailed preparation and execution of institutional strengthening activities that
will be undertaken under the UDP. The assessment will focus on basic conditions of
performance, strategic planning capacity, technical and operational capacity, fiduciary systems,
transparency and accountability mechanisms and environmental and social management.

        In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the UDP, technical
assistance for the BRA will need to be recruited under UIPP comprising a full-time project
coordinator, full-time procurement specialist, full-time financial management specialist, a part-
time social and environmental specialist, and a part-time monitoring and evaluation specialist.

Garowe (US$ 0.82m). Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the identified roads and
potential bridges will be undertaken to estimate costs and identify the trade-offs to inform the
selection of potential roads and bridge construction activities to be undertaken under UDP within
the available budget envelope, survey the roads, determine the standards of roads/bridge
construction, identify options for sourcing of materials and equipment, and assess the labour
pool.

        Environmental and social due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via
two main types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data
and issues that would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement
of project outcomes, and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the
subsequent design process; (ii) the development of an environmental and social management
framework, which would constitute a generic tool for managing social and environmental risks
related to urban investments, regardless of funding source, in Puntland for use by entities such as
local governments and water utilities.

       At the institutional level, an assessment will be undertaken of the Garowe Municipality
(GM) in order to provide an informational and analytic foundation for the detailed preparation
and execution of institutional strengthening activities that will be undertaken under the UDP.
The assessment will focus on basic conditions of performance, strategic planning capacity,
technical and operational capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency and accountability
mechanisms and environmental and social management.
        In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the UDP, technical
assistance for the GM will need to be recruited under UIPP comprising a full-time project
coordinator, full-time procurement specialist, full-time financial management specialist, a part-
time social and environmental specialist, and a part-time monitoring and evaluation specialist. It
is possible that some of these roles could be combined, thus generating efficiencies. The
potential for this will be explored as the UIPP is executed.

Hargeisa (US$ 0.74m). Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the solid and liquid waste
investments will be undertaken to determine the costs and siting of bulk solid and liquid waste
disposal/treatment sites and improvements in transfer points/stations, determine necessary
construction standards and the basic technologies that are most appropriate and cost-effective,
identify options for sourcing of materials and equipment, and assess the labour pool, and
determine requirements (financial, technical and institutional) for sustaining and expanding the
system of solid waste collection that has been introduced under donor-funded technical
assistance efforts in recent years, and identify potential environmental and social impacts that
will be assessed in UDP. This work has already been completed for the water supply sub-
component (under the UN-Habitat supported project) and so is not required under UIPP.

        Environmental and social due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via
two main types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data
and issues that would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement
of project outcomes, and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the
processes for design and environmental / social assessments planned for UDP or other
downstream planning activities; (ii) the development of an environmental and social
management framework, which would constitute a generic tool for managing social and
environmental risks related to urban investments, and planning follow-up investigations,
assessments and analyses (for e.g. water supply and waste management activities) regardless of
funding source, in Somaliland for use by entities such as local governments and water utilities.

        At the institutional level, assessments will be undertaken of the Hargeisa Municipality
and the Hargeisa Water Authority in order to provide an informational and analytic foundation
for the detailed preparation and execution of institutional strengthening activities that will be
undertaken under the UDP. The assessments will focus on basic conditions of performance,
strategic planning capacity, technical and operational capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency
and accountability mechanisms and environmental and social management. In the case of the
HWA, the assessment will build on the review being carried out by the Water and Sanitation
Program (WSP) as part of their Corporate Governance Advisory support to the agency. The
UIPP institutional assessment will identify potential residual activities from WSP’s work; and
recommend areas for future support in UDP to enable HWA to take on these residual activities.

In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the UDP, technical
assistance which can be shared by the HM and HWA will need to be recruited under UIPP
comprising a full-time project coordinator, full-time procurement specialist, a full-time social
and environmental specialist, and a full-time monitoring and evaluation specialist.
Local Development Fund (US$0.17m). The preliminary preparation activities for the LDF
component to be conducted under the UIPP will constitute an assessment of the LDF focusing on
quantum and allocation of the funding it provides, the usage of the funds, the efficiency of the
funding and allocation process, the performance criteria, fiduciary issues, environmental and
social management approaches used by beneficiary local governments, reporting and monitoring,
budgeting and planning, and related issues. Detailed design of the support to be provided will be
undertaken under the SUDP.

         Additional Cross-cutting studies. There will be two of these. One will focus on the issue
of conflict. The UDP will be will be implemented in three urban areas, namely, Mogadishu,
Hargeisa and Garowe. These contexts – and particularly those most affected by conflict - require
that enhanced attention be paid to understanding potentially harmful conflict and fragility factors
which could affect the project, that the potential conflict-increasing impacts of each of the main
project activities be assessed, and that mitigating strategies be identified. To this end, conflict
assessment/mitigation work is necessary at two levels. First, an assessment will be undertaken to
identify differentiated sources of conflict and fragility and their potential impacts on the specific
activities which are likely to constitute the SUDP, to sensitize the design of the operation to such
factors, and to develop a screening tool which can be utilized in the detailed preparation of the
project components to identify potentially conflict-aggravating impacts of project activities and
develop strategies to mitigate these impacts. This will include an initial, quick “do no harm”
screening of the proposed SUDP investment activities which will feed into the feasibility studies
under the UIPP. Second, the conflict screening tool will need to be applied in greater detail
during the detailed preparation of UDP to gain a better understanding of the conflict factors
surrounding the project activities and to identify opportunities for the activities to help, where
possible, mitigate conflict.

       Second, evidence indicates that infrastructure development projects can have social,
human and economic impacts and outcomes for targeted communities. Infrastructure
development furthermore can have different impacts and outcomes on men and women,
influencing access to services and economic opportunities, resource allocations, and participation
in community decision-making. Given that the SUDP will be one of the first major infrastructure
investment projects that will take place across the Somali territories in many years, it is
important to begin to develop an understanding of these impacts, particularly to inform the
character and design of infrastructure investment interventions that will take place in the future.

To this end, an evaluation of the socio-economic impact of select urban infrastructure
components will be conducted, including a disaggregation of some of the results by gender, to
improve the understanding and knowledge of the impact of project activities of the kind
anticipated under UDP. This evaluation will be conducted in two phases. Overarching survey
design, including evaluation tools and protocols, will be developed during the UIPP to assess and
evaluate the social and economic impacts of the UDP, including the differentiated impact of
select components on men and women, both during and at the end of the project (i.e. the impact
of project implementation and project outputs). Thereafter, impact evaluation activities,
including survey administration, data collection and analysis of results, will be undertaken during
the implementation of UDP. The evaluation activities will focus tentatively on road construction
activities in Garowe, assuming the feasibility of security and other conditions.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project will be implemented in the cities of Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe in the
territories of Somalia. The physical environment in all project areas and locations is
characterized by a strong existing anthropogenic imprint typical for intra-urban areas, including
transport infrastructure, residences, shops, workshops, managed drainage systems and highly
altered biodiversity and land cover. Virtually all of the project planning activities will pertain to
the footprint of pre-existing infrastructure, which has deteriorated or been destroyed due to war
or neglect.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: Wolfhart Pohl, Abdoul-
Wahab Seyni.

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                          Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

At this stage, the project will not finance any physical activities, civil works or final design
studies for the potential investments in urban infrastructure in Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe.
Nevertheless, as the technical assistance and preparatory work provided is intended, and likely to
result in concrete investment planning, the project has been classified as safeguards category B.
SUIPP’s main focus will be on the establishment of institutional structures and capacity, the
definition of potential project portfolios, and the production of feasibility studies and
environmental and social framework instruments.

A separate and subsequent project, the Urban Development Project (UDP), will be dedicated to
the concrete preparatory work, which would include the identification of specific projects, their
respective technical designs and eventual implementation, as well as the associated
environmental and social assessments, management plans and possibly additional thematic
studies (e.g. on waste management and water supply). Preparation of the UDP will commence
once the preparatory work supported by the UIPP is completed.
Under the above described project design, the appropriate environmental instrument for the
SUIPP has been determined as an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) to
inform and guide the overall engineering designs and techno-economic planning process. The
TOR for this E&S management framework have been produced by the Bank team during the
project preparation phase as safeguards planning instrument. The TOR have been prepared under
continuous dialogue with key stakeholders in the participating municipalities, and a summary has
been disclosed in the World Bank’s infoshop.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Borrower’s safeguards capacities were assessed to be low during project preparation. Thus
the team has taken the lead in designing the safeguards process and preparing the required
documentation. The Borrower has been involved in a consultative and information-sharing
manner, but will be trained and guided to assume successively more responsibility during further
project preparation, especially UDP. While specific environmental experience and expertise is
sparse in the municipal authorities (which are expected to be the implementing agencies),
engineering capacities are significantly higher.

The project thus plans to build on and expand safeguards expertise from the technical personnel
of the implementing agencies, who will be trained in good housekeeping and basic
environmental management. In parallel the project will deliver targeted capacity building in
form of training and parallel work of counterpart staff with World Bank specialists and
Consultants, in a “learning by doing” manner.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The key stakeholders at this stage will be the urban management institutions and utilities in
Mogadishu, Hargesia and Garowe. They have been continuously involved in the safeguards
process, as well as the preparation of the TOR for the ESMF. The TOR have been disclosed in
the World Bank’s infoshop.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: TOR for ESMF
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N.A.
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       N.A.
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   N.A.
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                            2 Dec 2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                               N.A.
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [ X ]     N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                             Name      Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Roland White            17 Nov 2014
 Environmental Specialist:           Wolfhart Pohl           18 Nov 2014
 Social Development Specialist       Abdoul-Wahab Seyni      18 Nov 2014
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra Bezeredi      08 Dec 2014
   Comments:
 Acting Practice Manager:            Alex Bakalian           19 Nov 2014
   Comments:
