                                                                                     90267

                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE




 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2014

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country: South Africa                        Project ID: Pl50008
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
 Project Name: Land Bank Financial Intermediation Loan
 Task Team Leader: Birgitte Gunhild Berg
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Nov-2014        Estimated Board Date: 19-Mar-20 15
 Managing Unit: AFTFE                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                              Intermediation Loan
 Sector: General finance sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(20%), SME Finance (50%)
Theme: Rural markets (60%), Other Financial Sector Development (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: FI-2- Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                Simple []                  Repeater []
Is this a transferred project        Yes []                     No []

B. Project Objectives

The project's development objective is to scale up Land Bank's wholesale financing, specifically
to emerging farmers, and to strengthen its institutional capacity.

C. Project Description

The proposed project will be a financial intermediary loan (FIL) of about USD 100 million to
Land Bank as the borrower and implementing agency with a guarantee of the Republic of South
Africa. The project has the following two components:

Component 1: Line of Credit (LOC) for Agricultural Financing (USD 99 million). The
objectives of the LOC component are to:
 •   Support Land Bank in refocusing its operations on wholesale lending. Land Bank uses
     both wholesale and direct lending under the Retail Emerging Markets (REM) and Business
     and Commercial Banking (B&CB) business lines, while Retail Commercial Banking (RCB)
     is exclusively focused on direct lending. Given Land Bank's limited branch network,
     wholesale lending is more sustainable because it helps Land Bank leverage the network of
     financial intermediaries without incurring significant operating costs. In addition, wholesale
     lending allows Land Bank to play a market enabling role because it permits agricultural
     borrowers to build credit history with financial intermediaries and improve their financial
     records for commercial loans, thus improving their ability to gain access to credit.

 •   Help expand the REM business line of Land Bank, which focuses on improving access
     to credit along with extension services for emerging farmers, in a sustainable manner.
     The REM business line - which is exclusively focused on lending to emerging farmers for
     development purposes currently accounts for about I percent of Land Bank lending. The
     LOC will help Land Bank in expanding this segment. This will also help in scaling up the
     provision of non-financial services, such as agricultural extension services that are being
     effectively delivered by Land Bank intermediaries.

To achieve the above objectives, this component will finance wholesale lending by Land
Bank for its REM and B&CB business lines. Land Bank will on-lend the funds to participating
financial intermediaries (PF!s) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World
Bank. The PF!s will on-lend funds to eligible agriculture enterprises, farmers including emerging
farmers, communal property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the REM
and B&CB business lines. The LOC will help Land Bank expand financing particularly under
REM.

Component 2: Capacity Building to strengthen Land Bank's institutional capacity (USD 1
million). The objective of this component is to support Land Bank in expanding its share in
agriculture financing in a sustainable manner and to strengthen Land Bank's asset-liability
management.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The Project will be national in scope, targeting Participating Financial Intermediaries who
will on-lend to eligible agriculture enterprises, farmers including emerging farmers,
 communal property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the REM
and B&CB business lines. The sub-loans will target project activities in the agriculture sector.
However, the exact location or types of agriculture activities that will be supported under the
project will be determined during the project preparation and appraisal. The WBG Exclusion List
will be applicable in selecting the activities to be supported by the project. The Land Bank will
review the operations of borrowers/investees, where they present Environmental and Social
risks, for compliance with national Environmental and Social laws and regulations where they
exist and are applicable. Environmental risks and impacts inherent to the agriculture sector are
largely related to effluent discharges from use of chemicals for agro-processing, waste generated
from agro-processing activities, use of pesticides and their likely impacts on land and water
 resources, including general health and safety of workers. Social risks can include possible
 displacement of on-farm landworkers, either through intensification of cultivation or through
 land acquisition. During project preparation the team will assess the adequacy of the existing
 Land Bank's Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) and their capacity to carry
 out due diligence of the PFis to ensure that the ESMS is in compliance with the World Bank's
 Performance Standards. In addition, the team will determine whether a customized
 Environmental and Social Operations Manual will be necessary for each Participating Financial
 Institution (PFI) or if a uniform manual can be used for Land Bank and all the PFis.

 E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

 The Project is categorized as Fl-2 - moderate environmental and social risks and impacts.
 This is in line with OP/BP 4.03 World Bank's Performance Standards for the Private Sector
 Projects which were adopted from the IFC Performance Standards in May 2013. The Land Bank
 loan, as a financial intermediary loan, is a good candidate for using the World Bank Performance
 Standards, given that the loan is designated for subprojects which will be implemented by the
 private sector.

The Land Bank, a new client to the World Bank, will be the implementing agency for the
project. Currently, the Land Bank has an Environmental and Social Management System in
place which was developed to meet the safeguard requirements of the African Development
Bank loan. The system includes a draft Environmental and Social Management Policy and draft
guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment. As a state-owned bank, Land Bank is
obligated to comply with South Africa's national environmental and social laws and guidelines.
Since Land Bank is a new client, due diligence will be carried out during project preparation to
assess compliance of the system to the World Bank's Performance Standards and additional
measures recommended to enhance the system as necessary. If there is a need for further
capacity building to support alignment with the World Bank's Performance Standards, this could
be supported under the project.

Before on-lending funds to the PFI, the Land Bank will be required to carry out a due
diligence of the PFI and ensure that each PFI has an ESMS system in place to screen sub-
projects for environmental and social risks and their impacts before providing funds to the
farmers and other eligible beneficiaries. Where necessary, guidance will be provided to assist in·
development of a screening mechanism. During preparation, the Bank will assess if the Land
Bank's current ESMS is adequate to carry out the requisite due diligence and also if it is in
compliance with the World Bank's Performance Standards and national E&S laws and
guidelines.

All PFis are exposed to some level of environmental and social risks and impacts through
the activities of their borrowers/investees, which can represent a financial, legal, and/or
reputational risk to the PFI. The risk associated with a PFI's lending/investment activities
depends on factors such as the specific E&S circumstances associated with a
borrower's/investee's operations, the sector, and the geographic context, among others. It is
anticipated that many of the transactions supported in this program will be services or
 investments that will have little or minimal environmental and social risks and impacts
 associated with them.

 The Land Bank's ESMS will incorporate relevant principles of the World Bank's
 Performance Standard 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The scope and complexity of the ESMS will depend on
 the environmental and social risks and impacts of Land Bank's lending/investment activities.
 With respect to Performance Standard I, environmental risks and impacts inherent to the
 agriculture sector are largely related to effluent discharges from use of chemicals for agro-
 processing, inappropriate disposal of waste from food processing facilities, use of pesticides and
 their likely impacts on land and water resources, including general health and safety of workers.
 Social risks and impacts derive from either intensification of use of existing agricultural land or
acquisition of additional land (which may have on-farm tenants who have specific rights under
South African law. Land Bank must also manage the working conditions of its workforce in
accordance with relevant aspects of Performance Standard 2 on Labor and Working Conditions,
which in the case of this financial sector project relates to employment practices and conditions.
Performance Standard 3 is triggered due to the likely use of pesticides, fertilizer and agro-
chemicals that is inherent to most agricultural practices. The specific supported agricultural
activities may potentially involve movement of equipment on public roads and the use of
security, requiring screening under Performance Standard 4. Agricultural investments by the
Land Bank should be screened with respect to Performance Standard 5 to determine whether
land will be acquired. Production may also be intensified or altered on existing land, affecting
on-farm laborers in terms of residence or livelihoods. Land tenants under South African law have
specific rights in terms of security of tenure which are consistent with the objective of
Performance Standard 5.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Kisa Mfalila, Senior Environmental Specialist (AFTN2)
Paula F. Lytle, Senior Social Development Specialist (AFTCS)

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain wlty)                        Yes          No         TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                    X
and Social Risks and Impacts

PS 2: Labor and   Workin~   Conditions                              X

PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                  X

PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                        X

PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                X
  Performance Standards (please exJJ!ain why)                                                Yes                   No           TBD
  PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                                                                    X
  Manag_ement of Living Natural Resources

  PS 7: Indig_enous Peoples                                                                                         X

 PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                                            X


 III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
    disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: N/A

 B. For Category Cor Category Fl projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
    preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: October 15,2014

 C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing 1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

 IV. APPROVALS

   Signed and submitted by:                                                                     ..!;;)
   Task Team Leader:                                Name: Birgitte Gunhild Berg                                          Date       tJN~ r/l'f
   Approved by:                                                                                                                 l'l.;,./,
   Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra       B~ p~                                          Date .. ,/..!'   0
     Comments:                                                                             /11711             .......-
   Sector Manager:                                  Name: Irina Astrakhan                  vv,.                          Date   O'i:/:0 7.
     Comments:                                                                                           ((                        I




1 Reminder:   The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the Info Shop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
