                                                                              85001

                   INTEGRATED SaFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/07/2014

 .
1 B3SIC        . Data
        . P ro.tect
Country: South Sudan                        Project ID: Pl46413
Project Name: South Sudan Health Rapid Results AF
Task Team Leader: Anne Margreth Bakilana
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, Estimated Board Date: March 13, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: AFTHE                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                            Financing
Sector: Health ( 100%)
Theme:       Child health (50%); Health system performance (25%);Population and
reproductive health (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            35
GEF Amount(US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          0.00
                                                                     0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                       Simple [X]        Repeater[]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                               Yes [X]    No []
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives (PDOs) are (i) to improve the delivery of high impact
primary health care services in Recipient's states of Jonglei and Upper Nile; and (ii) to
strengthen coordination and monitoring and evaluation capacities of the Ministry of Health.

Proposed New PDO
The project paper does not propose changes to the original Project Development Objectives.

3. Project Description

The proposed additional financing of USD 35 Million will build on work carried out by
the MOH, and will support activities under both components of the project as follows.

The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will support activities under Component One
which focus on the delivery of high impact Primary Health Care services in the two states
of Jonglei and Upper Nile. The proposed additional financing wiU extend the Ministry of
Health (MOH) performance-based contract with a Coordination and Service Delivery
Organization (CSDO) to improve the delivery of high impact primary health care services
in the two states. The primary health care services to be supported include maternal and
child health services such as vaccination, prenatal care, skilled birth attendance etc.
Under the supervision of the MOH and State MOHs, the CSDO will supervise service
delivery, mobilize human resources, procure and distribute pharmaceuticals and other
inputs, and help to determine the need for additional health facilities. The CSDO will also
play an overall coordination function to ensure that there are no gaps in service delivery
and that duplication of effort is minimized.

The proposed additional financing    will
                                        also support activities under component two
which aim to strengthen grant and contract management. It will also support monitoring
and evaluation functions by strengthening routine Health Management Information
System (HMIS); the Quantitative Supervisory Checklists ensuring timely health facility
surveys and household surveys.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The original project and the proposed AF, support the two states of Upper Nile and
Jonglei. The component 2 of the project aims to support the strengthening the
coordination and monitoring functions of the MOH will be implemented across the 10
states of the country. There are no salient physical characteristics relevant to the
safeguard analysis.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    1. Varalakshmi Vemuru, Senior Social Development Specialist (AFTCS)
    2. Bedilu Amare Reta, Environment Specialist/Consultant (AFHE)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.0 1)                   X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                 X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.1 1)                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.1 0)                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                     X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                              X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed AF is a continuation of the ongoing HRRP and has the same PDO and
activities as the original project and therefore has the EA Category B like the original
project and triggers OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Environmental issues pertaining
to safe water supply, sallitation, and waste disposal are expected to come up as minor
renovation of existing functioning health facilities and health care activities will continue
to be supported under the AF. The main environmental safeguard policy relates to health
care waste management, in view of the risks associated with the handling and disposal of
medical waste.

To avoid/offset the anticipated environmental impacts, as the original project, this AF
will use the project specific ESSAF of the original project that explains the OPs
triggered, safeguard screening and mitigation based on the possible types of sub-projects,
responsibilities for safeguards screening and mitigation, capacity-building and
monitoring of safeguards framework implementation, and consultation and disclosure.
The Medical Waste Management Plari (MWMP) prepared, finalized and disclosed in the
Banks Info Shop on February 10, 2014, will guide AF implementation. During the
original project implementation period no significant environmental impacts were
identified and no safeguards non-compliance recorded and all the issues were managed
by the best practice method stated in the ESSAF and Medical waste management plan.

The MWMP prepared by the client and discussed with various stakeholders in the
country and finalized in October 9, 2011. This focused on existing waste generation, as
well as segregation, storage, collection, transport, and final disposal practices;
technologies for waste disposal; public awareness programs; and relevant national
legislation. The South Sudan Ministry of Health will continue to use this Plan as a
guideline to avoid or minimize the potential impacts that could be generated due to the
implementation of the project particularly lack of proper hygiene and sanitation facilities
and mismanagement of medical wastes.

OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered since minor renovations and
upgrades are expected to be undertaken in existing facilities and there will be no taking of
land under the project. Social impacts of proposed activities under the project will be
addressed in accordance with the ESSAF that was prepared for the original project.
OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered and is applicable to the project as analysis
by World Bank and other experts confirms that the overwhelming majority of people in
the project area are expected to meet the requirements of OP 4.10. The approach and
implementation process of the proposed Project embeds the basic principles of OP 4.10
and ensures that benefits will flow to all households, and the campaign and outreach
activities enables support for the project and participation of the entire community.

During implementation of the project, the Bank's safeguards team will work closely with
government to confirm the technical assistance and capacity building required at central,
state and local government levels to ensure effective implementation of the ESSAF,
IPMP, and ESMPs.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No project alternatives are required for this project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This ongoing project and the proposed AF trigger World Bank Safeguard Policy OP/BP
4.01 on Environmental Assessment similar to the original project. To offset the potential
adverse impacts of the project, the Borrower has begun to mitigate the impacts that may
be generated due to the distribution and use of medical supplies based on the ESSAF and
the MWMP. Based on the screening process outlined in the ESSAF, the client will
continue to conduct an environmental impact assessment for specific activities as needed
and develop appropriate ESMPs and other safeguards instruments before the
commencement of the activities during implementation, as and when required.

The MWMP is valid for a five year period (2011- 2016) and is therefore valid for
supporting implementation under AF. This will therefore be revised based on
implementation experience at a later date.

The Environmental Health Directorate (EHD) under the MOH which is responsible in
conducting follow-up and implementation safeguard within the ministry has a limited
capacity to take care of environmental and social safeguards issues. However, the
Ministry particularly the Environmental Health Directorate has been supported through
training and capacity building activities to strengthen available capacity for managing the
environmental and health issues. This Directorate (EHD) has received and will continue
to will continue to receive required technical expertise from the project for implementing
the MWMP and preparation of ESMP, as required. This capacity building for the
directorate will help the team to identify the potential impacts, monitor the recommended
Environmental and Social mitigation measures and carry out all health service activities
in an environmental sound manner.

OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered and is applicable to the project as analysis
by World Bank and other experts confirms that the overwhelming majority of people in
the project area are expected to meet the requirements of OP 4.1 0. In order to ensure
compliance of the project with the principles of the OP 4.1 0, the implementation process
will ensure that the cantpaign and outreach activities under AF will ensure the
participation of all sections of the community, and the delivery of the essential health
services benefit all communities in the project area. No separate Indigenous Peoples Plan
is required for the project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders including the MOH, SMOHs, CHDs, health care workers and local
communities in target states, international/national NGOs/FBOs and Development
partners. All stakeholders receive guidelines on inclusion of potentially affected people in
decision making on matters that might affect them.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Manag ement Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 NA
  Date of "in-.country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to Info Shop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
  Date of receipt lby the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to lnfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Yes
Info shop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:          Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:                 Anne Margreth Bakilana                     2/7/2014
Environmental Specialist:         Bedilu Amare Reta                          2/7/2014
Social Development Specialist     Varalakshmi Vemuru                         2/7/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social            Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional
                                                                     ~~~-- VO&A
                                                                              /r/lbCJ
Coordinator:                                                                            1.J,ej
  Comments:                                                                                I~
Sector Manager:                   Olusoji Adeyi
  Comments:
