                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/15/2014                                     Report No.: AC7088
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P093132                  Original Project Name: Dam Safety and
                                              Water Resources Planning (DSWRPP)
Country: Sri Lanka                            Project ID: P148595
Project Name: LK: Dam Safety WRP - Addl Fin.
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18,        Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: SASDA                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (90%);Irrigation and
drainage (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (90%);Rural services and infrastructure (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             70
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               8.00
                                                                          8.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the project are to: (i) establish long-term sustainable arrangements for
operation and maintenance of large dams; and (ii) improve water resources planning.
This will be achieved through three main project components: (i) dam safety and
operational efficiency improvement; (ii) meteorological information system
improvement, and (iii) multi-sector water resources planning.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Dam Safety and Operational Efficiency Improvement: The expected
outcome of this component will be enhanced safety of selected high-risk dams and
sustainable institutional arrangements for effective dam safety management and operation
and maintenance (O&M). This is being achieved through: (a) remediation works for 32
high-risk dams, including replacement or repair and painting of hydro-mechanical works
(gates), upstream embankment protection with rip-rap, grouting, construction or cleaning
of toe drains, replacement or repair of sluice gates, and rehabilitation of spillways; (b)
provision of basic safety and operational facilities for 80 dams, including access roads,
communications, monitoring instruments, floodlights, and maintenance equipment and
tools; (c) preparation of operation and maintenance manuals for all 32 project dams; (d)
emergency action plans (EAP) for selected dams; and (e) the establishment of a Dam
Safety Secretariat.

 Under the Additional Financing (AF) an additional 30 high- and medium risk dams will
be included in the dam safety remedial works program.

 (ii) Component 2: Hydro-Meteorological Information System (HMIS): The expected
outcome of this component would be enhanced staff capacity and physical and analytical
 infrastructure for monitoring hydro-meteorological data, detecting and forecasting water
 hazards and assessing water resources for multi-sectoral planning, development and
management. This component would comprise: (a) Establishment of 122 hydrometric
stations; (b) Establishment of data banks at the Irrigation Department (ID) and the
Department of Meteorology (DoM) and improving the analytical capability of staff; (c)
Establishing procedures and providing tools and training for real-time analysis of flood
situations in the influent streams of some major reservoirs; and (d) Groundwater
monitoring and assessment including support to upgrade the groundwater database. This
component would finance goods, consultancy services and minor civil works.

 Under the AF, another 20 hydro-meteorological stations will be established and the
monitoring at the 7 ground water pilots will continue and one additional pilot area will be
developed.

 (iii) Component 3: Multi-sectoral Water Resources Planning: The expected outcome of
this component will be a national water use master plan, an updated Mahaweli water
development plan, and the Mundeni Aru river basin plan. Support will mainly be through
consulting services.

 The AF will support the preparation of feasibility studies for key developments
identified in the three plans that were prepared under the original component 3. It will
also support the improvement to ID training center at Galgamuwa and MASL training
center at Kotmale so that the training program on various aspects of dam safety and water
resources planning and management for staff of the ID and MASL, and other water
management agencies can be carried out in-house.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project dams are located throughout the country. Since the project is associated with
upgrading and rehabilitation of existing facilities there will be no major alterations in the
existing land use patterns.

 The AF will include up to nine dams in the Eastern Province and 3 dams in the Northern
Province, areas of the country that could not be part of the project area under the original
project. It has also been identified that the project will finance the rehabilitation of three
dams that fall within the designated boundaries of National Parks, namely the Ulhitiya
Rathkinda Dam and Henanigala Wewa Dam within the boundaries of the Maduru Oya
National Park and the Udawalawe Dam within the Udawalawe National Park. However
no major impacts are envisioned to these sensitive habitats via project interventions and
all identified impacts will be managed stringently.

 Apart from these two areas, the project is not expected to fund any activity within any
other forest and wildlife reserves and protected areas, and therefore would not have any
adverse impact on environmentally sensitive areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS)
   Ms Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1.1 Environmental Safeguards.
 Since the DSWRPP would only upgrade and/or rehabilitate existing dams under the
Dam Safety component, most of environmental consequences of constructing a new dam
would not be encountered. Remedial works that are proposed for the dams vary, with the
main works being: (i) strengthening of the existing dams; (ii) repair/replacement of gates
and sluices; (iii) repair/improvements to existing spillways; and (iv) replacement of
essential electro-mechanical equipment.

 As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in general and
the dam safety component in particular would be subjected to a project specific
Environmental Analysis (EA) and the subsequent preparation of an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) for each intervention. For the dams located within the
boundaries of National Parks, the EAs will identify all potential impacts that will be
caused due to project interventions to the surrounding sensitive areas and their
inhabitants. Special measures will be taken, as needed, to ensure that disturbances to the
wildlife inhabiting the area and general park operations are made minimal during the
project activities. Before the works on the dams start, an EA and EMP are prepared to
focus on the potential environmental impacts, both on site and off site. The scope of the
EA may vary depending on the type of interventions planned, the dam site characteristics,
and characteristics of the sites for borrowing construction materials.

  The remedial works for strengthening of existing dams undertaken are likely to cause
environmental issues off site where resource extraction would take place. Some of the
work involved in strengthening the dam body would require large amounts of sand/soil
and rocks to be extracted from one or more places and brought to the construction site.
The borrow sites, if not properly identified and managed (subsequent to extraction) could
have environmental repercussions. Resource extraction in Sri Lanka has reached critical
levels where unsustainable operations that have continued unabated for many years have
destroyed natural environments beyond remediation. Therefore, selection of sites for
extraction of construction material such as earth, rubble, etc. should be made after careful
evaluation of resource availability within the sites concerned and in conformity with the
Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) regulations for designation of such sites. Another
important aspect that ought to be considered in conveyance of material to the site is the
potential danger of the unintentional spread of invasive species. Sri Lanka has many
examples of severe invasions of aquatic weeds in waterways as well as terrestrial species
in dry coastal areas. The spread of invasive plants in already disturbed environments such
as construction sites is particularly high. This risk can be minimized by identifying
potential borrow sites in nearby areas where the occurrence of alien invasive species are
not observed. Therefore, the proper identification of suitable borrow sites would be a key
consideration in managing the afore-mentioned environmental impacts.

 Solid waste/debris disposal is another issue that would need addressing, as needed. Dam
reconstruction would result in removal of certain quantities of topsoil, rip rap, etc and in
the generation of concrete debris and other construction wastes. In addition, wastes would
be generated from worker camps. The project should explore options for re-using
material such as soil and for the careful disposal of other waste material. It is also
mentioned that many of the dams and reservoirs are currently subjected to ad hoc and
haphazard disposal of garbage, construction debris and industrial/domestic wastewater.
Such practices if allowed to continue would only undermine the expected benefits from a
project of this nature. Specific disposal sites would be identified in the respective EMPs.

  Effects such as air and water pollution at the sites would largely be temporary and
localized in nature, provided that adequate precautions are taken to manage such issues.
If dam rehabilitation work requires the emptying of a reservoir, there would be impacts
on its aquatic life depending on the extent of drying up that would take place. However,
seasonal fluctuations in the water levels of tanks in the dry zone are a natural
phenomenon to which aquatic life is adapted. In addition, since there would be no
instances where reservoirs would be emptied below its dead storage capacity, aquatic
flora and fauna should be well preserved. Similarly, it has been agreed with the
Government of Sri Lanka that the project would not finance any activity to increase the
storage capacity of the reservoirs. Hence, environmental issues associated with additional
inundation of land and private and public property would not apply. GOSL's investment
in upgrading and/or rehabilitating selected dams under this project would not yield the
anticipated long term benefits unless there is proper management of the watersheds in the
catchment areas. Major environmental factors affecting the functioning and the life span
of the dam are those caused by the manner in which land, water and other resources are
used in the catchment areas above the reservoir. Increased pressure on upland areas above
the dam is a common phenomenon caused by the resettlement of people from the
inundated areas and by uncontrolled influx of people to the watershed. On site
environmental deterioration as well as a decrease in water quality and an increase in
sedimentation rates in the reservoir result from clearing forest land for agriculture,
grazing pressures, use of agricultural chemicals and illegal timber felling for commercial
purposes. It would therefore be of utmost importance that the dam owners work in
coordination with the agencies responsible for management of the watersheds to identify
such issues and arrest them with appropriate measures. Sustainability of the project
interventions would be dependent on better management of the surrounding watersheds.

 Impacts arising from construction of buildings under the different components of the
project, if any, are expected to be minimal. If the construction work is to be located on
sites where the implementing agency has existing buildings, it is not anticipated that any
real environmental concerns may arise and could be dealt with by environmental codes,
building codes and best practices. The main impacts of building construction for such
sites would be off-site impacts due to resource extraction for construction. Hence,
resources should be extracted from authorized locations and sources that are licensed by
relevant GOSL authorities. Obtaining all necessary GOSL approvals for construction of
buildings are a pre-requisite for the civil works to be eligible for funding under the
project. If buildings are to be constructed on new land, an environmental checklist would
be applied with an EA conducted only if necessary.

 Worker camps can also be a source of potential public health problems and therefore
should be kept clean and hygienic. Provision of proper sanitation would be key to this,
especially in the case of preventing the introduction and spread of water-borne diseases.
Also, the work force may require substantial quantities of firewood for cooking and
hence increase the demand for it. This could have a threatening effect on the forest
resources in the area. In order to eliminate this threat, construction contracts would
require worker camps to be provided with Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) as cooking
fuel. LPG canisters are freely available throughout the country so should not pose an
undue burden on the contractor.

  In addition, run off from the vehicle yards containing fuel and lubricants and run off
from material stock piles containing particulate matter can all lead to contamination of
soil and water. Hence, proper waste management for all types of wastes generated on-site
would be of high importance.


 1.2   Social Safeguards
  Given the nature of the interventions under the AF that are very similar to the original
project, it can be determined that the social impacts are expected to be mostly positive.
However, water flows into and from some reservoirs are likely to be interrupted during
the dam safety remediation works, particularly when the repair works demand the
lowering of reservoir water level and keeping the level low until the repair works are
completed. This scenario could affect the livelihoods of the local communities
temporarily. It is estimated that in about 5 out of the 30 dams under the AF this is likely
to happen. Further, there are two dams wherein 'reservation' areas have been encroached.
So, as the two situations are to be addressed, following social development issues assume
significance: (i) participation by the local communities; (ii) inclusion – particularly of the
poor and vulnerable sections including landless laborers, women, women headed
households; (iii) human and institutional development support – involvin the community
based organizations as well as joint management committees (comprising both
government and people representatives); (iv) Information, Communication, and
Education (ICE) campaigning to ensure informed decision making as well as
transparency in transactions; and (v) livelihood supports.

 1.2.1 Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). None of the expected remedial activities will
require acquisition of any land. Hence, no land acquisition is envisaged, nor will there be
any displacement of people. However, in a few cases, it is likely that water flows into the
reservoir and consequently, irrigation flows might have to be stopped for prolonged
periods to conduct detailed technical investigations and repair/ rehabilitation works. This
could impact livelihoods of some downstream users adversely. Given this situation, a
better appreciation of the need, or otherwise, for triggering this policy demands an
understanding of the selection processes and different types of dams being covered by the
project.

  Interruption of water flows and impacts. The suspension of water could prevent farmers
from growing paddy. Instead, they will have to resort to some other crops (relatively new
to them) or forego cultivation for one season. However, discussions with Agricultural
Experts reveal that although the farmers would have to forego paddy cultivation, they can
grow other field crops like maize, cowpea and green gram and ground nuts using residual
moisture and limited rainfall during the Yala season and under rain-fed condition in
Maha (wet) season. However, rainfed farming of non-paddy crops would be an entirely a
new practice to some farmers, because it requires different crop husbandry practices and
probably higher wage labor inputs. Thus, despite this potential alternative cropping
possibility, it is felt that that the livelihoods for the following users could be affected
adversely: (i) farmers who draw water from the reservoir for cultivating paddy; (ii)
landless laborers eking their wages from the agricultural operations in the command area;
and (iii) fishers involved in catching fishes from the reservoir. In addition, in a few cases,
water supplies for domestic purposes (drinking, bathing, washing, cooking) could also be
affected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Apart from the urgent interventions identified by the various engineering surveys and
funded by the project currently, it is possible that the Government could undertake other
interventions in the future as part of a continuous effort to improve/maintain dam safety.
However, since it is not possible to define what those activities would constitute of, if
undertaken at some point in future, it is not possible to assess any resultant cumulative
environmental impact. For large development programs EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory in
accordance with the National Environmental Act and associated regulations, hence the
impacts would be addressed through the EIA/IEE studies in the future. The EAs would
take activities funded under this project into account, therefore, cumulative impacts, if
any, would be addressed at that stage.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Environmental Impacts: The Dam Safety component of the project would reduce water
induced hazards to the public by improving dam safety of some of the high risk tanks and
reservoirs. The proposed interventions are essential and critical and hence alternative
options do not apply because the dams are already constructed and the project would
finance only interventions for rehabilitation. Different alternatives for rehabilitation
would be considered during the engineering design stage and the most sustainable option
would be selected.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the
mitigation of potential impacts mentioned above. The Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL)
established the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) in 1982 as the environmental
regulatory agency instituted under the National Environmental Act (NEA). Under the
NEA, all development projects that fall into a prescribed category are required to go
through a comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA or IEE).
CEA has demonstrated technical expertise and a good track record of evaluating
environmental impact assessments. Since the proposed project would be mainly
concerned with dam rehabilitation and there would be only limited civil works in other
components, there would be no EIA/IEE requirement under the NEA. Nevertheless, it has
been agreed with GOSL that all interventions that have the potential for adverse
environmental impacts would be subject to an environmental assessment and any
identified adverse environmental impacts would be mitigated according to a site specific
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).

 As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in general and
the dam safety component in particular would be subjected to a project specific
Environmental Analysis (EA) and the subsequent preparation of an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) for each intervention. As the specific interventions in the
selected dams have not been fully identified yet, specific environmental assessments and
EMPs cannot be prepared at this stage. Therefore, an Environmental Assessment and
Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared that would serve as a template and
guidance for preparation of specific EAs and EMPs. The EMAF primarily includes an
assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with dam rehabilitation and
associated structures, measures for environmental risk mitigation and institutional
arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, EMP implementation and
monitoring. The EA/EMP for four selected dams to be taken up in the first year of the
project has been prepared.

 Although an adequate policy and regulatory framework exists in the country for natural
resource management and conservation, enforcement of the policy and regulations has
been weak. Monitoring of EIA approval conditions, especially, is a weak area and needs
strengthening. Several programs to improve institutional capacity, funded by bi-lateral
and multi-lateral donors, aimed at providing technical and financial assistance to CEA
and other institutions dealing with natural resource management have been implemented
in the past. Some of these efforts are on-going. Hence, it is anticipated that the capacity to
enforce regulations will gradually improve in the future.

  Proper identification of suitable borrow sites would be a key consideration in managing
the key potential environmental impacts. It has been agreed with the GOSL that the
project would not support the use of any borrow material taken from sites within
protected areas and the use extractive material from designated protected areas,
regardless to approvals from GOSL, would result in the sub-project being ineligible for
financing under the project.. The Soil Division of the Irrigation Department, which
carries out surveys on borrow sites, would be used as a resources agency to identify
proper borrow sites. Also, if an identified burrow area is privately owned, the land would
be temporarily rented out from the owner on a willing basis and the borrow material
would be purchased on a commercial basis. On completion, the land should be restored
back to normal (to be highlighted in the EMP).

 Specific disposal sites would be identified in the respective EMPs to mitigating the
impacts of solid waste/debris disposal during construction. The off-site impacts of
building construction due to resource extraction for construction would be mitigated by
using existing government building codes and regulations for approval of such buildings
and extracting the construction material and other resources only from authorized
locations and sources that are licensed by relevant GOSL authorities. Obtaining all
necessary GOSL approvals for construction of buildings are a pre-requisite for the civil
works to be eligible for funding under the project. If buildings are to be constructed on
new land, an environmental checklist would be applied with an EA conducted only if
necessary. The Project would collaborate closely with the ongoing watershed and forestry
management projects to mitigate the risks of sustainability of dam safety investments that
might arise due to poor management of catchments of the dams to be financed under the
project.

 In terms of the project, the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, which would, has been
one of the implementing agencies for the project and under which the PMU has been
established, has ample experience of conducting environmental assessments for dam
related work. Under the accelerated Mahaweli Development Program, extensive
environmental assessments have been conducted and risk mitigation measures
implemented and the appropriate expertise is still available. Monitoring of compliance
with the specifications in the EMPs for dams to be rehabilitated would be mainly
conducted by the environmental specialists in the PMU and in the consultants' team
providing supervision on implementation. They would report on contractors' performance
in terms of implementing conditions give in the particular EMP and take appropriate
action accordingly. The requirements of the EMPs would be part of the Conditions of
Contract for all civil works contracts financed under the project. In addition, it is
proposed that safeguards monitoring committees, which would include key stakeholders,
such as members from the local community and local environmental officers, would be
established to assist with compliance monitoring.

  Identification and assessment of impacts to Physical Cultural Resources is generally
undertaken as part of the EA process and any mitigation measures will be included in the
EMPs. Under this policy it will be ensured that any formal clearances/approvals are taken
from relevant government authorities as per National legislations. The proposed
operations pose limited risks of damaging physical cultural resources since it involves the
rehabilitation of historic earthen dams that in some areas hold cultural significance. The
impacts will mostly be positive as rehabilitation of these dams will ensure they are further
preserved and maintained thus the trigger is predominantly a positive one. Nevertheless
procedures for identification, protection of Physical Cultural Resources will be
undertaken under the guidelines stipulated in the EAMF and national policies and
procedures.

 Lessons Learned Via Project Implementation

  The procedure highlighted above has been accordingly followed in a satisfactory
manner throughout the prior course of the project. As lessons learned no major safeguard
issues were recorded in the lessons learnt thus the same procedures of assessment,
implementation and compliance monitoring outlined in the Environmental Management
Framework can be followed. Even though the policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
was not triggered during the previous project, adequate measures were included in the
environmental assessment process to ensure that rehabilitation work within tanks either in
close proximity to or within designated conservation areas was managed to the
satisfaction of national policies, the bank's safeguard policies and authorities in charge.
The project also has many success stories to document as to how such interventions have
further benefited the management of these natural habitats as well as the fauna that reside
within its boundaries, thus assisting national wildlife conservation endeavors as well. In
the three identified dams located in sensitive areas the PMU will have to work in close
collaboration with the Department of Wildlife Conservation (DWC) and Forest
Department as the authoritative bodies under which the management of various
designated conservation areas are assigned in Sri Lanka. Mandatory clearances will also
have to be obtained in accordance with the policies and regulations of the DWC. The
project has had close and successful collaboration with these institutions during the first
phase which should facilitate smooth implementation during the additional financing as
well. Stringent and proactive monitoring should be conducted, especially on these three
dams, as per the findings of the environmental assessments that will be completed.
Implementation of safeguards has been monitored accordingly throughout with
participation of all local communities and relevant agencies and authoritative bodies as
well. During the additional financing the project seeks to further strengthen reporting of
safeguards implementations to highlight success stories and key lessons learnt that will
benefit environmental safeguards and stewardship within the sector.

 Under the original project, a Livelihood Support Assistance (LSA) Plan was developed
with participation by all the relevant stakeholders, including the farmers and fishers. This
comprised plans to provide: (i) Coping Assistance to affected farmers; (ii) Cash/Wage
Assistance Plan to land less and fishers; (ii) Alternative Crops Plan; (iii) Fisheries
rejuvenation plan; (iv) Gender Plan; and (v) Domestic Water Supplies. The LSA plan has
not only been successfully implemented in four dams under the original project but has
come for great appreciation from all sections of the society for its innovativeness,
contextual relevance, and utility. During AF, LSA will continue to underpin the social
safeguards management measure and same has been planned for some 5 dams. Number
may get reduced if technical alternatives are found to ensure un-interrupted flow of water
supplies during the implementation.

 Social Safeguard Measures – Plans to encounter temporary water flow interruptions.

 DSWRPP project preparation had well recognized that the stakeholder profile is not
homogenous, rather, it encompasses a variety of diverse set of beneficiaries (direct as
well as indirect) comprising a number of sub-groups identifiable based on differentials in:
type of water resources/ structures (ancient/ modern dams); the place of living (in terms
of proximity to the dam), sources of livelihood, occupational pattern, and skill base.
Therefore challenge was to address the requirements of all sub-groups, with special
attention towards the rural poor whose livelihoods depend directly upon the dams
proposed for project intervention. Besides, there are a large number of other interest
groups, both external and internal to the program, which would have differing degrees of
influence and impact on project activities and outcomes. Hence, mapping different
stakeholders and soliciting their views, to be incorporated into the designing of this
project was recognized as essential. Towards this end, and as a part of the project design,
GoSL had enlisted the services of an external consultant firm and conducted a Social
Assessment and consequently mitigation measures viz., social management plan (SMP).
The Plan was successfully implemented in the original project and rich experiences have
been gained. Drawing upon the experiences gained so far social management plan (SMP)
has been updated for the AFP.

 SMP implementation performance.

 The LSA plan has not only been successfully implemented in four dams but has come
for great appreciation from all sections of the society for its innovativeness, contextual
relevance and utility. Overall, in four dams, a sum of Rs 138 million has been expended
by the project and provided assistance to 8,600 familes. Of this, 92% account for wage
assistance. This apart, GOSL provided assistance for taking up alternative crops – 12,000
acres of green gram, 1000 acres of maize and 600 acres of vegetables which resulted in a
gross income of Rs 200 million. Fish fingerlinks worth Rs 4.3 million too have been
replenished by GOSL under the four dams. Apart from the economic assistance/ impacts,
there are two institutional developments. One, 60% of the families did not have an
account in the Bank and all of them do own and operate an account, as theproject insisted
on payments being made through the Bank accounts directly. Two, the project provided a
platform for all the actors – irrigation department, agricultural department, farmers
organizations, fishers, agriculture traders, NGOs- to come and work together.

  Project has done a comprehensive evaluation of all the four Plans and a detailed
documentation outlining the processes, SOs adopted in each of the dam, towards planning
LSA along with the costs, issues/ hurdles encountered, and the benefits accrued as well as
lessons learnt. All the four reports are available on the website of the project.Key lessons
emanating are as follows:

  (i)   Project preparation had expected that water flows interruption could take place in
respect of some 9 dams. However, technical alternatives could be found and eventually,
water flows interruption took place in only 4 dams.
  (ii) Disruption has not happened beyond one season.
  (iii) Farmer households were against any sort of cash doles, rather, preferred pooling
of the project assistance and use this opportunity for rehabilitating the canal/distribution
system in the downstream.
  (iv) Landless laborers and fishers do require a different type of help. Landless aborers
are not fully locally based, they migrate from one place to the other, to towns in search of
livelihoods. So, mapping them is difficult. But, it is expected that on an average, 10- 15%
of the farmers to be exclusively landless laborers in any given situation. As regards
fishers, each reservoir could have some 50- 100 fishers depending exclusively on the
reservoir for their livelihoods. Towards ensuring that their livelihoods are not adversely
affected, project needs to place funds at the disposal of the RPM / PM who (with
Livelihood Support Facilitators who will perform the role of a social animator) will
prepare a Wage Assistance action plan to use the same and deploy labor for some asset
generation/ maintenance work.
  (v) Creating full awareness of about the potential social and economic disruptions of
the contemplated dam safety remedial measures is critical to secure buy-in from the down
stream water users. A systematically designed IEC campaign is essential for this. The
campaign should also focus on enabling the water users an economic benefit out of the
project interventions.
  (vi) The most important lesson is preparation of beneficiary list for offering benefits
under LSA program. This should be done effectively in such a way to avoid all possible
interferences from external parties such as politicians. A systematic baseline study would
help immensely. Baseline Survey and Information Education and Communication (IEC)
campaign should be designed such as to bring about an attitudinal change which then will
ensure transparency and lay the foundation for developing beneficiary confidence.
  (vii) Domestic water supplies were not affected for two reasons. One, there are many
open wells in any command areas. Two, no reservoir was emptied fully and even in the
event of a natural disaster, some dead storage water was always available. Still,
preparedness for supply drinking water is essential

 All the above lessons have been taken due note of and the Operations Manual is being
revised. Key feature of this will be a Q&A note.

 The only new issue which has cropped up during AFP relates to 'encroachment'. With
regards to the encroachment of the reservation areas, the project will formulate technical
alternatives so that rehabilitation works can be put in place without 'displacement' of
permanent structures. At the same time it has been agreed that consultations will be held
and mutual agreement reached to ensure that: (i) encroachments do not spread further;
and (ii) safety measures are not disturbed.

 Project Management is now endowed adequately with experience and expertise in
managing LSA as they were fully responsible for designing and successfully
implementing the same during the past 4 years. The personnel who were engaged in
managing this component during the original project are still available and are expected
to continue for AFP as well. Further, project has made excellent documentation of the
LSA experiences, both written and audio-visual. The former include 4 very well written
Implementation Completion Reports which bring to the fore not only the processes
adopted and the difficulties encountered, as well as the outcomes. Project's monitoring
and evaluation arrangements will continue during AFP as well. Further, process cycle,
prepared earlier, depicting all the activities to be done, specifying a time frame and the
role and responsibilities of all the stakeholders involved shall underpin the institutional
and implementation arrangements.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Rapid Rural Appraisal conducted by the PMU has enabled identifying key stakeholders
both from a geographical/ administrative – national, regional, district and village – as
well as from functional perspectives. The latter comprise (i) Water users of reservoirs
such as farmers and farmer organizations and federations, laborers earning wage from
agricultural operations, fishers catching fishes in the reservoir, and households using
water for domestic purposes; (ii) Water Managers or the Service Providers at the
operational level – chiefly, officers of the Irrigation Department, Mahalweli Authority,
Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB), National Water and Drainage Board, Agrarian
Development Department; (iii) Administrators/ Regulators such as the offices of
Divisional Secretary, Government Agents, at an Intermediary level; (iv) Water Resources
Decision Makers, at the strategic level -- Ministries of Irrigation, MASL, Power,
Finance, Disaster Management Center, Meteorology who formulate draft policies/
programs as well as resource allocations; and (v) Apex/policy level comprising
administrators, policy makers, political functionaries, scientific and extension agencies
who play a major role in promoting public safety and water resources development and
planning. Systematic and extensive consultations will continue during the implementation
as well so as to not only ensure fuller awreness among the stakeholders but also to secure
a buy-in from them. In respect of 5 dams, wherein, LSA is expected, the institutional
framework designed for the original project will be adopted for continuous engagement
with the communities. All implementation action plans will be developed with the help of
external facilitators with full participation by the communities. Documents will be
translated into Sinhalese and Tamil as appropriate and disseminated widely.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/14/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/08/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/26/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/05/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/13/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/13/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Note: the document dates under the header of Resettlement Action Plan refers to a Social
Assessment and Management Plan that was prepared for the additional financing.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk                03/13/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne   03/13/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr Suryanarayan Satish              03/13/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano               03/13/2014
  Comments: Cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                03/13/2014
  Comments: Cleared.
