                                                                                   81627


                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                            Report No.: ISDS
.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          20 October 2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                    Sudan                 Project ID:              P129156
    Project Name:               Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project (P129156)
    Task Team Leader:           Asferachew Abate Abebe
    Estimated Appraisal Date: 2013                    Estimated Board Date: 11-Dec-2013
    Managing Unit:              AFTN3                 Lending Instrument:      Investment Project
                                                                               Financing
    Sector(s):                  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Forestry (40%)
    Theme(s):                   Environmental Polices and Institutions (20%), Land Administration and
                                Management (20%), Biodiversity (30%), Other environment and natural
                                resources management (30%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       7.73                     Total Bank Financing:    7.73
    Total Co-financing:                                Financing Gap:           0.00
        Financing Source                                                                        Amount
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
        International Development Association (IDA)                                                 0.00
        Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                           7.73
        Total                                                                                       7.73
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred       No
    project?
.


.




    2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environment Objective is “to increase the
    adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in targeted landscapes”.
3. Project Description
The Sudan Sustainable Natural Resource Management Project (SSNRMP) is part of the Great
Green Wall Initiative (GGWI) and falls under the World Bank umbrella Program for the
Sahel and West Africa countries in support of the GGWI. The project will be implemented
over a 5 year period (2014-2018), with a total cost of US$7.73 million.

The SSNRMP will have three components: (1) Institutional and policy framework; (2)
Community-based sustainable management of rangelands, forests and biodiversity; and (3)
Project management.
Component 1: Institutional and policy framework
Institutional capacity building:. The project will support key institutions involved in natural
resources management by strengthening their capacity to formulate, implement and monitor
programs and projects geared towards the sustainable management of natural resources and
biodiversity conservation, based on a capacity enhancement plan. The capacity development
program will be flexible and modular, whereby capacity building activities will be designed
based experiences in the implementation of component 2. A variety of consultative
mechanisms with all concerned stakeholders at the federal, state and locality levels will be
used to determine the institutional, technical, and administrative training needs. The project
will provide institutional support to MoEFPD, FNC, RPA and WCGA at all levels. This
support will be used to: (i) develop effective inter-agency collaboration mechanisms at the
central and state level; (ii) assist communities in preparing and implementing investments
under integrated land management plans; (iii) manage, monitor, and maintain infrastructures
by Village Development Committees (VDCs).
Support to policy framework: The project will contribute to addressing the lack of effective
comprehensive policy and legislative framework that deals with sustainable forest and land
use management in an integrated, multi-sectoral way. The project will assess the adequacy
and effectiveness of the current regulations governing the implementation of SLWM and
biodiversity conservation practices following the landscape approach in the selected
landscapes. Selection of strategic entry points for any legislative reforms will be based on
complementarity with other initiatives and on lessons emerging from component 2. A strategy
will be developed with practical recommendations, measures and policies for effective
cooperation at centre-state-local and community levels for the protection and conservation of
the natural resource base. The project will work with HCENR to strengthen policy framework
and legislation for SLWM and biodiversity conservation.
Information and knowledge management: The project will help address the barriers in terms
of information and knowledge related to broader adoption of SLWM and biodiversity
conservation practices. In order to systematically apply and scale up best practices for SFM
and SLWM, a systematic approach to capturing lessons must be established, with clear
methodology for lesson learning rooted in scientifically based evidence. The project will
therefore ssupport the Pressure State, Impact Response (PSIR) analysis of land and
biodiversity degradation, including assessment of land management practices. The analysis
will provide information as to what would be the best practices to promote in each target
locality and landscape (in component 2) based on relevant baseline data collection to update
    key information after the separation of South Sudan, including key species and variables for
    forests, rangelands and wildlife in selected landscapes.
    A communication plan will be designed and implemented in order to disseminate information
    concerning processes, results and lessons learned through the program to key ministerial
    departments and national agencies, state and local Governments, bilateral and multilateral
    development partners, non-Governmental organizations and beneficiaries. This will
    encompass strategy to prepare or contribute to national policy; and linkages with Sudanese
    institutions and learning platforms to be established at the outset. The proposed project will
    receive support from the BRICKs project in strategic communication, and contribute to
    knowledge exchange initiatives that will directly benefit the project’s implementation, within
    the TerrAfrica platform, the SAWAP through the BRICKS project1 as well as other national
    or regional exchange initiatives.

    Component 2: Community based sustainable management of rangelands, forests and
    biodiversity

    Integrated land management plans: The project will support the preparation of natural
    resource management plans for the gazetted Wad Bugul reserve in the Butana area in the
    Rufaa locality of Gezira State, Telkuk Forest Reserve in Kassala State, and the rangelands in
    Aum Rimta in White Nile State.

    Forest ecosystem rehabilitation and restoration: In Gezira, the gazetted Wad Bugul Forest
    Reserve (totaling about 50,000 ha) will be rehabilitated. In Kassala State, the project will
    gazzette and rehabilitate 2,400 ha of the Telkuk Forest Reserve. Proposed project sites can
    support many of the original small mammals, birds, reptiles, other fauna, and plant life typical
    of the Sahel biome. The project is expected to benefit biodiversity conservation through the
    gazetting of forest reserves; restoration of native vegetation by reforestation, enrichment
    planting, natural regeneration, sand dune stabilization, and effective implementation of
    management plans.

    Rangeland management: Activities will include establishment of shelter belts for sand dune
    fixation, demarcation of animal migration routes and grazing land rotations, establishment of
    nurseries for rangeland rehabilitation, clearing and opening of fire lines to protect rangelands.
    In addition, community level project activities may include rehabilitation of existing Hafirs
    and water sources; rehabilitation and cultivation in open spaces; and seeding rangelands to
    improve range condition with fodder grasses.

    Local communities will receive technical assistance to acquire the capacity to conduct the
    selected rangeland activities, including training to support the organization of communities in
    associations (cooperatives) around specific NRM livelihood initiatives. Given the importance
    of livestock in Sudan and its impact on land degradation, sustainable rangeland management
    activities related to husbandry and livestock are crucial.

1
  The Building Resilience through Innovation, Communication and Knowledge Services project (BRICKS) aims to
improve accessibility of best practices and monitoring information within the SAWAP portfolio on integrated
management of natural resources, climate change and natural disasters.
    Component 3: Project management


    Project Management includes support for day-to-day project management including,
    procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards, annual work plans
    and organization of supervision missions.
    Monitoring and Evaluation will provide support for operating an M&E system that will track
    the project results, including those registered in the GEF tracking tools for Biodiversity, Land
    Degradation and Sustainable Forest Management. The M&E system will work in
    coordination with the SAWAP Program so that key indicators can be aggregated from the
    country level to the regional Sahel level. To achieve this, the project will receive
    complementary support from the BRICKS project for regional portfolio monitoring that will
    reinforce benchmarking and improved investment design and execution.


    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)


The project locations are East Gazira forest reserves, including the already gazetted Wad Bugul
.




reserve in the Butana area in the Rufaa locality of Gezira State, the Telkuk Forest Reserve in
Kassala State, and the rangelands in Aum Rimta locality of White Nile State. Fluctuation in
rainfalls, land degradation, decline in productivity, and reduction in biodiversity, accompanied
by socio-economic problems are challenges that all the three locations share. One of the
defining characters of the rangelands and forest reserves in these locations is the severe
degradation mainly caused by overgrazing and encroachment of forest resources for agricultural
production.

    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Desta Solomon ( AFTCS )
    Tamene Tiruneh ( AFTSE )
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01    Yes            The SSNRMP is a category B project.
                                                          Rangeland      and forest rehabilitation
                                                          activities will have positive environmental
                                                          and social impacts. However, this policy is
                                                          triggered because the Project will finance
                                                          establishment of nurseries, and small scale
                                                          irrigation, among others, that would have
                                                          some adverse environmental and social
                                                          impacts. This ESMF is prepared to ensure
                                                          that negative impacts are avoided or
                                                          reduced with appropriate mitigation
                                            measures. Further, the framework suggests
                                            some      recommendations    to    ensure
                                            sustainability of rangeland and forest
                                            rehabilitation activities
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes   The policy is triggered because sub-projects
                                            in SSNRMP may have minor adverse
                                            impacts on protected areas, conservation
                                            sites, and critical ecosystems. Sub-projects
                                            involving significant conversion of natural
                                            habitats will not be eligible for financing
                                            under SSNRMP

Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes   Under SSNRMP, the forest related activities
                                            such as reforestation, rehabilitation of
                                            degraded forests will have positive
                                            environmental impacts. However, some
                                            livelihood improvement interventions like
                                            Haffir (pond) construction may pose some
                                            negative impacts if forests are found in
                                            those sub-project sites. Environmental
                                            management plans with appropriate
                                            mitigation measures will be prepared to
                                            avoid or reduce such impacts. If there are
                                            sub-projects likely to cause significant
                                            conversion of forests, they will not be
                                            financed under the SSNRMP.
Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes   This policy is triggered by the SSNRMP,
                                            particularly for those activities targeted to
                                            improve the livelihood of communities by
                                            investing on small-scale irrigation and
                                            nurseries. Such investment can encourage
                                            the use of agrochemicals (e.g. insecticides
                                            and herbicides). The project will promote
                                            Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and safe
                                            utilization of pesticides by the targeted
                                            communities. However, the project will not
                                            finance the procurement of any
                                            agrochemicals.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No   Since the project will mainly implement
                                            activities to rehabilitate rangeland and
                                            forests, impacts on physical cultural
                                            resources is not anticipated.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the
                                            project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   Under SSNRMP, activities related to
                                            rehabilitation and reforestation sub-projects
                                            will not involve involuntary land acquisition
                                            and displacement of people since they will
                                                                be implemented in communal rangelands
                                                                and forest reserves. However, such
                                                                activities trigger this policy during
                                                                enclosure of areas for rehabilitation and
                                                                natural regeneration since it may restrict
                                                                access to humans and livestock. A process
                                                                framework has been prepared and will be
                                                                used to ensure that marginalized and
                                                                vulnerable people are consulted and
                                                                engaged in sub-projects implementation.
                                                                Vulnerable and marginalized people would
                                                                be identified during the social assessment,
                                                                which would be conducted, before
                                                                implementation of project activities.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No              Although there will possibly be construction
                                                                of Haffir (small pond) under SSNRMP,
                                                                particularly for irrigation, these may not
                                                                require special procedures to follow, as
                                                                provided in the Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37.
                                                                Haffirs are small water collection and
                                                                storage ponds which do not involve
                                                                construction of dams. Thus, the project does
                                                                not trigger OP 4.37 (safety of dams).
    Projects on International Waterways         No              Activities under Component 2 of the project
    OP/BP 7.50                                                  are aimed at rehabilitating the rangeland in
                                                                Aum Rimta, White Nile, and reforestation
                                                                and biodiversity conservation in Wad Bugul
                                                                and Telkuk Forest Reserves Gezira and
                                                                Kassala States, respectively. None of the
                                                                project activities will, therefore, adversely
                                                                change the quality or quantity of water
                                                                flows to the White and Blue Nile and their
                                                                tributaries. In addition, based on the fact
                                                                that the small investments under the Project
                                                                are unlikely to affect the overall
                                                                hydrological balance of any of the
                                                                international waterways or tributaries, this
                                                                policy is not triggered under the SSNRM.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No              The policy is not triggered, as the project
                                                                will not be implemented in disputed areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The SSNRMP will rehabilitate rangeland and forests that will have positive environmental impacts
    and social benefits. the Project will finance construction of infrastructures such as seedling nurseries,
    and small scale irrigation, that may have minor and localized environmental and social impacts.
However, these impacts will not be large scale, significant, and irreversible.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The overall impact of SSNRMP on both the biophysical and social environments is expected to be
positive because the Project would focus on rehabilitation of degraded rangelands and forest reserves
through appropriate land and water management technologies and practices. The project will support
specific activities and technical capacity building initiatives targeted at rehabilitating and
restoring forest ecosystems in Gezira and Kassala States. Activities to restore rangelands will
include establishment of shelter belts for sand dune fixation, demarcation of animal migration
routes and grazing land rotations, establishment of nurseries for rangeland rehabilitation,
clearing and opening of fire lines to protect rangelands, among others.
Potential negative impacts, although temporary, reversible and mitigable may emerge during
construction work related to small scale irrigation, Haffirs, and other similar livelihood interventions.
There are no any likely long-term negative impacts associated with these activities of the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The alternative that was discussed but discarded was to put the forest reserves under strict protection
devoid of any human and livestock interference. This alternative is not feasible, as the forest reserves
support the livelihood of a large number of local people living in and around the proposed project
areas.
The alternative not have the SSNRMP will not be an option because the rangelands and forest reserves
could be further degraded with dire consequences on the natural environment and the population
whose livelihood is dependent on them.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) is responsible for
implementing Environmental Impact Assessment in Sudan. However the capacity and representation
of HCENR at the state and local levels are limited. For example, it was noted that HCNER is
represented in 3 States out of 18. The ESMF identified training activities that will strengthen Project
implementing institutions to properly implement ESMF and PF. Budget for the training activities have
been included in the ESMF. The Project Coordination Unit will employ environment and social
safeguard specialist who will be responsible for implementation and monitoring of ESMF and PF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project will create coordination mechanisms at each administration level for the implementation
of the activities under the Project. These include Steering Committees, and project implementation
units at national and state levels.

Sub-projects identification and preparation will be participatory involving all the stakeholders,
particularly local communities. Key stakeholders include the following:
- Agro-pastoralists practicing crop and livestock production within the project area;
- Village development committees;
- Locality administrations;
- State governments, particularly the Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, Range and
Pasture Administration, Wildlife Administration, and Forest National Corporation
- At federal level, the Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Physical Development, Higher Council
    for Environment and Natural Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Range and Pasture Administration,
    Wildlife Administration, and Forest National Corporation
    - Civil society, including research and academia, non-profit organizations, and development partners.

    Safeguards implementation issues would be discussed and handled at each level, particularly at
    sub-projects design and implementation. Given the nature of the project, it is very unlikely that the
    project activities would result in any adverse risks for any group of people in the project areas.
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    "In country" Disclosure
    Pest Management Plan
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    "In country" Disclosure
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]          No [ X ]    NA [ ]
    OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
    Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [ ]     No [ X ]    NA [ ]
    degradation of critical natural habitats?
    If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ ]     No []       NA [X ]
    of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
    mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes []      No [ ]     NA [X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [ ]     No [ X ]   NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ X ]
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ ]     No [ X ]   NA [ ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ]     No [ X ]   NA [ X ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [ ]     No [ X ]   NA [ ]
include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [X ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]          No [ X ]   NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]      No [ ]     NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]    NA [ ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:              Name: Asferachew Abate Abebe
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Alexandere Bezeredi                    Date: October 21, 2013
    Sector Manager:                Name: Magda Lovei                          Date: October 21, 2013
