                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/29/2014                                    Report No.: AC7119
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P087154                    Original Project Name: Water Sector
                                                Support Project
Country: Tanzania                               Project ID: P146700
Project Name: Tanzania Water Sector Support Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Yitbarek Tessema
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2014        Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTU1                            Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                Financing
Sector: Water supply (70%);Sub-national government administration (11%);General
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (7%);Sanitation (7%);Central government
administration (5%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Urban services and housing for the poor
(25%);Water resource management (15%);Pollution management and environmental
health (10%);Other human development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             45
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              15.00
                                                                         15.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                           Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the parent WSSP and the additional financing is "to assist
the recipient in a) improving integrated water resources management by strengthening
water sector institutions; and b) expanding access to water supply and sanitation services.

3. Project Description
WSSP is part of a Sector Wide Approach Program (SWAp – the Water Sector
Development Program (WSDP) - which incorporates all activities undertaken in the
water sector in Tanzania. WSDP is funded by the Government of Tanzania (GoT), IDA,
and other Development Partners (DPs): KfW, the Netherlands, AFD, AfDB and DFID.
All DPs and Government agencies have signed an MOU that sets out common principles
governing WSDP and establishes a common basket fund (for DPs) to finance a subset of
WSDP activities. The common basket fund is administered in accordance with the WB
fiduciary and safeguards rules and is supervised by the WB in coordination with other
DPs.

 The WSSP is contributing to the first phase of the country's Water Sector Development
Program (WSDP) which spans a 20 year period from 2006-2025, the first phase of the
WSDP provides assistance to 132 Local Government Authorities (LGAs), 109 district
small towns utilities, 7 national water supply projects, 19 regional urban water and
sewerage authorities as well as Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
(DAWASA) to improve first phase of priority water supply and sanitation services.
WSSP also assists in improving integrated water resources management through
strengthening water sector institutions and supporting water resources management and
development investments.

 The project has four components;

 Component 1 (Sub-Program – A)- : Strengthening of Water Resources Management
Institutional Framework: This component is intended to strengthen 9 Basin Water offices
(BWOs) and to prepare basin wide Integrated River and Lake Management and
Development Plans (IRLMDP) and support priority water resources development
schemes.

 Component 2 (Sub Program B): Scaling up of Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Services: This component is intended to enhance the capacity of the Local Government
Authorities (LGAs) and to rehabilitate / expand rural water supply schemes as well as
provide assistance to Sanitation improvement .

 Component 3 (Sub Program C): Scaling up of Urban Water Supply and Sewerage
Services: This component is intended to enhance the capacity of 19 urban Water Supply
and Sewerage Authorities (UWSAs), Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
(DAWASA), regional and district town utilities national multi village schemes, and
gazetted small towns as well as providing household connections and kiosks.

 Component 4 (Sub Program D) Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
Building: This component is intended to enhance the capacity of MoW with the provision
of new offices, equipment, technical assistance, training, establishment of Management
Information System (MIS), and support to sector coordination and capacity building.

 The additional financing to the WSSP is aiming at financing activities started under the
original project following the same safeguard arrangement designed for the original
project.

 Since the project was approved in February 2007, some 800 sub-projects have been
screened for environmental and social risks and impacts. The vast majority of sub-
projects have been Category C, with negligible impacts.
 Project safeguards management has improved significantly over the recent period. After
delayed implementation stemming from serious capacity constraints, the project's
safeguards performance has gained momentum and substantially improved its
performance following the midterm review and subsequent project restructuring. As a
result of this improvement in safeguards, the project has been able to better identify and
manage risks associated with the nationwide WSDP program.

 The environmental categorization of subprojects proposed to be supported under the
urban water supply component of the additional financing include: one Category "A", six
category "B", and nine Category "C" subprojects.

  a.    Category A: The single Category A investment – development of the Kimbiji
/Mpera well field – is being undertaken in a phased manner to ensure that the final well
field development design reflects the results of the ongoing Comprehensive Groundwater
Assessment (CGA) and the actual pump test from the first phase drilling. Two ESIAs
(one each for Kimbiji and Mpera) are being prepared. Once the CGA is completed in
January 2015, a separate supplemental environmental management and monitoring plan
will be prepared to outline the sequence and monitor of development of the well field. A
RAP for both Kimbiji and Mpera was prepared, approved and cleared in November 2013.

 b.     Category B: Some of the Category "B" subprojects were not initially considered
for WSDP financing, and as such, followed national environmental standards rather than
rules set forth in the WSDP ESMF. These subprojects would now be included within
WSDP, and as such, would be subject to environmental and social audits to identify any
necessary measures to ensure the environmental and social management of the project is
satisfactory.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will support government's national program which covers rural and urban
beneficiaries in the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (AFTN3)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The ongoing Water Sector Support Project (WSDP) is a Category A Project, for which an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) were developed and applied to subprojects as part of the approval
process. There are no known safeguards compliance issues that are unresolved in the
original project. Safe guard screenings are conducted for sub projects and depending on
the recommended procedure ESIAs and RAPs are prepared and implemented.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no known potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The key stakeholders include: Ministry of Water,; Prime Minister's Office Regional and
Local Government (PMO-RALG) , Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
(DAWASA); Local Governments (LGAs); relevant municipalities; and the affected
communities and people. The ESMF and RPF provide the criteria for subproject
screening and set out the mandatory safeguards management procedures to be followed
throughout the project cycle in order to comply with national environmental laws and
World Bank safeguard policies. Important progress has recently been made to improve
the overall environmental and social management of the Project including hiring of an
international safeguard advisor, and improving planning of required safeguard
supervision especially for high-risk subprojects. Nonetheless, implementing agencies still
lack sufficient capacity and resources to ensure effective safeguard management.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project safeguard documents ESMF and RPF, require implementing agencies to
undertake adequate level of consultation with beneficiary communities; in particular the
rural water supply and sanitation component of the project follows a community based
participatory planning, implementation and management of the water supply schemes
provided under the project. Beneficiary community prioritizes their needs and makes
informed decision on the technology they chose to construct. The RPF has laid down the
participatory approach to planning and resolution of issues in a manner acceptable to
stakeholders including the PAPs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/10/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/15/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/28/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                               10/02/2006
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/10/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/15/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/28/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Yitbarek Tessema        04/22/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber   04/22/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Helen Z. Shahriari      04/22/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   04/22/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian   04/22/2014
  Comments:
