                          ENTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET

                                       APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                                               Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 27, 2014
                                                                                               93414
L BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data
    Country:               Thailand                         ProJeetiD:            P128965
    Project Name:          Thailand - Partnership for Market Readiness
    Task Team Leader:      Warapom Hironwatsiri
    Estimated Appraisal    September 22, 2014               Estimated Bank. January 31, 2015
    Date:                                                   Approval Date:
    Managing Unit: e       EASTS                            Lending               Investment Project
                                                            Instrument:           Financigg_
    Sector:                General energy sector (500/ft), General indjiStly and trade sector (500/ft)
    neme:                  Climate change (1 OOOAt)
    Is this projeet        No
    processed under OP
    8.50 (Emergency
    Recovery) or OP
    8.00 (Rapid
    Response to Crises
    and Emereendes)?
    Finaneine: (In USD Million)
    Financing Source                                              Amount
    Borrower                                                      2.79
    Partnership for Market Readiness                              3.00
    Total                                                         5.79
    Environmental           B
    Catesrory:
    Is this a Repeater No
    projeet?
    Is this a Trauferred No
    oroieet?
   2. Current Projeet Development Objectives
      The PDO is to infonn policy decision on the development of market-based instl1lment for
      reducing GHG emissions in Thailand by providing technical support to the Royal Thai
      Government (RTG) in preparing core readiness components of Energy Perfonnance Certificates
      (EPC) scheme, recommending legal framework for the Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) and
      identifying priority abatement projects at municipality level.



                                             Page 1 of9
    3. Project Description
    Background for the PMR. The PMR is a grant-based, capacity building multi-donor trust fund that
    provides funding and technical assistance for the collective innovation and piloting of market-based
    instruments for greenhouse gas emissions reduction. It provides a platfonn for technical discussions
    on market instruments, fostering South-South exchange, facilitating collective innovation for pilot
    efforts and harnessing financ~al flows for implementation and scale up.

    Proposed PMR activities for implementation phase. In view of the establishment of a mandatory
    market-based mechanism to implement cost-effective emission reductions nation-wide in the long-run
    (tentatively post 2020), the Royal Thai Government (RTG) plans to introduce three key building
    blockslschemes: (i) the Legal Framework for Emission Trading Scheme (ETS); (ii) Energy
    Performance Certificates (EPC) scheme; and (iii) Low Carbon City (LCC) scheme.

    Given the above, the Market Readiness Proposal (MRP) was designed to comprise four project
    components to support the preparation of key market components of EPC scheme, development of
    local GHG abatement plans and a study on pricing of LCC credits, policy recommendatiQn on legal
    framework to establish the ETS and project management. The PMR support will be solely on
    technical assistance activities.

    Comoonent 1: Preparation of key market components of the Enem Performance Certificate
    lEPC) Scheme: The voluntary EPC scheme, which already has legal fiamework in terms of energy
    reporting system to support its implementation under the Energy Conservation and Promotion Act, is
    proposed in the MRP to be fust launched so that the country can Jearn more about various elements of
    market-based mechanism. The proposed EPC scheme is a voluntary target-and-reward scheme'
    targeting the energy intensive industrial units and commercial buildings, the major GHG emitters
    which are already the Designated Factories and Buildings or DF&BS being regulated under the
    Energy Conservation Act The proposed EPC scheme will cover seven industrial sectors and four
    types of commercial buildings. This component will provide technical assistance to support the
    preparation phase of the EPC scheme. This phase would focus on the detailed assessment of the
    various preparedness levels, identify and bridge the gaps, and stakeholder consultations. The PMR
    support will complement the government's other planned activities to implement EPC. The PMR
    support will focus on data readiness, target setting methodology for different industrial
    sectors and buildings, development of MRV system, assessment of laws and regulations and
    modifications required to implement EPC, and an analytical study on performance-based
    incentive and pricing mechanism for EPC (e.g. pricing of surplus allowances to be bought back
    by public sink fund, potential source of fund, financial, legal and administrative structure of the fund).
    These core components of EPC scheme can later be transferred to prepare the ETS.

    Component 2: Development of Loeal GHG Abatement Plans and a study on pricing of LCC
    credits;

    This component will provide support to 24 local municipalities to develop a local GHG Abatement
    Plan which will be used to guide mitigation actions and low-carbon investment, from which carbon
    credits can be generated for trading under the LCC program in the existing domestic voluntary carbon
    market (so-called Thailand Voluntary Emission Reduction Program or T-VER). It will be built on the

Lnac over-performers will be rewarded by public sink fund who will buy back surplus allowances at a guaranteed price; however,
the under-performers will not be penalized.
                                                        Page2of9
 TOO's past experiences on piloting city carbon footprint in 3 municipalities (Cbiangra~ municipality,
 Lampang municipality and Nong Samrong Municipality (Udomthani p~vince)) project. The pilot
 city carbon footprint project assisted 3 municipalities to prepare city GHG inventory, prioritize them,
 assess potential technology to reduce GHG emission and recommend GHG reduction activity for the
 city's mayor consideration. Based on the existing Thai City Carbon Footprint (CCF) Guidelines and
 experiences gained from the development of24 local Abatement Plans, the GHG Abatement Plan
 Guideline will also be developed as part of PMR. A Project Design Document (PDD) for the selected
 mitigation action will be developed for each municipality using the RTG co-financing resources.
 Development of LCC PDD will follow the current T•VER methodology and use the same criteria.
 The PDD will not be a comprehensive city-wide program but rather focus on specific activity. It is an
 initial assessment document for considering GHG reduction project of the city/municipality and is not
 an investment plan but briefly describes the project activities, baseline GHG emission and reduction
 from the proposed activity and monitoring plan. From TOO's experience on piloting city carbon
 footprint project, potential activities for LCC include solar rooftop project, conversion of street
 lighting and/or municipality's building lighting to LED, methane recovery from existing wastewater
 treatment system/landfill, improvement of solid waste transportation logistic to reduce fuel
 consumption and operating cost, promotion of non-motorized vehicle (e.g. bicycle) and electric car
 etc.

 The PMR will also support the LCC pricinglincentives study to set price of carbon credits generated
 under the LCC program for voluntary buyers and provide recommendations on other fiSCal or
 fmancial incentives that the RTG can adopt to create the domestic voluntary carbon market. The
 study will also help TGO explore the potential to set up an LCC fund to act as a carbon fund.

  Component 3: Polley recommendation on legal framework to establish the ETS: This component
  will complement RTG's ongoing and planned activities on assessing the applicability of ETS in
  Thailand. TOO is now conducting impact assessment on macro-economic of establishing an ETS. In
  addition, TGO also has a plan to pilot test some of the key elements of an ETS system in the TOO's
  Thailand-V-ETS to further infonn the policy process. The PMR will specifically support the legal
  aspect of the overall ETS assessment. The legal framework is a crucial basis for any mandatory
· scheme to be adopted in the future as Thailand currently has no legal requirement for GHG reporting.
  The PMR will provide a policy study to review international experiences on legal and institutional
  framework required for establishing an ETS, existing domestic laws which are related to future
  establishment of an ETS, and provide recommendations on suitable legal framework and other related
  regulations and administrative rules together with institutional arrangement for establishing an ETS in
  Thailand. In parallel with this work, TOO will use the national budget for other technical preparation
  works for other elements ofETS design (e.g. defining the scope, setting cap and target, e~.).

Component 4: Project management

This component will support the daily project management activities as well as provide technical
support to TGO. It will support hiring of individual consultants to assist TOO on project coordination
and management, technical support, procurement, and financial management to comply with the
Bank's guidelines and procedures. It will also support incremental operating cost and organize
workshops and training related to the project implementation.


                                             Pagel of9
4. Project Loeation and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguards Analysis
   (iflmown)
The project support to Thailand consist solely of technical assistance activities, i.e. study and
assessment on legal framework, data gaps, price level and fund structure and allocations,
establishment of data reporting and MRV system, capacity building, development of local GHG
abatement plans and abatement plan guidelines, preparation of project design document, etc. It will
not fmance any physical investm~nt or piloting ofEPCILCC or preparation of feasibility study and
technical design work. The technical assistance activities and capacity building will take place in
various locations in Thailand. For the LCC component, 24 municipalities are targeted.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Wasittee Udchachone                • Environmental Specialist (Consultant)

      Pamomrat Tansanguanwong            - Senior Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard policies
 Safet!llard Policies          Triuered?        Esplanation(()ptionaO
 Environmental Assessment      Yes              The project will provide technical assistance to
 OP/BP4.01                                      Thailand in preparing core carbon market
                                                readiness. The project supports will be solely
                                                on technical assistant activities to support
                                                preparation ofThailand ETS, EPC and LCC
                                                schemes. It will not support physical
                                                investment, piloting activity, preparation of
                                                feasibility study and technical design work.
                                                The project, however, will support the
                                                preparation of local GHG Abatement Plans of
                                                participating municipalities and the preparation
                                                of Project Design Document (PDD) for each
                                                participating municipality based on their
                                                Abatement Plans.

                                                It is anticipated that the project will lead to
                                                long tenn positive impacts to the environment
                                                particularly on GHG emission reduction and
                                                energy consumption reduction. The project
                                                activities are likely to have minimal or no
                                                adverse impacts, although the PDD may lead
                                                to the preparation and implementation of
                                                projects in the future that may have
                                                environment and social impacts downstream,
                                                when these are implemented. That taken into
                                           Page4 of9
                                   account, the project is categorized as Category
                                   B.
                                  The Bank will work with the counterpart to
                                  ensure stakeholder consultations especially on
                                  the development of the Abatement Plan and
                                  PDD of each participating municipality and
                                  that perspective of men and women on GHG
                                  and its mitigation actions are taken into
                                  account. The Bank will review and provide
                                  inputs on key TORs, e.g., preparation of local
                                  GHG Abatement Plans to ensure that
                                  appropriate safeguards measures, including
                                  environment and social screening criteria, are
                                  incorporated in relevant studies and the
                                  development of Abatement Plan Guidelines.
                                  The project will screen the PODs based on
                                  these Guidelines for environment and social
                                  impacts and to identify appropriate safeguard
                                  instruments to be prepared for each project as
                                  part of preparing their feasibility studies and
                                  detailed engineering designs in the future.

Natural Habitats OP/BP   No       No negative impacts to natural resources are
4.04                              anticipated since the project would riot finance
                                  any physical investment and piloting activities.
                                  The project will mainly involve energy
                                  intensive industrial units and commercial
                                  buildings. The LCC preparation scheme will
                                  involve municipalities and unlikely to involve
                                  natural habitats. In addition, it is expected that
                                  the project will lead to long term positive
                                  impacts to the environment particularly on
                                  GHG emission reduction and energy
                                  consumption reduction.

                                  The Abatement Plan Guidelines that integrate
                                  environment and screening criteria will be
                                  used to screen potential impacts of projects
                                  identified in the POD on natural habitats and
                                  make sure that appropriate instrument prepared
                                  as part of the feasibility study will take into
                                  account measures on natural habitats in
                                  accordance with the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No       No negative impacts to forests are anticipated
                                  since the project would not finance any
                                  physical investment and piloting activities. It is
                                  expected that the project will lead to long term
                              PageS of9
                                    positive impacts to the environment
                                    particularly on GHG emission reduction and
                                    energy consumption reduction.

                                    The Abatement Plan Guidelines that integrate
                                    environment and screening criteria will be
                                    used to screen potential impacts of projects
                                    identified in the POD on forests and make sure
                                    that appropriate instrument prepared as part of
                                    the feasibility study will take into account
                                    measures on forests in accordance with the
                                    policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09    No       The project will neither promote, purchase, use
                                    pesticides nor envisage to lead to increase
                                    usage of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources No      The project will not involve civil work or
OP/BP4.11                           activities that potentially affect Physical
                                    Cultural Resources.

                                    The Abatement Plan Guidelines that integrate
                                    environment and screening criteria will be
                                    used to screen potential impacts of projects
                                    identified in the PDD on PCRs and make sure
                                    that appropriate instrument prepared as part of
                                    the feasibility study will take into account
                                    measures on PCRs in accordance with the
                                    policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No       The project supports will be solely on technical
4.10                                assistance activities, which are not anticipated
                                    to have adverse impacts on indigenous people.

                                    The PDDs will be screened using the screening
                                    criteria integrated into the Abatement Plan
                                    Guidelines to ascertain if any of those
                                    subprojects identified in the POD have
                                    presence of IPs, and to make sure that
                                    appropriate instrument prepared will take into
                                    account measures in accordance with the
                                    policy.
Involuntary Resettlement   No       Technical assistant support activities provided
OP/BP4.12                           by the project will not involve involuntary
                                    resettlement or restricted of access to legally
                                    designated parks and protected areas.

             .                      The PDDs will be screened using the screening
                                    criteria integrated into the Abatement Plan
                                    Guidelines to ascertain if any of those
                                    subprojects identified in the PDD will involve
                                    land acquisition and/or involuntary
                                    resettlement and to make sure that appropriate
                                 Page 6of9
                                                      instrument such as Resettlement Action Plans,
                                                      if required, are prepared as part of the
                                                      feasibility study and engineering design.
       Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No               The project will not involve construction or
                                                      rehabilitation of dams nor any investment that
                                                      will rely on the services of existing dams or
                                                      dams under construction.
       Projects on International     No               The project will not involve any international
       Waterways OPIBP 7.SO                           waterways.
       Projects in Disputed Areas    No               The project supports will be implemented
       OPIBP7.60                                      within Thailand tenitory and will not involve
                                                      disputed areas.


    D. KEY SAFEGUARDS POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
      A. Summiii'J' ofKey Safeguards Issues
          1. Deseribe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restnetured
             project. Identify aod describe any potential large seale, sigliifieaot and/or
             irrevenible impacts:

              The project is designed to assist Thailand in preparing core carbon market readiness
              components in the energy and urban sector with a view to establishing a mandatory
              GHG ETS in the future. PMR supports will be solely on technical assistant activities
              to support preparation of Thailand ETS, EPC and LCC scheme. It will not finance any
              physical investment and piloting activity. The project will conduct analytical works
              and studies of legal and institutional framework that involve emission trading,
              emission standards and reduction of energy consumption. These studies will be
              needed for EPC preparation and to inform ETS policy design in the future.

              For LCC component, PMR will support development of local GHG Abatement Plan
               for 24 municipalities and GHG Abatement Plan Guideline. Development of the
              abatement plans will be conducted in consultation with key stakeholders from
              government, private sectors and representatives from local communities and civil
              society. According to the local abatement plan, the POD, for the selected mitigation
              action will be developed for each municipality using the RTG co-financing resources.
              The POD will not be a comprehensive city-wide program but rather focus on specific
              activity. It is an initial assessment document for considering GHG reduction project of
              the city/municipality and is not an investment plan but briefly describes the project
              activities, baseline GHG emission and reduction from the proposed activity and
              monitoring plan. From TOO's experience on piloting city carbon footprint project,
              potential activities for LCC include solar rooftop project, conversion of street lighting
              and/or municipality's building lighting to LED, methane recovery from existing
              wastewater treatment system/landfill, improvement of solid waste transportation
              logistic to reduce fuel consumption and operating cost, promotion of non-motorized
              vehicle (e.g. bicycle) and electric car etc. In developing the abatement plan and POD,
              it is important that the project recognizes that women and men may have different
              perspective on GHG mitigation action and these should be taken into account during
              the stakeholder consultation and project implementation.

1                                               Page7of9


j
    In summary, the project will be solely on technical assistance activities. The PMR
    support will not include physical investment, piloting activities nor investment
    plan/feasibility study. It is anticipated that the project will lead to long term positive
    impacts to the environment particularly on GHG emission reduction and energy
    consumption reduction. The project activities are likely to have minimal or no adverse
    impacts, although the PDD may lead to the preparation and implementation of
    projects in the future that may have environment and social impacts downstream,
    when these are implemented. That taken into account, the project is categorized as
    CategocyB.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
   future activities in the project area:
   See section 1.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
   minimize adverse impacts.
   See section 1.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
   Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
   described.

   No separate safeguards instrument is required for this TA project. The key TORs will
   be reviewed by the Bank, e g., preparation of local GHG Abatement Plans to ensure
   that appropriate safeguards measures, including environment and social screening
   criteria, are incorporated in relevant studies and the development of Abatement Plan
   Guidelines. The project will screen the PODs based on these Guidelines for
   environment and social impacts, identify policies triggered and appropriate safeguard
   instruments to be prepared for each project as part of preparing their feasibility studies
   and detailed engineering designs in the future outside this project.

   The Bank will work with the counterpart to ensure stakeholder consultations especially
   on the development of the Abatement Plan and POD of each participating municipality
   and that perspectives of men and women on GHG and its mitigation actions are taken
   into account.

   TGO is an autonomous governmental organization under the Ministry of Natural
   Resources and Environment (MONRE). It was established with a specific purpose as
   an implementing agency on GHG emission reductions in Thailand. TOO is an
   officially CDM Designated National Authority (COM-DNA) which holds an authority
   to approve and monitor CDM projects at national level including approval of the COM
   project Initial Environmental Evaluation-Sustainable Development (IEE-SD). It also
   acts as the national infonnation clearing bouse of greenhouse gas and technical focal
   point on greenhouse gas management. It has high capacity on and familiar with
   safeguard aspects in CDM projects development and approval. However, it has limited
   experiences on the World Bank safeguard policies. During the appraisal mission, the
   TOO counterpart on safe211ard has been assigned. The TGO safeguard counterpart will
                                       Page 8of9
           work closely with the Bank environmental safeguard specialist and social safeguard
           specialist to ensure that adequate safeguard considerations are taken into account in
           preparing and implementing the project. A session on an overview of the Bank
           safeguard policies and its application to the project was introduced to TGO after the
           appraisal mission and will be continued during PMR implementation. The Bank will
           ensure when reviewing TORs that the adequate safeguards expertise is associated to
           activities and studies taking into account safeguard policy issues.

       5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
          disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
           Market-based mechanism is an innovative concept in Thailand both in the government
           and private sector. Several stakeholder consultation workshops, dialogue, roundtables,
           etc. were conducted during the project preparation and will be continued throughout
           implementation phase to ensure that all parties fully understand the planned project
           activities and appropriately benefit from the capacity building and technical assistance
           provided by the PMR. This provides an excellent opportunity to promote broad
           stakeholder engagement and participation through public infonnation disclosure at all
           critical phases of the project Stakeholders' perception of the project, their view on the
           design of EPC scheme and the LCC program as well as the proposed regulations and
           institutional structure, type and level of incentives and other relevant issues have been
           gathered and taken into account in the project design. During the implementation, as
           women and men may have different perspective on GHG mitigation action, the work
           with 24 municipalities will take gender-sensitive aspects into account especially when
           organizing stakeholder consultations.

    B. Disclosure Requirements
     Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
     Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
     Date of submission to InfoShop                  N/A
     For category A projects, date of distributing N/A
     the Executive Summary of the EA to the
     Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure                          N/A
    Comments:
     Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
     Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
     Date of submission to lnfoShop                  N/A
     For category A projects, date of distributing N/A
     the Executive Summary of the EA to the
     Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure                          N/A
    Comments:

                                               Page9of9



I
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
 Date of receipt by the Bank                    N/A
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                 N/A
 "In country" Disclosure                        N/A
 Comments:
 Pets Mauagement Plan
 Date of receipt by the Bank                    N/A
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                 N/A
 "In country" Disclosure                        N/A
 Comments:
If the project trigen the Pest Mauagement and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disdosed as part of the Environmental
 Assessment/Audit/or EMP. N/A
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
 why:N/A



C Compliance MoniJoring Indicators at the Corporal~ Level
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?     Yes (]No [X]NA 0
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ ] No [] NA [X]
 (SM) review and approve the EA report?                        ·
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ ] No [] NA [X]
 credit/loan?
 OPIBP/GP 4.04- Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes []No [] NA [X]
 of critical habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes []No [ ) NA [X)
 other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
 mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
 OPIBP/GP 4.09- Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes [) No [ ) NA [X]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                           Yes [ ) No [] NA [X)
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards        Yes [ ] No [ ) NA [X]
 specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design?
 If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OP/BP/GP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources

                                         Page 10of9
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?       Yes [ ] No [] NA [X]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential     Yes[] No []NA [X]
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OPIBP/GP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as             Yes [ ] No [] NA [X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OPIBP/GP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process         Yes[] No[] NA [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector   Yes [] No [ ] NA [X]
Manager review the plan?
OPIBP/GP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and       Yes [] No [] NA [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome         Yes[] No[] NA [X]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it        Yes[] No []NA [X]
include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP/GP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of         Yes []No [] NA [X]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and                Yes [ ] No [] NA [X]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.SO- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                    Yes[] No[] NA [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                   Yes[] No []NA [X]
OP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                   Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the       Yes[] No[] NA [X]
OP?
World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World         Yes[] No[] NA [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place       Yes[] No ()NA [X]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                                          Page II of9
   All Safeguard Policies
   Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ 1No [] NA [X]
   responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
   related to safeguard policies?
   Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   Yes []No[] NA [X]
   project cost?
   Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes      Yes [ 1No [ 1NA [X]
   the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
   safeguard oolicies?
   Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes [] No [ 1NA [X]
   borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
   documents?

DL APPROVALS
                            Name: Warapom Hirunwatsiri




                                            Page 12of9
