                                                                                      84740
                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          February 10, 2014


I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
  Country:                     Thailand            Project ID:              P115761
  Project Name:                Thailand HCFC Phaseout Project (Phase I)
  Task Team Leader:            Viraj Vithoontien
  Estimated Appraisal Date: 12 February 2014       Estimated RVP            31-March 2014
                                                   Approval Date:
  Managing Unit:               EASTS               Lending Instrument:      Investment Project
                                                                            Financing (OTF Grant)
  Sector:                      Other Industry (90% ); Central Government Administration (I 0%)
  Theme:                       Pollution Management and Environmental Health (50%); Environment
                               Policies and Institutions (50%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:       33.82                   Total Bank Financing:    23.92
  Total Cofinancing:        9.91                    Financing Gap:           0.00
      Financing Source                                                                      Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          9.91
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        0.0
      Montreal Protocol (OTF Grant)                                                              23.92
      Total                                                                                      33.82
  Environmental Category:      B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? Yes
  Is this a Transferred        Yes
  project?


  2. Current Project Development Objectives
  The Project Development Objective (PDQ) is to reduce HCFC consumption in the
  air-conditioning and foam sectors in order to contribute to Thailand's efforts to meet its HCFC
consumption phase-out obligations under the first phase of the program (20 14-20 18).

3. Project Description

Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions (US$30.95 Million; OTF
$21.05 million; beneficiaries $9.91 million)

    1.   Provision of Sub-grants to Beneficiary Enterprises in the foam sector to carry out HCFC
         consumption reduction subprojects;
    n. Carry out demonstration subprojects to perform in-house testing of new
       non-HCFC-141b foam systems;
    iii. Provision of Sub-grants to 12 Beneficiary Enterprises in the air-conditioning sector to
         carry out HCFC consumption reduction subprojects~ and
    iv. Provision of Sub-grants to Beneficiary Enterprises for the development of non-ozone
        depleting substances compressors for refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment.

Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$0.63 million)

   1.    Provision of technical assistance to support HCFC-22 phase-out in the air-conditioning
         sector through, inter alia, technical workshops on climate friendly refrigerants for large
         and small AC systems~

  ii.    Development and provision of train-the-trainer programs on good servicing practice for
         HFC-32 air-conditioning units and inclusion of said programs in the curricular of
         training institutes in the territory of the Recipient;
 111.    Cany out of public awareness programs to promote energy efficiency and low global
         warming potential technology in air-conditioning equipment;
  iv.    Provision of technical assistance to 12 air-conditioning manufacturers to convert their
         production facilities to HFC-32 technology and to develop proper installation and
         servicing procedures; and
  v.     Provision of technical assistance to support HCFC-141 b phase-out in the foam sector
         through, inter alia, marketing of non-HCFC-141 b formulation by foam system houses
         and introduction ofthe use ofnon-HCFC-141b formulations by micro enterprises;

Component 3: Project Management (US$1.38 million}

   1.     Provision of technical assistance to the Depru1ment of Industrial Works-Project
          Management Unit (DIW-PMU) for managing, supervising, monitoring and reporting
          on the implementation of activities under Component 2 (a)- (c) of the Project;
   u.     Provision of technical assistance to the DIW-PMU for the development of
          sector-specific regulations and policy, such as, inter alia, rules governing HCFC
          imports and exports and a ban on the use of HCFC in the air-conditioning and foam
         manufacturing sectors; and
  111.   Provision of technical assistance to the Government Savings Bank-Project
         Management Unit (GSB-PMU) for managing, supervising, monitoring and reporting
         on the implementation of Components 1 and 2 (d) and (e) of the Project.

Component 4: Strengthening of the National Ozone Unit (US$0.87 million)

  i.     Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of the National Ozone Unit
         (NOU) to fulfill the obligations of the Recipient under the Montreal Protocol.


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)

The project will cover selected enterprises manufacturing air-conditioners and those manufacturing
foam products including rigid polyurethane foam, flexible polyurethane foam and integral skin foam.
About 131 small and medium-sized foam manufacturers and foam system houses and twelve
locally owned air-conditioner manufactw·ers and a compressor manufacturer are eligible to be
project beneficiaries.

In the foam sector, about 23 out of 131 potential foam enterprises with HCFC 141 b consumption of
more than 20 million tons per year will be converted to hydrocarbon technology. Hydrocarbon
(cyclopentane) has a global warming potential (GWP) less than 25. Due to its flammability, safety
requirements associated with hydrocarbons are important and must be in place. The rest will be
converted to Hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)-based alternatives (such as a reduced formulation to minimize
the amount of high-GWP substances used) and water blown (C02) technology both of which have
minor adverse environmental impact. Selection of alternative technologies will take into account the
capacity and -for hydrocarbon technology- their physical location to satisfy the safety requirements.

In the air-conditioning sector, twelve air-conditioner manufacturing enterprises will be financed by the
project to switch refrigerant from HCFC-22 to HFC-32 with GWP of 700 (about l/3 of HCFC-22).
Since HFC-32 is mildly flammable, potential safety risks and fire hazards need to be properly
addressed in the environmental management plan (EMP).

These enterprises are located in Bangkok and nearby provinces in commercial and industrial
areas at safe distances from residential areas and will be able to implement the required safety
measures within their existing facilities. All participating enterprises must be in compliance with
National, local laws and regulations related to environment/ social/health and safety protection.

Project investment under Component 1- Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions will
take place within existing enterprises or in relevant industrial area. There will be no new
construction or expansion of the existing factories, and no land acquisition will be required.
Eligibility criteria for funding under the project are mainly governed by the ExCom guidelines
and/or the approved HPMP project document in line with the criteria set forth by the
Multilateral Fund.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                      l
Songling Yao ( Sr. Social Development Specialist, EASCS )
Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (Sr. Environmental Specialist, EASTS)                                           !
Wasittee Udchachone (Environmental Specialist, EASTS)


6. Safeguard Policies                  Triggered ·r   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 I   Yes            The project will have a positive impact on
                                                      the global environment as HCFCs are not
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                      !
                                                      only ozone depleting substances, but they are
                                                      also high global warming gases whose            I
                                                      global warming potential (GWP) ranges
                                                      from several hundred to several thousand
                                                      times that of carbon dioxide. Moreover, the
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                      i
                                                      conversion of various HCFC-based                r
                                                      manufacturers to alternative, advanced
                                                      technologies to be used under this project          t
                                                      will lead to improved energy efficiency,        i
                                                       patticularly in the refrigeration and           ~

                                                      air-conditioning sectors.                       ''
                                                                                                      j,




                                                      The project triggers Environmental
                                                      Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), as its
                                                      interventions may impact on environmental
                                                      safety and occupational health particularJy
                                                      from the conversion to HFC-32 and
                                                      hydrocarbon as described earlier. However,
                                                      project activities will likely occur in the
                                                      existing facilities and these impacts will be
                                                      site-specific, which can be mitigated by
                                                      implementation of proper measures as
                                                      specified in EMP and EMF. Therefore, the
                                                      project is assigned as an Environment
                                                      Category B project.

                                                      For the foam sector, since the participation
                                                      of the potential enterprises had not been
                                                      confirmed by the project appraisal stage, the
                                                      consultants conducted site visits to the
                                                      selected enterprises to understand the
                                                      operation of sample foam manufacturing
                                                      enterprises and its environmental health and
                                                      safety management. To address the
                                                      environment impacts, health and safety
                                                      issues that may arise from the foam
                                                      manufacturing conversions, an
                                                      Environmental Management Framework
                                                      (EMF) has been prepared for the
                                                      implementation of foam conversion sector
                                                      prior to appraisal. This is also in line with
    Thai regulation that an Environmental           '·
                                                    t
    Impact Assessment (EIA) is not required for     ~~

    the type and size of these foam enterprises.
    The EMF defines the content, procedures
    and institutional responsibilities for
    environmental management of the foam
    enterprises to ensure compliance with Thai
    Law and regulations and the World Bank          ;;
    Group Environment, Health and Safety            l;

    (EHS) Guidelines, and the World Bank            t-
    OP/BP 4.01 (Environment Assessment). In          ,.
                                                     ;;,_:




    addition, the EMF also includes the proposed     t
                                                     ''
    mitigation measures for conversion to             ~
    hydrocarbon and the template of an                ''
                                                      ~'
    Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to
    be prepared site~speciftcally by each             ,.
                                                      F

    participating enterprise that convert to
    hydrocarbon technology.

    The site specific EMP of each enterprise will
    be prepared and submitted tor approval at
    sub~project approval stage. The mitigation
    measures proposed are based on
    requirements of relevant regulations and
    information from the site visits. The EMP
    will include mitigation measures to address
    safeguard issues including compliance to the             '
                                                             "
                                                             '
    relevant regulations on safety and                       r
    environmental management and site
    emergency response.                                      ·r
                                                             }:

    For all project sites in the air~conditioning
    sector, a due diligence review on                        !
                                                             '
                                                             f
-   occupational health and safety measures, fire            ~
    and exposure risk was conducted by
    consultants hired by DIW. A specific
                                                             l
                                                             t
                                                             r
    Environmental Management Plan (EMP)                      ~
    which includes appropriate emergency                      ~i

                                                             f
    preparedness and response measures has
    been prepared for each of 12 air-conditioner
                                                                 ~~
                                                                 ;
    manufacturing enterprises. The EMP follows                   ~
                                                                 ¥
    the requirements of the World Bank Group                     !

    Environment, Health and Safety (EHS)                         'r
    Guidelines as well as the Thai law and                        ~
    regulations. No EIA preparation will be
    required. Staff involved in the production,
    installation and services will be trained as
    needed.

    Concerned stakeholders were consulted in
                                             the preparation of both EMP and EMF,
                                             which were disclosed in country and at the
                                             Bank's Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
                                             The public consultation of these documents
                                             took place on September 6, 2013.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No     The project will not affect any protected
                                             areas, known natural habitats, or established
                                             or proposed critical natural habitats as all the
                                             project activities will take place in existing
                                             industrial facilities. According to Thai law
                                             and regulation, the respective factories are
                                             not permitted to be located in any protected
                                             areas, known natural habitats, or established
                                             or proposed critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No     The project will not finance activities that
                                             would involve significant conversions or
                                             degradation of critical forest areas or related
                                             critical natural habitats as defined under the
                                             policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                No    The project will not finance procurement of
                                             pesticides or pesticide application equipment


                                                                                                l
                                             (either directly or indirectly). In addition the
                                             project will not affect pest management in a
                                             way that harm could be done, nor lead to
                                             increased pesticide use and subsequent             !
                                             increase in health and environmental risk.         ~-

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                '~
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.1 I No   The project will not adversely affect sites        I
                                             with archeological, paleontological,
                                             historical, religious, or unique natural values
                                             as all project activities will be developed
                                             within the existing plants of the project
                                             beneficiary enterprises or in an industrial
                                             area.
                                                                              -···---
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10          No    All project activities will be developed
                                             within the existing plants of project
                                             beneficiary enterprises or in industrial area,
                                             The prospective beneficiary enterprises are
                                             not located in an area with indigenous
                                             peoples. No indigenous peoples group will
                                             be affected.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No    All the project activities will be within the
                                             existing plants of project beneficiary
                                             enterprises. There will be no land acquisition
                                             or involuntary resettlement related impact.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No    The project will not involve any construction
                                             or rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International Waterways    No    The project will not involve international
OP/BP 7.50                                             waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No             The project is not located in any known
                                                       disputed areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities under the Project may have minor to moderate adverse environmental impacts
that are specific to each factory site, including potential impacts and risks on occupational
health and safety and fire hazards due to flammability of hydrocarbon and HFC-32.
Consequently, the project is category B for EA purposes.

For the air-conditioning (AC) sector which will be converting to HFC-32, a mildly flammable
refrigerant the general condition of refrigerant charging procedure has a very low likelihood
of HFC-32 to be released and reach the lower flammable limit. However, there is a possibility
that HFC-32 may leak out to the atmosphere due to failure of connections or hose ruptures.
The air-HFC-32 mixture can cause a flash fire. A good ventilation system is required in the
area where HFC-32 is stored and this may need to slightly redesign the existing storage
facilities within the same foot print. Installation of the Ex-Proof transfer electrical equipment
in the storage area, production line around HFC-32 refrigerant charging, vacuum pwnps,
transfer pumps and piping are among the technical steps required to upgrade the existing
facilities. In addition, gas detection and alarm systems are recommended to be installed at
HFC-32 storage area, refrigerant charging area, vacuum area and finished good warehouse. It
is anticipated that there will be no significant adverse impact from the project if all mitigation
measures that proposed in EMP are followed.

For the foam sector, 131 enterprises (mostly small and medium enterprises) will be converting
to water blown and/or HFC-245fa technology, which require few modifications to their
production process. There will be no significant impact on the environment from the conversion
to these two technologies. However, there is concern on the conversion to hydrocarbon
(cyclopentane) technology due to its low flash point and flammability. Twenty-three (23) out of
131 foam enterprises will be supported for conversion to hydrocarbon technology. Each
participating enterprise will need to prepare a site-specific EMP that covers proper measures to
mitigate potential impacts from the conversion. An EMF has been prepared to provide guidance
to these foam enterprises in preparing their EMP. It is anticipated that impacts from the
conversion to hydrocarbon will be site-specific and manageable through implementation of the
required safety measures in the EMF and its site-specific EMP. In addition, most of the
enterprises current practices already involve handling of other types of flammable substances
e.g. oxygen gas, welding gas etc.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
There will be a long term positive impacts due to phase out of the HCFC in the project area. As
per the approved HPMP, the overall HCFC consumption shall be reduced from 1,155 Ozone
                                                                                                       '


                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                       !
Depleting Potential (ODP) tons in 2012 to 927.6 ODP tons in 2013, 834.84 ODP tons in 2015
and 788.46 ODP tons in 2018. The reductions will be achieved through a phase-out of                    t
HCFC-22 consumption of 67.86 ODP tons in the air-conditioning sector and 151.68 ODP tons
of HCFC-141 b in the PU foam sector. The phase out will also enhance reduction in GHG
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                       t
emissions. However, to reduce risk on occupational health and safety of the workers and                t
                                                                                                       I
possible limited fire hazard, the change of refrigerant to hydrocarbon and HFC-32 will require
not only the redesign of the production line but also proper safety management practices for
plant operation and maintenance. Training for workers on safety handling of mildly flammable
                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                       ~
liquid will be conducted regularly and agreed mitigation measures followed closely to ensure
that only qualified/trained operators could enter to hot zone.
                                                                                                       l
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse        I
                                                                                                       t
impacts.                                                                                               !
                                                                                                       I
There are three alternatives for conversion HCFC-141 bin the foam sector namely, hydrocarbon               t
                                                                                                           '
technology, HFC-based technology and water blown (C02) technology. Due to the
                                                                                                       I
flammability of hydrocarbon, only large foam enterprises with HCFC-141 b consumption of
more than 20 MT per year will be eligible to convert to hydrocarbon technology. This will help         I   f
                                                                                                           l
minimize adverse impacts to small enterprises.
                                                                                                           '
For the AC sector under the project, HFC-32 was selected as the altetnative refrigerant as per
relevant guidelines from the Executive Committee ofthe Montreal Protocol's Multilateral                I   '
                                                                                                           I
Fund. Compared to hydrocarbon, HFC-32 is considered a good alternative to help minimize
adverse impacts on occupational health and safety and fire hazard due to its milder flammability
characteristic.
                                                                                                           i
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                                                 ----------------------~
The activities under the Project may have minor to moderate adverse environmental impacts
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                           f
that are specific to each site, including potential risks on occupational health and safety and fire
hazards due to flammability of hydrocarbon and HFC-32. In order to identify and mitigate
such impacts, DIW hired consultants to conduct a due diligence for all air-conditioner
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           I
manufacturing enterprises and some representatives of different types of foam enterprises to               I
identify potential risks that may occur due to the conversion from HCFC-22 to HFC-32 (for the
AC sector) and from HCFC 14lb to hydrocarbon technology (for foam sector). The consultant
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           !
prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for each of the twelve participating
manufacturers in the air-conditioning sector. For the foam sector, since not all the foam
beneficiaries have been identified at the time of project appraisal, an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared by the consultants in close consultation
with DIW to provide guidance to all stakeholders including the DIW-PMU and beneficiary
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                           I
enterprises to effectively identify and address environmental safeguard issues that may arise
from the proposed conversion project. Each pat1icipating foam enterprise that will be
convetting to hydrocarbon technology will prepare a specific EMP and get approval fi·om the
                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                           I
Bank at Sub-project approval stage.

The EMF and EMPs were prepared and publicly disclosed in country and at the Bank's
Infoshop in line with the World Bank's Operational Policy (OP)/Bank Procedure (BP) 4.01 -
Environmental Assessment (EA) and in accordance with Thai National Laws and Regulations.
Furthermore, the applicable World Bank Group Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines
have been taken into consideration in preparing the EMF and EMPs where practically feasible.

The capacity assessment confirmed that the Department of Industrial Works (DIW) which is
the responsible agency for the implementation of the Montreal Protocol and its amendments,
has the capacity to oversee, supervise, and monitor the overall implementation of the foam and
AC conversion sub-projects. DIW can provide training and capacity building to enterprises on
good practices in handling hazardous substances, flammable liquid and gas, etc. DIW will also
be in charge of the coordination among government agencies and the industries. The National
Ozone Unit (NOU) under the DIW is experienced with Hazardous Substance Control Act, and
safeguard issues under the implementation of the Thailand-National CFC Phase-out project.

From the site visit and due diligence report, most of the enterprises have experienced handling
flammable liquid and gas. However, there is room for improvement to minimize risks to
occupational health and safety and fire hazard. The mitigation measures and good practices in
handling hydrocarbon and HFC-32 were included in the EMP and EMF. The project will
provide technical assistance for the development of training modules for service technicians for
employing good practices in servicing air-conditioning units with flammable refrigerants and
for avoiding leakage. In addition, technical assistance financed by the Project will be
undertaken to assist the beneficiary enterprises in the conversion process. Experts with
extensive experience in the safe handling and use of HFC32 will assist the beneficiary
enterprises with the redesign of plant layout and manufacturing of new air conditioners in order
to ensure not only safety but the quality of the new air conditioners.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following Bank guidelines, the EMPs for the 12 beneficiary enterprises for the air conditioning
sector were disclosed by the respective AC manufacturer on their website and at the World
Bank's Infoshop by February 7, 2014. For the foam sector, the EMF was disclosed in country
on DIW's website on January 8, 2014 and at the World Bank's lnfoshop on Febmary 2, 2014.
Consultations were held with the key stakeholders; i.e. foam and AC manufactw.ing enterprises,
a non-profit organization and relevant national authorities in particular DIW who managing
requirements regarding storage of flammable materials and hydrocarbons at factories and use of
hydrocarbon in the production of foam.

The Project Stakeholder Consultation for the draft Environmental Management Framework
(EMF) for the Foam Sector was held at DIW on September 6, 2013. There were 48
participants from 10 polyol suppliers/system houses, 9 foam enterprises that will be converting
to cyclopentane technology. Also in attendance were representatives from the Polyurethane
Group ofthe Federation of Thai Industries (FTI), Treaties and International Strategies Bureau
ofDIW, Industrial Cluster 3 Bureau ofDIW, Industrial Cluster 4 Bureau ofDIW, Central
Office for Machinery Registration of DIW, Bangkok Fire and Rescue Department of Bangkok
Metropolitan and Administration (BMA), Department of Labor Protection and Welfare and the
Department of Public Works and Town & Country Planning participating in this consultation
workshop.
The main objective of this consultation workshop was to present outcomes ofEMF preparation
comprising of: (i) general risk assessment for the foam sector; (ii) applicable local regulations
for the foam enterprises regardless of selected altemative; (iii) specific local regulations for
enterprises planning to convert to cyclopentane technology; (iv) characteristic of raw materials
used for the production of foam; and (v) proposed mitigation measures for the conversion to
alternatives to HCFC-141 b in the foam sector. Feedback and recommendation from the
consultation workshop were included in the final EMF and project appraisal document.

The Project Stakeholder Consultation for the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
Air-conditioning (AC) Sector was held at the Department oflndustrial Works (DIW) on
September 6, 2013 from 13.30 pm-16.30 pm. There were 33 participants representing project
stakeholders attended the consultation workshop and included: (i) 12 AC manufacturing
enterprises that will be converting to HFC-32 technology; (ii)Air conditioning and
Refrigeration Industry Club of the Federation of Thai Industries (FTI); (iii) manufacturer of
compressor; (iv) Daikin Industries (Thailand); (v) Treaties and International Strategies Bureau
ofDIW; (vi) Industrial Cluster 4 Bureau ofDIW and (vii) the Department of Public Works and
Town & Country Planning.

The main objective of this consultation workshop was to present the outcomes ofthe EMP for
12 AC manufacturers to concerned agencies regarding: (i) the general risk assessment for the
AC sector; (ii) local regulations applicable for the AC enterprises; (iii) local regulations specific
for HFC-32 refrigerant; and (iv) proposed mitigation measures for the conversion from
HCFC-22 to HFC-32 refrigerant. Feedback received from the workshop have been
incorporated into the final EMP and project appraisal document including the request from the
AC enterprises for DIW to conduct training on the safe handling ofHFC-32.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  February 7, 2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               February 7, 2014
                                                              -
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   NA
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure: The EMF for foam sector was disclosed in DIW's website. For the
site-specific EMP for 12 air-conditioning manufacturing enterprises, each EMP was disclosed in the
enterprise's website. The EMF for foam sector was disclosed at lnfoShop on February 2, 2014. The
12 EMPs were disclosed at InfoShop from February 3-7, 2014.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                        ·-·

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Complitmce Monitoring l11dicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]      No [    ]   NA [ J
The World Bani< Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X 1     No [ ]      NA [ 1
Bank's InfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X]    No [    ]   NA [ J
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [X]    No [ 1 NA [ 1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X]   No [ J NA [ ]
project cost?
                                                       -··

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation System of the project include Yes [X)       No [ J NA [ J
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X)   No [ l      NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
                                                                                               ···-




III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:             JName: Viraj Vithoontien
Approved By:                                          __....,

Sector Manager:               IName: Julia Fra~er    r)J'f'G¥'         .!Date: (e   lo * 111 'J 0 I ~
                                                      (/
