                       INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                               APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/30/2013                                                         R~portNo.:     84082
1• BaSIC      ' Data
        . Pro.iect                                                            .,
Country: Timor-Leste                        I Proiect ID: P145491              '
Proiect Name: Community Driven Nutrition Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Eileen Brainne Sullivan
Estimated Aooraisal Date: January 8, 2014 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASHH                          Lending Instrument: Trust Fund
Sector: Health (50%), General Agriculture, Fishing, and Forestry (25%); General Water,
Sanitation, and Flood Protection (Z5%)
Theme: Nutrition and Food Security (1 00%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):.             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
          JSDFTF                                                        2.71
          Financing Ga12                                                0.00
                                                                        2.71
Environmental Category: B                                               I

Simplified Processing                          Simple fl          Repeater fl
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)      Yes []        No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Resoonse to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve nutrition practices
targeted to children under the age of two and pregnant and lactating women In
targeted least developed communities. 1 In order to acheive this, the project will address
the key underlying causes through: (i) community mobilization, awareness raising and
participatory planning (about malnutrition, its causes and consequences); (ii) community
led delivery of nutrition-specific interventions (focusing on the four interventions
                                                                                         2
identified. by the Lancet series that encourage changes in behavior to improve nutrition) ;
and (iii) community led delivery of nutrition-sensitive interventions.3 By linking both
 1
   TimC?r teste has 13 districts, 66 sub-districts, 442 sucos (villages) and 2336 aldeias (hamlets). Community
 in !his CN refers to aldeias
 2
   Raew, Kathryn et al. (2012). A Life Free From Hunger: Tackling Child Malnutrition. STC. London.
 3
   As defined wilhin the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) framework, nutrition-specific interventions are
 programs and plans !hat are designed to address the direct causes of malnutrition and to have a specific
 impact on nutrition outcomes, These Include: support for eKclusive breastfeedlng; appropriate
 complementary feeding; micronutrient fortification and supplementation; and treatment of acute
 mainutrition. Nutrition-sensitive approaches are strategies and plans that address !he underlying and basic
                                                                                                                 1
nutrition specific and sensitive interventions through·. multi-sectoral approaches, the
proposed project will achieve wider and more sustainable improvement in the nutrition
status of target populations.

3. Project Description

Component 1: Community Mobilization. Awareness Raising and Participatory !>Janning
(USD 0.34 million). The objective of this component is to increase community's
understanding and participation in identifYing and addressing malnutrition. The
Component 1 objective will be achieved through the following strategies: (i) district and
sub-district level orientation of project objective and identification of target communities;
(ii) orientation of project objective at suco level in consultation with suco councils; (iii)
participatory mapping of key issues in child malnutrition at community level (e.g. types,
causes and impact as well as options to address to malnutrition based on gender analysis
to understand the roles of women and men in decision making); (iv) community-led
participatory planning including nutrition-specific and sensitive intetvehtions a,nd
 selection of community volunteers to be members of each Care Group.4 Expected outputs
 under this component will include: (i) finalized detailed implementation plans; (ii) a
complete list of district-endorsed target communities; (iii) completed participatory
appraisal/assessment events by all target communities; (iv) a list of                     Care
                                                                                      Group
 volunteers and existing community health volunteers/workers (e.g., Promotor Saude
 Familia (PSF)) from each community; and (v) action plans for community led
 interventions to be carried out under Components 2 and 3.

Under this component, the implementing agency, Catholic Relief Services (CRS) and its
local partners (e.g., Civil Society Organizations5, etc.) will be responsible for facilitating
project orientation, coordination and participatory planning processes at the national,
district, suco, and aldeia levels. This component will take into account the roles and
responsibilities of all actors and institutions at the different levels and leverage strengths
of various actors to sustain the delivery mechanisms. The project wilr work in close
consultation with the different entities including newly formed Council for Food and
Nutrition Security and Sovereignty to compliment other initiatives addressing
malnutrition; and the Nutrition Working Group at national level and district health and
agriculture departments at district level.


 causes of malnutrition and take into consideration the cross-sector impact of nutrition including those
 related poverty reduction, education, agriculture and improved sanitation.
 4
    A Care Group is part of a cascading health promotion model made up of beneficiaries (i.e., caregivers),
 care group volunteers (from target communities), community facilitators (from local partners) and overall
  supervisors (from local partners). Under the overall technical support of the Implementing agency,
  communities facilitators trained in key health promotion messages will meet with care group volunteers
  twice a month to share a set of heaiU1 promotion messages. In tum, each care group volunteer promotes
· positive behaviors to the target mothers/ caregivers the volunteer is responsible; In order to minintlze
  turnover, care group volunteers will be selected by community leaders/beneficiaries: About IS-20% more
  volunteers will be trained to compensate turnover.
  5
    CSOs include local NGOs, faith-based organl2ations (FBOs), etc currently operating in the target areas.
  Local partners will be selected per the simplified World Bank Procurement/Consultant Guidelines for
· Fragile and Small States (FCS).

                                                                                                         2
·component 2: Community Led Delivery of Nutrition Specific Interventions (USD 0.76
 million). The objective of this component is to improve accessibility of community
 driveri nutrition specific interventions by the target households. While the Integrated
 Community Health Services (SISCa) and clinic-based initiatives to address malnutrition
 in Timor-Leste have made some progress they have not been able to reach the outlying
 households. Most of these households do not have frequent contact with pro.yiders of
 health services. 6 This project will incorporate aspects of the Care Group modbl that is
 able to multiply efforts through the use of community based volunteers that have shown
 promising results to improve .the level of global under-nutrition scale at a low cost in
 Africa. 7 CRS has experience in Timor Leste to reach large number of colJllllunities with
 high level of engagement from community facilitators/volunteers. This will be a mixed
 approach that will blend a volunteer-based strategy with the provision of incentives for
 CNE. The Component 2 objective will be achieved by: (i) providing Community
 Nutrition Coordinators (CNC's) with training of trainers (ToT) on nutrition and hygiene
  counseling and facilitating community led learning sessions; (ii) CNC's will train
  Community Nutrition Educators (CNE's) on nutrition and hygiene counseling and
  conducting home visits ana small group discussions; and (iii) CNE's will build
  relationships with households· and provide ongoing, individualized, dynamic counseling.

Nationally, CRS will engage with the Technical Working Group for Nutrition within the
Ministry of Health (MOH) so that training materials and Behavior Change and
Communication (BCC) materials used in the field are aligned with the national nutrition
strategy and existing initiatives. Based upon this consultation, CRS will create/adapt
training materials for the ToT provided to CNC's and training for CNE's1 CNE's will be
part of groups that meet monthly at the suco level for the nutritional learning sessions.
They will also conduct home visits and small group sessions to provide
promotion/counseling sessions, building awareness and inducing behavior changes
around optimal infant and young child care and feeding, appropriate hygiene especially
hand-washing, proper food preparation, disease prevention and treatment. A local partner
implementing agency, will be contracted to lead training of CNE's, with technical support
provided from CRS in close collaboration with the MOH. The volunteers will also be
responsible for encouraging households to attend monthly SISCa events and work to
 support and collaborate with existing community health promoters (PSF's). Expected
 outputs include: (i) training plan and finalized curriculum/manual for training of trainers;
 (ii) approximately 500 CNE trained on nutrition and hygiene promotion and facilitating
 counseling sessions; (iii) Community Nutrition Learning Sessions conducted in 50 sucos;
 and (iv) 70% of targeted households receive counseling either via home visits or small
 group sessions.

 Component 3: Community Led Delivery ofNutrition-Sensitiye Interyentions (YSD 1.14
 million). The objective of this component is to improve accessibility of selected nutrition

 6
   TLSLS 2007
 1
   Davis, Thomas P. et al. Reducing child global undernutrition at scale in Sofala Province, Mozambique,
  using Care Group Volunteers to communicate health messages to mothers, Global Health: Science and
  Practice 2013.
                                                                                                      3
sensitive activities that address the underlying causes of malnutrition and create an
enabling environment for households and communities to engage in the behavior change
for improved nutritional outcomes. Under this component, communities will implement
their community action plans. The communities select one of three options that best
address their needs, interests and natural resources. These three nutrition sensitive
interventions have been identified as having the most promising effects on leducing
maternal and child malnutrition8• CRS Timor-Leste experience with commmiity based
projects has shown increased participation and better outcomes when the community is
provided with limited number of interventions to select from that address the community
 prioritized problems. A recent review of nutrition sensitive agriculture interventions of
 Timor-Leste9 identified the following as having positive impacts on nutritional outcomes
 at the.household level: (a) increasing the availability and production ofbio-fortified foods
 such as orange flesh sweet potato; (b) increasing vegetable production and homestead
 gardening combined with nutrition education; and (c) increasing aquaculture production,
 post-harvest handling and storage. This information was used to create the three nutrition
 sensitive intervention options for this component. The three options are 1) increased
 availability of nutritious staple and minor crops; 2) increased availability of vitamins and
 diversified food through homestead gar~ens; 3) increased availability of protein and
 Omega 3 through creation of household level fish ponds.

Each of these interventions will contribute to dietary diversity (measured. as number of
food groups from which individuals consume) and increased meal frequency. They will
increase the availability of carbohydrates, micronutrients, proteins, and essential fats.
Additionally, these options contribute to two of the five objectives of the Strategic
Development Plan of the Ministry of Agriculture: Objective! - sustainbble increase in
the production and productivity of selected crops, livestock species, fisheries and
forestry; and Objective 5 • enhance sustainable resource conservation, management and
 utilization.

 Community led delivery of nutrition-sensitive interventions chosen by the target
 communities will only be initiated after verifying that (i) targeted beneficiaries in the
 communities have been mapped; (ii) communities have selected volunteers and
 participating households under Component 2; (iii) selected volunteers have been trained;
 and (iv) communities have organized at least three CNEs sessions and at least 70% of
 participating households engaged in either home visits or small group sessions (for which
 multiple members of households are expected to attend). All Component 2 relevant
 activities will nonetheless continue upon triggering Component 3. Verification of
 successful completion of the conditional criteria set forth in Component 2 will be the
 responsibility of the implementing agency. The conditionality of this component is based
 on the premise that the proven interventions in Component 2 for improving nutrition are
 necessary and urgent during the first 1000 days of life. Since existing structures,
 incentives and health schemes have not been sufficient to adequately increase their

 8
   Tung, Curran and Fanzo (2013) "Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture for Timor-Leste: A Compendium of
 Resources"
 9
   Tung, Curran and Fanzo (2013) "Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture for Timor-Leste: A Compendium of
 Resources"

                                                                                                4
adoption at the household and community level, this project will pilot the effects of
conditionality on community development initiatives that have shown to have a higher
demand.

Execution of the component will be done by community members encompassing all
members of the households targeted, assisted by Agricultural Coordinators (AC), CNEs,
consulted with suco councils 10 and facilitated by the local NGO with support from the
Ministry of Agriculture (MAF), MOH (including District Health Teams) and others as
needed. Expected outputs include: (i) technical specifications and guidelines for each
option of interventions; (ii) 200 communities with necessary inputs, training and
demonstrations provided; and (iii) 200 communities completed the intervention(s) per
plan.

Component 4: Monitoring, Evaluation. and Project Management (USD 0.48 million) The
objectives of this component are to: (i) provide technical advisory services and other
material support to facilitate implementation of nutrition specific and sensitive
interventions by target communities; (ii) improve coordination among various actors
through creation of communication flow map (e.g., ministerial counterparts, district
teams, sucos, aldeias, etc.); and (iii) strengthen monitoring and evaluation activities
associated with the verification and measurement of project results at the community
level. Monitoring implementation plans, supervision, and verification of de!iverables lies
with CRS. Expected outputs include: (i) a simple results framework to direct supportive
supervision of project implementation and monitoring system to facilitate systematic data
collection, project implementation, coordination of multiple local implementing agencies,
and ensure beneficiary accountability through feedback mechanisms for. community use
 of monitoring data; (ii) quarterly progress reports including unaudited financial reports;
 and (iii) implementation completion and results report incorporating results of the final
 evaluation. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system will incorporate the
 community monitoring component to ensure beneficiary accountability and community
 ownership of information gathered and analyzed. The output indicators will be verified
 and finalized under Component 1 of this project, allowing communities to decide what
 information they want to record and monitor throughout the subsequent components of
 the project.

 CRS will be responsible for contracting services for carrying out baseline and end·line
 surveys to measure the effects of the intervention on the targeted communities and
 households. Secondary data from existing sources such as the Demographic and Health
 Survey as well as the National Nutrition Survey for Timor-Leste conducted by UNICEF
 will also be used in the analysis of project level data so as !ISSess the strategies to be
 scaled up after the completion of the pilot period .
      . -y




 10
   Suco Councils are made up of the Suco Chief, the Aldeia Chiefs, two women representatives, two youth
 repre,sentatives (one male and one female) and one representative of the Lia Naln, who are traditional
 authorities in each Suco.
                                                                                                     5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project will target all communities (i.e. 287 aldeias) in 50 sucos that fall in the two
lowest living standard groups 11 in the two eastern districts of Baucau and Viqueque. 12
These two districts have significantly higher proportion of sucos with the lowe"st living
standard group. 13 The project will primarily benefit an estimated number of 4,470
children under the age of two and 5,503 14 pregnant and lactating women by increasing
demand for and utilization of nutrition specific and sensitive interventions. The project
will aim to achieve universal targeting of all children under the age of two and all
pregnant and lactating women in targeted aldeias. Adding in the nutrition sensitive
 interventions, the project will benefit an estimated 70,000 people within those target
 communities, as well as 1,000 service providers 15 who will also benefit from a
 community driven interventions(s) indirectly improving nutritional status and training,
 respectively.


S. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr. Virza S. Sasrnitawidjaja (BASIS)
   Ms. Francisca Melia Setiawati (BASIS)




 11
    Asian Development Bank (2012).    Timor-Leste's Least Developed Sucos
 12
     While Oecussi has the highest proportion of sucos in lowest living standards, the proposed Project will
 target Viqueque and Baucau given the fact that it is a pilot project requiring a lot oftechnical assistance by
 the implementing agency and travel time between Viqueque and Oecussi is substantial.
 13
     The total number of population within the target area (i.e., sucos falling in the two lowest quintile in
 Baucau and Viqueque) Is 72,305. The estimated number of children under the age of two living in the
 target areas based on DHS 2009/2010 and the Asian Development Bank's analysis is 4,470, while Census
 2010 shows a higher number of children under the age of two (-7,0000).
  14
     An average rate of women aged 15-49 currently pregnant in the lowest two wealth quintiles is 7.35%
 (DHS 2009/20 I0). Based on the population within those two quintiles in the target area, an additional I,033
  pregnant and lactating women will be targeted, in addition to the 4,470 households with children under age
  two. Adolescent girls aged 15-19 within the targeted communities wilf also be encouraged to attend any
  nutrition education/counseling sessions.
  "Service providers include community health workers (PSFs), agricultural extension workers (SEOs),
  community facilitators from Implementing partner staff and Care Group volunteers.
                                                                                                             6
6. Safetmard Policies Tri~.ttzered                         Yes        .No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Mana~.tement (OP 4.09)                                             X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
lndi~.tenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Proiects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
IdentifY and describe any potentia/large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project focuses on community mobilization/awareness raising (Component 1),
communit-based health and nutrition education and promotion (Component 2), and other
interventions that will help the community members exercise practices that can
eventually improve their nutritional status (Component 3 - i.e., nutrition sensitive
interventions).

 The physical investment of the project will be in small scale or households scale type of
·agricultural activities to improve the nutritional content of the communities. The .likely
 types of investment that will be supported under Component 3 are promotion of organic
 and environmentally friendly garden farming, such as self-generating compost and
 organic pest control (integrated pest management); small garden size fish ponds and/or
 tank/used drums aquaculture in community lands. No pesticides or herbicide will be
 supported under the project; this and other activities that are not allowed by the project
 are listed in the project's negative list. The potential environmental impacts of the
 investments will be minimal, localized, and will be managed by adopting the best
 environmental practices, The implementing partner will prepare the ECOPs
 (environmental code of practices) as the environmental instrument, for each activity that
  will be promoted to the communities as a menu of options, upon which they will decide
  which one is more appropriate to their respective environmental conditions, as well as
  local livelihood practices. The ECOPs will be disclosed in both English and Tetum
  Language, and included in the Project Operation Manual (POM).

 Given that this is a CDD project no involuntary land acquisition and resettlement is
 envisioned. Thus the project does not trigger OP 4.12. Most of the physical investment of
 the project will be on household scale in the form of small scale homestead gardening or
 fish pond by utilizing the beneficiary's own land/home. garden to increase existing
 vegetable/livestock/aquaculture production. Any land acquisition, if needed, will be done
 on voluntary basis. If community demonstration plot is included in the final list of

                                                                                           7
interventions to be supported by the project, the project will use small pieces of
government or community land, or if government land is not available, the project will
temporarily rent voluntarily individual land for demonstration plots.. The process of
determining land for community demonstration ·plots will be conducted through a
participatory process to ensure that all stakeholders are involved. The project will
document step-by step the consultation process in the Project Operation Manual (POM)
to ensure any transactions are indeed voluntary. All consultation process~ will be
documented.

 The project is triggering the Bank's Indigenous People Policy (OP 4.1 0), Ethnicity in
 Timor Leste is bound by language. Seventeen languages, derived from one of two broad
  language groups - Austronesian (Malaya - Polynesian) and Papuan (Melanesian) - are
  spoken across the country. The project will prepare a Social Assessment based on an
  existing, thorough and information Social Assessment carried out by ADB indicating that
  no significant difference of cultural and social identity exist among the people who speak
  different languages. Since· the project will have In~igenous People as overwhelming
· beneficiaries, a separate Indigenous People's Plan (IPP)/Indigenous Peoples Policy
  Framework (IPPF) is not required. Since the overwhelming majority of the beneficiaries
  are IPs, the project design will incorporate the elements.ofpolicy requirements, such as in
  Project Operational Manual (POM). The project uses an existing ADB's social
  assessment that provides .thorough and informative social and economic profile of all
  districts in Timor Leste as a baseline.

 The project location is in the two Eastern Districts· of Baucau and Viqueque. ·The
 Macasae language is mother tongue of 70% of the population in Baucau<District and the
 rest of the population speaks "other" language. About two~thirds of households are
 engaged in subsistence production, while less than half of the population having access to
 drinking water from an improved source, In Viqueque District there are three mother
 tongue groups, Mambae (40%); Teturn-terik (25%) and the rest speak "other" language,
 More than three-quarters of households are engaged in subsistence production and have
 access to drinking water.

 Most of the poor are concentrated in niral areas and about three-quarters of the poor live
 in rural areas. Most of the poor are engaged in low-productivity farming. The proportion
 of poor engaged in the agriculture sector is very high at 78% and almost 90% of the rural
 poor depend on the agriculture sector. Thus increasing availability and diversity of
 farming inputs as well as improving access to markets have credible contributions toward
 poverty reduction.
  Baucau District is located in the east of Timor Leste with the area's district is at 1,506
  krn2.< The district is divided into six sub-districts (Baguia, Baucau, Laga, Que!icai,
  Ven1ase, and Venilale), and a 2004 census population of 100,748. The average population
  density of the district is 67 people per km2 and highest in Baucau sub-district-(101 people
  per km2). An average household consists of 4.4 people. The district consists of 59 sucos,
  among them 26 sucos fall in the lowest living standard group. Baguia, Laga and Quelicai
  are sub-districts that have almost 60·70% of their suco with the lowest living standards,
  Only in Baucau sub-district do sucos fall in the middle and highest living standards.
                                                                                            8
Venilale sub-district has 12.5% sucos with the lowest living standards and Vemase sub-
district has 28.6% sucos with lowest living siandards. The Macasae language is the
mother tongue of 70% of the population and is spoken in five of the six sub-districts.
Other language such as Waima'a and Midiki are spoken in two sub-districs. Three-
quarters of the population can speak Tetum and 40% can speak Bahasa Indonesia. Tetum
and Bahasa Indonesia together are the main languages of a third of the population.
Literacy levels are low but not the lowest; 47% of the population 18 years ~d older
cannot read or write, slightly higher than the national figure of 46%. Disaggregating by
sex shows that 54% of females and 40% of males are illiterate. In Bacau the poverty
incidence is 22.3%, the second lowest poverty rate (after Lautem) in the country. The
district accounts for 11.3% of the total population but only 5.1% of the total poor. While
a third of the population does not consume enough food, this .district has the second
highest food security.
 About two-thirds of households are engaged in subsistence production, with 68%
 involved in maize, 61% cassava and 70% in coconut. Baucau is the second largest rice
.producing district (57%). Some 39% grow various vegetables and some 67% grow
 various fruits, but only 16%, a relatively small proportion, grow coffee which makes
 Baucau along with Oecussi the third smallest coffee producing district. The economic
 activity of39% of the population aged 12 years and older is farming, and accounts for the
 activity of 27% of females and 51% of males. Housework is the main economic activity
 of 17% of the population, accounting for a third of female activities and none of the
 activities of males. The unemployment rate in the district is the highest nationally at 14%.
 Less than half of the district's population (41%) has access to drinking water from an
 improved source; this represents the third smallest proportion in the c.ountry. Some 41%
 of the population has access to basic sanitation (pit latrine, septic tank, flush toilet); and
 29% of the population has electricity supplied from the national grid. In terms of
 dwelling type, some 59% of the population lives in houses with an iron or tin roof, and
 31% of the population lives in dwellings which have walls made of bamboo, and some
 22% of the population lives in dwellings with concrete walls.
 Taking both public and private schools, there are 71 primary schools, 20 junior high
 schools and six secondary schools. With regard to health facilities, there are 16 health
 posts and six community health centers and a hospital in Baucau town. Access to
 facilities, based on average traveling times and average distance, is good with both the
 nearest health center and secondary school being between half and three-quarters of an
 hour away and the nearest primary school being half an hour away. The district has the
 lowest malnutrition rate for children under five years old, but the morbidity rate is one of
 the highest in the country at 24%.
 Viqu,eque Distri~:t is located in the eastern region and is the largest district in Timor
 Leste·, accounting for 14% of the total area of the country, at 1,879 km2. The district is
 divided into five sub-districts (Lacluta, Ossu, Uatucarbau, Watulari and Viqueque), and
 has a 2004 cen~us population of 65,449. The average population density of the district is
 low at 35 people per km2 and is highest in Watulari sub-district (58 people per km).
 Average household size is 4.3 persons. The district consists of37 sucos, among them 17
 sucos fall in the lowest living standard group. All sucos in Lacluta sub-district have the
                                                                                              9
lowest living standard, while other sub-districts (Ossu, Uatucarbau, watulari and
Viqueque) more than half of the suco's number is suco with the lowest standard of living.
There are three mother tongue groups in the district: Mambae (40%); Tetum-terlk (25%);
and "other" language (32%). Some 88% of the population can speak Tetum and 45% can
speak Bahasa Indonesia. Tetum-terik is spoken in two sub-districts, Naueti language is
spoken in another two sub-districts, and Macasae is spoken in one sub-district. Ll_teracy is
slightly lower than the national rate at S1%; 49% of the population 18 years and older
cannot read or write. 56% of females and 40% of males are illiterate. The poverty
incidence in Viqueque is 43.4% and is the third lowest in the country. The district
accounts for 5% of the total population but 4.4% of the total poor.
More than three-quarters of households are engaged in subsistence production, 86% in
cassava, 87% in coconut, and 84% in maize. Households are also involved in production
of higher-value crops such as vegetable (71%) and fruit (88%). The district is one of the
largest fruit producing districts and is the district with the largest proportion of population
engaged in rice production (78%). Less than a quarter of the population (21 %) grows
coffee. The agricultural sector accounts for 89% of the laborforce (aged between IS and
64 years), and the economic activity of 40% of the population aged 12 years and older is
farming, and accounts for the activity of 20% of females and 60% of males. Housework
is the main economic activity of a quarter of the population, accounting for 51% of
female's activities (highest rate in the country). The unemployment rate in the district is
4.4%.                                 .
 More than three-quarters of the population (82%) has access to drinking water from an
 improved source. Nearly half of the population (46%) has access to basi<\ sanitation (pit,
 latrine, septic tank, flush toilet). Some 45% of the population has electricity supplied
 from the national grid, compared to the national·rate of 37%. In terms of dwelling type,
 permanent houses make up half of the housing stock, a third of the population live in
 semi-permanent dwellings, and 19% of the population lives in traditional houses. About
 60% of the population lives in houses with an iron or tin roof, and 19% live in dwellings
 with a palm or leaf roof. A large proportion of the population (41%) live in dwellings
 which have walls made of bamboo and some 39% of the population lives in houses with
 walls constructed of "other" materials (mostly earth/clay and timber).
 There are 35 primary schools, including public and private schools, 10 junior high
 schools and four secondary schools. With regard to health facilities, there are 15 health
 posts and five community health centers. The closest hospital is located in Baucau.
 Access to facilities, is comparatively good with both the nearest health centre and
 secondary school being less than an hour away (43.3 and 47.4 minutes respectively), and
 the nearest primary school being 20 minutes away. The district has the lowest
 mall):ptrition rate for children under five years old in the country, but the morbidity rate is
 26% and is higher than the national rate of22%.
 The project was designed to ensure the participation and inclusion of various groups
 (women, the poor, indigenous) in local level decision making process. In accordance with
 OP 4.10 the Bank task team conducted community consultations with a variety of
 stakeholders throughout Timor Leste (December 5, 2012) in order to provide free, prior
                                                                                             10
and informed consultation to broad community support for the project and fully explore
the underlying causes of and varied responses to the challenge of maternal and child
malnutrition. The recommendations from those findings are as follows:
    • A real need and demand for a consistent production of consumables across the
        entire span of the year. Supporting the development of household kitchen gardens
        responds to this need (such as the 'keyhole garden').
    • Storage of perishables is problematic. The great majority of householqs do not
        have access to refrigeration and rely on tradition drying and smoking of a limited
        number of staples such as com. Provision of education in short-medium term
        storage options for perishables is a priority.
    • Access to and storage of seeds is also problematic. Facilitation of access to a
        diversity of seeds and provision of simple seed storage technologies is prioritized,
        and will be closely coordinated with household kitchen garden activities.
     • Surplus and storage values and habits are not usually oriented over the long-term.
        Food surpluses are generally consumed quickly, and the use of stored food (such
        as dried com) when no fresh food is available results in a poor diet. Further, local
        perceptions of sufficiency mean that people will acknowledge insufficiency only
         in relatively extreme circumstances. Education on both these facets of nutrition is
         prioritized.

Inputs from these consultations were used in the design of the project. In-depth interview
were also conducted with a range of participants selected purposively from three districts,
namely Aileu, Baucau and Enriera. Concurrent with the community consultations, a rapid
mapping relevant Civil Society Organizations (CSO) working in the field of nutrition
and/or agriculture was also conducted, The consultation process will continue to be held
during project implementation through participatory planning process at aldeialvillage
level. Specific measures in the project design has translated in to the use of an
experienced non-governmental organization (NGO) as the implementing agency
 (Catholic Relief Service (CRS) and community facilitators who will be trained by CRS to
ensure that people's participation in and benefit from the project is through free, prior and
 informed consultations. As a Community-Driven Development project, the community
will engage in every project stage to be able to partie! pate, plan and implement nutrition
 specific interventions and nutrition specific interventions. The project will ensure that
 vulnerable people have the same chances of inclusion in all project cycles and in project
 benefits as others who are better off. Inclusion of the vulnerable groups in project
 implementation will be operationalized and detailed in the project operational manual.

 The project will also promote local/indigenous knowledge and practices in improving
 farming/livestock/aquaculture productivity rather than introduce the new ones so that it
 will not adversely affect the social and economic conditions of the beneficiaries.

 2. D;scribe any potential Indirect and/or long term Impacts due to anticipated fUture
 activities In the project area:

 No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
 area are envisaged.

                                                                                          11
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated jilfure
activities in the project area:

No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are envisaged.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The implementing agency is Catholic Relief Service (CRS) - Timor Leste who will be
supported by CRS regional and HQ teams. CRS is considered well qualified with long
experience on community based projects and has been implementing provisions
underlying the Bank's safeguard policies such as consultation and community
participation as a foundation for project implementation. The project will also build upon
CRS's experience during the Community Based Adaptation (CBA) and Community
Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) projects that utilize participatory planning
methodologies to allow communities to not only be at the forefront of problem analysis
and identification but to ensure that integrated and participatory community action plans
directly relate to the actual needs of project participants. CRS also has more than thirty
years' working experience in Timor Leste.

5. Identifj' the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders are all communities living at project location (i.e. 287 aldeias in 50
sucos). At community level, the project will involve field staff and use
facilitators/volunteers to reach a large number of communities in an efficient manner.
Further consultations will be undertaken with the communities in the project locations,
including translating project document such as project operation manuals in to local
language and disclosing them at project location.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/06/2014
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/!7/2014
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                              01/!7/2014
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive


                                                                                         12
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/08/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01117/2014
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                              01/17/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to lnfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to he addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Cotporate Level

The project design has been reviewed and approved for incorporating OP 4.10 provisions.

OP/BP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [X]    No []       N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     Yes [X]    No [ ]      N/A []
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes [ ]   No [ ]      N/A [X]
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No []       N/A [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or     Yes [ ]   No [ ]      N/A [X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 -Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes []    No [ ]      N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No[X]         N/A []

                                                                                     13
     Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]    No []     N/A [X]
     cultural property?
     Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate Yes [ ]         No [ ]    N/A [X]
     the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
      resources?
     OPIBP 4.10 -Indigenous Peovles
      Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]    No [X']     N/A []
      Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
      consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
      If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for          Yes [ ]    No []     N/A [X]
      safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
      If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the     Yes [X]    No [J-    N/A[]
      design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
      Social Development Unit?
      OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
      Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ ]    No [X].    N/A []
      framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
       prepared?
       If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes [ ]    No []     N/A [X]
       safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
     . plan/policy framework/process framework?
       OPIBP 4.36- Forests
       Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]   No []     N/A[XJ
       issues and constraints been carried out?
       Does the project design include satisfactory measures to Yes [ ]      No [ ]    N/A [X]
       overcome these constraints?
       Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if      Yes [ ]   No []     N/A [X)
       so, does it include provisions for certification system?
        OPIBP 4.37 ·Safety_of Dams
        Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ 1   No [ 1    N/A [X] ·
        Have the TORs as well as composition for the               Yes [ ]   No [X]     N/A []
        independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
        approved by the Bank?
        Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been              Yes [ ]    No [X]     N/A[]
        prepared and arrangements been made for public
        awareness and trainitlg?
••      OPIBP 7.50 - Pro.lects on International Waterways
        Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
        If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the    Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X 1
        notifl.cation requirement, has this been cleared with the
        Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
         and sent?
         What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:   Yes [ ]    No []     N/A [X ]
         Has the RVP approved such an exception?                   Yes [ ]    No []     N/A [X 1
      OP/BP 7.60 • Pro.lects in Disputed Areas

                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                  ·.·.



 Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the       Yes [ ]           No [ ]                N/A [X]<
 international aspects of the project, including the                                                                     i\
 procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
 dealing with the issue, been prepared
 Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer              Yes [ ]           No [ ]                N/A [X]
 referred to in the OP?
 The World Bank Policv on Disclosure of Information                                          ~
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to       Yes [X]                No [ ]            N/A []
 the World Bank's Tnfoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a        Yes [X]                No [     I        N/A [ ]
 public place in a fonn and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
  and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]                No [ ]            N/A [ ]
  responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
  measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]                No [ ]            N/A [ ]
  included in the project cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evahmtion system of the              Yes [X]                No [ ]            N/A [ ]
  pr<~ject includes the monitoring of safegtwrd impacts and
  measures related to safe~mrd 12olicies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]                No [ ]            N/A [ ]
  agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
  reflected in the project legal documents?                                       !




  D. Approvals

Si.ened and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:
Environmental Specialist:
                                                 Name
                                Eileen Brainne Sullivan
                                Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja
                                                                   ~     - '
                                                                                                 Date
                                                                                             01/07/2014
                                                                                             0 1107/20 14__
Social Safeguard Specialist     Francisca Mel~a Setiawati                                    01/07/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards                 Peter Leo~
                                                       ~
                                                               A
                                                               <.v•<f,U~                 <1/     !'1/)JJJY
Coordinator:
  Comments:                                              1.           0 /)
Sector Manager:                     Toomas PaltJ   ·-·roo~,:t.c ~   ,f(,, v             I'D// 16 { l    0(y
                                                                                                   I
  Comments:                                                                    '-..




                                                                                                         15
