                                                                                     90507



                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET ·
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: June 20, 2014                                                 Report No.:

1. Basic Proiect Data
Countrv: Timor-Leste                         I Project ID: P148698
Project Name: Institutional Reform and Transformation ofMAF
Task Team Leader: Fabrizio Bresciani
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2014          I Estimated Board Date: NA
Mana~in~ Unit: EASIS                         I Lending Instrument: Trust Fund
Sector: Public Administration, Law, and Justice- Agriculture, Fishing, and Forestrv (100%)
Theme: Rural Policies and Institutions (25%); Decentralization (50%); Managing for
Develooment Results (25%1.
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                  0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                    0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                    0.00
TF Amount (US$m.): USD 498,000.00
Other financing amounts by source:
           ~Q[[Q~~[
         Trust Fund
Environmental Category: B
Reo eater                                               Yes rl           No   rXl
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or         · Yes []        No [X]
OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emere:encies)

2. Project ObJectives

A. Proposed Development Objective(s)

The objective of the Project Is to support Ministry of Agriculture and Fishery (MAF) in Its effort
to de-concentrate and reorganize its service delivery model so that MAF is better-aligned and
responsive to the needs of farmer and fisher communities.

B. Key Results

The Project's PDO will be achieved by:

    (I)       developing and piloting operational procedures at the district and watershed
              level for bottom-up planning involving farming communities;
    (ii)      strengthening MAF's program implementation capacity through enhanced
              planning, and MIS systems, and enhanced procurement and financial
              management systems that are aligned to national systems and regulations;
    (iii)     developing a Project Development and Management Service (PDMS) within the
              MAF's National Directorate for Policy and Planning (NDPP) which is tasked with
              the identification, preparation and Implementation of major investment
              projects, the coordination and supervision of donor-funded interventions, and
              the development of appropriate environmental and social safeguards to ensure
              that agricultural development is sustainable in terms of land and water

                                                1
           resources, and respectful of social inclusion of farming communities.

3. Project Description

A. Country Context
Malnutrition and poverty remain widespread in Timor·Leste, particularly in rural areas,
almost 75% of Timor-Leste's rural households depend on agriculture for their livelihood.
Agriculture also remains the only sector offering a prospect in the medium term to absorb
the country's growing labour force. In such context, MAF has the mandate to promote food
security and improved living standards in rural areas and to contribute to sustainable
management of the country's land and water resources. On the positive side, Timor-Leste's
agriculture development environment is endowed with cooperative and experienced
Development Partners (DPs) and NGOs. The recent approval (November 2013) of the
Decree for MAF's reorganization is an indication of a change in MAF 's leadership style as
the Ministry prepares to reorganize and change its business models. MISP intends to build
on this 'wind of change" and to assist MAF to formalize its new systems and procedures,
with a strong focus on farming communities.

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

The proposed IDF grant will address areas that were identified as critical during the
preparation of the MAF Strategic Plan (MAFSP) and have been prioritized in its Medium
Term Operation Plan, 2013·18 (MTOP). Prior Bank sectoral analytical work (Timor-Leste:
Responding to Low Food Production and High Prices, P127404) as well as the Strategic
Development Plan (SDP) (2013·20) indicate that MAF's capacity to deliver well-targeted
and cost-efficient services to its constituents is limited by several major constraints ,
including : (i) a lack of culture in terms of "bottom-up" and participatory planning and
monitoring of service delivery; (ii) a highly centralized structure that is not able to respond
effectively to requests for services due to weaknesses in terms of planning, budget
execution, targeting, and M&E of its activities; and (iii) poor ability to coordinate projects
and activities executed by DPs, which represent a significant share of the support currently
provided to the sector compared with activities and projects which are funded through the
national budget.

The Government of Timor-Leste (GoTL) is planning to decentralize at the district level all
Government services. MISP will assist MAF to prepare for this fundamental change in the
way in which Government plans for by transforming it into an institution which is an
efficient policy setter, sector regulator and service provider and which operates through a
process of decentralized decision-making informed by the inclusion and participation of
farmers in planning, fmplementation, monitoring, and evaluation. This will represent a
major cultural change for MAF, as at present MAF is a "top-down, national program driven"
Ministry with most of its human resources based in Dili and very little budget allocated to
district-level development activities.

  At the core of a functioning decentralized model is the ability to complement bottom-up
planning and an improved capacity to prioritize interventions, with central systems that
support the execution of programs and are able to monitor their programs for their
improved management. Considerable training and operational development of staff at all
levels, particularly at the district level and within the corporate services (FM, procurement,


                                              2
planning, and M&E) will therefore be required to achieve the transformation of MAF's
business model.

MAF will require assistance with the preparation of a successful de-concentration strategy
and a change management plan will be needed to guide its transformation. To achieve a
truly inclusive and participatory business model, MAF will need to Involve rural
communities and other key stakeholders through intensive consultations and the
establishment of regular feedback mechanisms. This will ensure that the development
process is progressively fine-tuned to ensure that MAF's core operational models are
delivered efficiently. To be successfully implemented, the IDF will require that local and
central bureaucracies and policy makers are able to understand and manage stakeholder
expectations. Similarly, stakeholders need to be able to factor the constraints posed by
government processes and policies when formulating their expectations In terms of service
delivery. A major focus under the IDF will therefore consist in ensuring that the multi-
disciplinary technicill expertise mobilized to implement the project will be coordinated
effectively. The Project's M&E will therefore include regular meetings at the PIU level that
will involve the experts contracted for its implementation to discuss the progress reports
and devise shared solutions to address gaps and shortcomings.

Given the complexity of redesigning a new MAF and the current limited capacity of MAF,
partnerships with DPs will provide MAF with an opportunity for support Tlmor-Leste Is
fortunate to have long-term and committed DPs such as the Government of Australia, GiZ,
IFAD, and the European Union, which together with the Bank have prioritized the
agricultural sector in their assistance strategies to Timor-Leste. Bimonthly donor-
coordination meetings on agricultural development are being organized by the Bank.
Progress in the implementation of the IDF will be shared with other DPs in order to receive
suggestions on how to improve its implementation. Technical assis~nce to further support
the implementation of the IDF will be sought through the AusAID funded and Bank-
managed TF for Timor-Leste.

C. Relationship to CPS

The World Bank's Timor Leste Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is fully aligned with
GoTL's Strategic Development Plan 20 11-30 and sets out a focused program of lending,
analytical and advisory work (AAA), trust funds and convening services grouped around the
four pillars in the SDP. The WBG will help GoTL, among others, to support the development
of a non-oil economy that creates jobs by improving the enabling environment for private
sector investment and augmenting the productivity and value-added of agriculture. Each
activity planned during the CPS period is designed to increase the government's capacity to
deliver core services, by putt ing in place essential institutional building blocks - including
systems and policies and a well-equipped civil service. Stronger institutions will not only
contribute to better and more transparent service delivery over the long-term, but will also
ensure that Timor-Leste's time-limited natural resource wealth is used productively. MISP
is fully aligned with the CPS, and reflects: (i) the intention to use Trust Funds as the basis of
sectoral support programs; (II) the importance of improving MAF's capacity (a stronger
institution) to deliver core services with the objective of increasing agriculture productivity;
and (iii) a reliance on partnerships with DPs who work with and assist MAF. Currently the
Bank is developing the proposal for a programmatic AAA on agricultural development to be
funded through a recently established AusAID-funded trust fund


                                               3
D. PROJECT COMPONENTS

   The Project consists of the following parts:

   Part 1; Stren&thenin& capacity to plan for the deliveO' of effective and efficient
   services

   (a) Development and piloting of operations manuals for community-based bottom-up
   participatory planning and priority setting; and

    (b) Development and piloting of a participatory monitoring of service delivery through a
   syste~   of farmer feedback surveys.

   Part 2;     Stren2lbenin& MAE's plannlna:, pro2f3mmln&· and service dellveO'
   capacity

   (a) Update ofMAFSP and MTOP/MTIP; and

   (b) Design and piloting of a MIS that will monitor the progress of development programs.

   Part 3; Strenethenin& procurement and financial mana&ement systems

   (a) Development of a Change Management Plan to guide MAF's restructuring; and

   (b) Update of MAF's electronic procurement and financial management system and
   piloting, in coordination with the Ministry of Finance, of the Procurement Performance and
   Compliance Indicators.

   Part 4; Strenethenln& MAE's capacity to develop and mana&e maJor proJects.

   {a) Training of NDPP staff in the identification, preparation, and implementation of
   agricultural projects, and in the coordination of sectoral assistance from development
   partners; and       ·

   (b) TralningofNDPP staff in the Identification and preparation of safeguards measures.

   Part 5; Bulldin& capaciLY for proJect manaeement

   {a) Support in establishment of a PIU, preparation of an annual work plan and budget,
   preparation of terms of reference for consultants to be hired during the Project, and
   assistance in hiring such consultants.

   (b) Preparation of a project operations manual to guide Project implementation.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

                     to
The project applies .an institution (MAF) rather than a physical location. The improved
capacity of the MAF will seek to Improve management of agricultural and fisheries

                                                  4
resources throughout the country by strengthening the use of bottom-up approaches and by
improving institutional capacity and systems.

S. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Ross Butler, Senior Social Development Specialist (EASNS)
Klan Siong, Environmental Specialist (EASlS)




                                            5
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Safeguard Policies            Trigg Explanation (Optional)
                              ered
Environmental Assessment OP/BP Yes   The project will not involve any physical works,
4.01                                 nor any feasibility . or preparatory works for
                                     physical works; rather the focus is on institutional
                                     and capacity development, including development
                                     of manuals. The project itself will not lead to the
                                     identification and .development of subsequent
                                     investments or projects.

                                     The policy is triggered as the project activities may
                                     have some downstream environment and/or social
                                     impacts when implemented though mostly on the
                                     positive side. These include:

                                     •   development and piloting of (i) operations
                                         manuals for community-based bottom-up
                                         participatory planning and priority setting and
                                         (ii) a participatory monitoring of service delivery
                                         (iii) an MIS to monitor progress of development
                                         programs,
                                     •   training of staffing the identification,
                                         preparation, and implementation of agricultural
                                         projects, and in the coordination of sectoral
                                         assistance from development partners,
                                     •   preparation of a project operations manual to
                                         guide project implementation

                                     the operations manual to be used for the training of
                                     MAF staff will consider provisions of OP 4.01 and
                                     other relevant applicable policies. The Terms of
                                     References for the Institutional Development
                                     consultants will also integrate safeguard
                                     considerations and policy requirements.

                                     No instruments will be required for successful
                                     delivery of the IDP. Safeguards will be directly
                                     integrated Into project activities, including training
                                     and operations manual.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No     The training and capacity building activities
                                     supported by the grant will not Involve any activity
                                     that will impact on natural habitats. Nevertheless
                                     the trainings and manuals will integrate measures
                                     to enhance project's positive impacts on natural
                                     habitats.

                                     6
Forests OP/BP 4.36               No    The training and capacity building activities
                                       supported by the grant will not involve any activity
                                       that will on impact on forests. Nevertheless the
                                       trainings and manuals will integrate measures to
                                       enhance project's positive Impacts on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09          No    The training and capacity building activities
                                       supported by the grant will not involve any activity
                                       that would lead to use of pesticides. Nevertheless
                                       as the main client is MAF with the mandate on pest
                                       management, the training programs for MAF and
                                       other stakeholders will include pest management
                                       through integrated pest management In addition,
                                       MAF's regulatory framework to promote and
                                       support safe, effective, and environmentally sound
                                       pest management will also be assessed and
                                       included in the training programs.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No    The training and capacity building activities
4.11                                   supported by the grant will not involve any activity
                                       that will impact on PCR.
Indigenous Peoples OP /BP 4.10   Yes   Inclusion of communal lands managed through
                                       customary systems in the context of agribusiness
                                       development is a very sensitive area in Timor-
                                       Leste, where legally sound processes are yet to be
                                       developed. The Project will positively benefit
                                       Indigenous People through the capacity building
                                       initiatives.

                                       The project will ensure that the provisions of OP
                                       4.10 are taken into consideration, including
                                       measures for complying with ' Free, Prior and
                                       Informed Consultations leading to Broad
                                       Community Support, disputes management,
                                       establishment and implementation of a Grievance
                                       Redress Mechanisms, and Participatory Monitoring
                                       and Evaluation tools as Integral parts of the IDP
                                       activities. All of these will be reflected in the
                                       operations manual.


Involuntary   Resettlement OP/BP Yes   The operations manuals, MIS systems and training
4.12                                   of staff on the identification, preparation and
                                       implementation of agricultural projects will foster
                                       an awareness of, and · operational culture that is
                                       supportive of the inclusion of assessment of
                                       impacts on land, including potential involuntary
                                       resettlement. Training activities and materials will
                                       reflect OP 4.12 to manage IR ..


                                       7
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No     The project will not finance construction or
                                             rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International Waterways No       Project will not be located in international
OP/BP7.50                                    waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No          The project is not located in any known disputed
7.60                                         areas as defined under the policy.


   A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or Irreversible impacts:.
The project will deliver technical assistance to improve the capacity of Government of Timor
Leste's Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF). No civil works are planned under the
activities; therefore there is no potential for direct impacts. Notwithstanding this, some of the
proposed activities are aimed at improving the ability of MAF to properly manage projects in
the future. The training and capacity building activities will include the benefits of using good
practice and World Bank safeguard policies will be incorporated and mainstreamed through
the activities (such as development of the operations manuals, MIS systems and training of
staff in the identification, preparation and implementation of agricultural projects will need to
develop an awareness of, and operational culture that is supportive of the inclusion of
assessment of impacts on land, including potential involuntary resettlement). Training
activities and materials will use World Bank safeguard policies as the benchmark for
management of environmental and social risks.
2. Describe any potential Indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the proJect area:                       ·                   ·
Over the long-term, introduction of the Bank safeguard policy by providing training to NDPP
staffs will not only help the client understanding of safeguard requirement whenever the Bank
is requested to finance any MAF projects but also to help the MAF in building a stronger
institution to deliver its core services with the objective of Increasing fishery agriculture
productivity in environmentally sustainable manner.
3. Describe any project alternatives (If relevant) consJdered to help avoid or minimize
adverse Impacts.
N/A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacLtyto_Rlan and im_Riement the measures described.
The Borrower will ensure that safeguard policy requirements are integrated into the
operations manual that will be used by MAF and that MAF staff training will include Bank
safeguard policies and requirements. TORs for any studies and consulting services will also
include reQuirements for complying with Bank safeguard policies.
5. Identify the key ·stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentlal!Y_ affectedJ!eQJ!le.
Although one of the activities is the development and piloting of operations manuals for
community-based bottom-up participatory planning, the stakeholders will primarily be MAF
staff. No safeguard instruments will be prepared as part of theTA.




                                            8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: Safeguard Management
Framework (SMF)
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NI A
   Date of receipt by the Bank: during appraisal
   Date of"in-country" disclosure:                             N/A
   Date of submission to lnfoShop:                             N/A
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: covered in SMF
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?               N/A
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                 NI A
   Date of"in-country" disclosure                              N/A
   Date of submission to InfoShop                              N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: covered In SMF
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              N/A
   Date of submission to InfoShop                              NjA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?               N/A
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                 N/A
   Date of"in-country" disclosure                              N/A
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                               N/A
• If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If In-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled In when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP /GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review       N/A
and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP Incorporated in the              N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Infonnatlon
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's           N/A
Infoshop?                                                           .
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form      N/A
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been   N/A

                                             9
  prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project N/A
  cost?
  Does the project's Monitoring and Evaluation system include the monitoring of N/A
  safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:              Name                                   Date
Task Team Leader:                     Fabrizio Bresciani                     07/19/2014
Environmental Specialist:             Kian Siong                             07/19/2014
Social Development Specialist         Ross Butler                            07/19/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:

  Comments:
                                      Peter Leonard   .--r{1/G#<.C4
Sector Manager:   ~ lA.-\-~ ......_    ~~\v\~              0~.....::.__:..
  Comments:




                                                10
