                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                       Report No.: 88003

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 12, 2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Kingdom of Tonga              Project ID:        IP150113
 Project Name:               Tonga Cyclone Ian Reconstruction and Climate Resilience Project
 Task Team Leader:           Christopher R. Bennett
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 8 April2014                     Estimated Board Date:       23 May2014
 Managing Unit:              EASNS                         Lending Instrument:         Investment
                                                                                       Project
                                                                                       Financing
 Sector(s):                   Housing construction (90%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                              sector ( 10%)
 Theme(s):                    Climate change (35%), Natural disaster management (35%), Urban
                              planning and housing policy (30%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Yes
 Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:         US$15.89                      Total Bank Financing:       US$12.00
 Total Cofinancing:          US$3.89                       Financing Gap:              US$0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             2.09
     Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                             1.80
     International Development Association Grant from the Crisis Response Window                     6~00

     International Development Association Credit from the Crisis Response Window                   6.00

     Total                                                                                          15.89
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       No
 project?
                                                                    I
    2. Current Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objectives are to: The project development objectives are to: (i) Restore housing,
    community facilities, Emd basic services to the affected population of Ha'apai; and, (ii) Strengthen the
    country's resilience to natural disasters.             ·


    3. Project Description
    Tropical Cyclone Ian (TCI) hit the South Pacific region in January 20 14 and had a devastating impact in
    Tonga. On January 11, 2014, it passed directly through the Ha'apai Islands Group, intensifying to a
    Category 5 system with winds of over 200 km per hour. It was the most powerful storm ever recorded in
    Tonga. One person died and 14 suffered minor injuries as a result of the cyclone. In response, the
    Government of Tonga (GoT) declared a state of emergency in Ha'apai and Vava'u on the day of the storm.
    Good preparedness measures had been in place and GoT's response was rapid and likely prevent~d more
    fatalities and injuries to human life.

    The GoT's National Emergency Management Office (NEMO),jointly with the Bank and in collaboration
    with other development partners, subsequently undertook a rapid assessment of the damages and losses in
    accordance with the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology. Of the 6,616 people (2011
    census) living in Ha'apai, some 5,500 people in 18 villages across six islands in the group were affected 1•
    The DaLA estimated the combined physical damage and economic losses to be USD49 .5 million (about
    11 percent of Tonga's Gross Domestic Product, GDP). The immediate physical damage, particularly on
    housing stock, transport infrastructure, and agriculture, was estimated at USD39.4 million. TCI is
    expected to cause a potential income loss for the Ha' apai Island Group of around 40 percent for 2014, and
    a significant increase in the poverty level of the affected persons via the destruction of subsistence
    agricultural crops, inputs for handicraft production, and disruption to private sector business activity.

    The housing sector bore the brunt of damages and losses from TCI as reflected in the National TCI
    Response Plan which outlined the immediate relief and recovery priorities. The plan included the need to
    reconstruct and rehabilitate some 800 homes, with an urgent priority to assist affected families move out of
    tents and evacuation centers and into safe housing with adequate water and sanitation facilities.

    The project will assist with the TCI emergency recovery effort through the following:

    Component A: Housing and Key Community Facilities Repair, Reconstruction and Climate
    Resilience CUSD12.97m including contingencies and taxes):

    A.l Houses· for the Vulnerable (H4Vs). Provision of two resilienf habitable rooms/dwellings for some
    200 socio-economically extremely vulnerable households or households in extremely vulnerable
    communities (equivalent to -USD 18,000ffOP32,500 per household).

    A.l Supported Self-Recovery (SSR). Facilitation of SSR for eligible households3 for replacement or
    repairs and retrofitting/climate resilience of slightly damaged and undamaged housing. The supported
    self-recovery activity is based on project funded building advice, inspection and certification to agreed
    standards to receive funding. The level of funding is linked to the level of damage incurred and resistance
    standards. Funding will be provided to households through vouchers in tranches linked to stages of

1
  The islands ofFoa, Ha'ano, Lifuka, Lofanga, Mo'unga'one, and 'Uiha (see map in Annex 6).
2
  For 70m/s wind speeds and appropriate seismic loading.
3
  An eligible household is one whose main dwelling and/or associated water and sanitation facilities were damaged by
Cyclone Ian
     construction and certified by Ministry of Infrastructure (Mol) Building Inspectors:

                 i.    A.l.A: SSR funding for some 350 eligible households with destroyed or severely
                       damaged main dwellings- home reconstruction funding (-USD9,000 I TOP16,500 per
                       household4) in tranches, subject to compliance with an agreed resilience standard.

                ii.    A.l.B: SSR funding for some 400 eligible households with reparable damage to main
                       dwellings- small repairs and retrofitting funding (average -USD2,750 I TOP5,000 per
                       household) in tranches, subject to compliance with an agreed resilience standard.

               iii.    A.l.C: SSR funding (resilience strengthening) for some 150 eligible households with
                       undamaged buildings- small retrofitting funding (average -USD750 I TOP1,400 per
                       household) for building supplies subject to compliance with an agreed resilience standard.

     Reconstruction and Resilience Strengthening of Community Facilities:

                 i.   A.3: Provision of supported self-recovery funding (or up to 18 eligible communities for
                      repairs and climate resilience of community-run public facilities - materials funding
                      for repairs and retrofitting (average -USD6,000 I TOPll,OOO per community) in
                      tranches, subject to compliance with an agreed resilience standard.

                ii.   A.4: Reconstruction and resilience strengthening of key large public facilities such as
                      the Lifuka market (-USD100,000/TOP180,000 total amount).

     Proper disposal of building debris and demolition rubble:

                 i.    ASA: Provision of funding to I, 100 households (-USD 150/ TOP 180) to sort and
                       assemble for collection non-hazardous building debris.

                ii.   ASB: Removal of debris- The safe collection of construction and demolition waste and
                      hazardous waste, and transport and disposal to a registered, managed landfill site on the
                      main island ofTongatapu.

     A.6 Household supplementary potable water and sanitation facilities. Address critical basic services
     at household level to improve potable water supplies and provide appropriately constructed, on-site
     sanitation disposal (average -USD1,800 I TOP3,300 per household).

     A.7 Logistical support for materials supply (USD0.23m)- purchase of a barge for Mol to transport
     reconstruction advisory and inspectorate personnel and building materials to supplement limited private
     sector carriers to the remote islands.

     Component B: Technical Assistance and Training for Enhanced Disaster and Climate Resilience
     CUSD1.58 m including contingencies and taxes)

     1.     B.l Resilience strengthening for safer homes and communities:

                 1.   Bl.A: Mobilization and Building Advice for households (USD1.04m). Provision of
                      technical assistance for repairs and retrofitting of homes and community facilities as part


4
    Households have the option to choose owner-led or central contractor-led building.
                     of the SSR (Component A). This will include: (i) the establishment of an on-site
                     one-stop-shqp 'Recovery Center' where participants can receive training, obtain advice
                     and support; (ii) preparation of pre-approved building plans and home repairs and
                     retrofitting toolkits; (iii) preparation and implementation of a communications strategy
                     (including grievance procedures); (iv) develop and put in place in the Mol PST a simple
                     but comprehensive database of beneficiary households5; and, (v) deployment (through a
                     contracted firm) of four mobile units (one per District) comprising 'Community Liaison
                     Officers' (CLO) and 'Building Liaison Officers' (BLOt.

              ii.    Bl.B: Climate Resilience Training. Knowledge and practical training of tradespeople,
                     supervisors, Mol Building Inspectors, community leaders, and local design and
                     supervision consultants for climate resilient buildings and infrastructure. It is envisaged
                     that this would take the form of both formal classroom training and on.:.the-ground
                     mentoring and oversight.

             111.    Bl.C: Improve Building Code Application. Strengthening and updating of the Building
                     Code, and design and implementation of public awareness and practices campaigns for
                     self-enforcement. Taking into account previous updates of the Code, the activity will
                     strengthen the sections relating to cyclone resilient standards, extract key messages for
                     influencing building practices, and focus on measures that P.ractically can be attained by
                     low income groups.

             iv.     Bl.D: Hazard Mapping. Assessment and mapping of coastal hazards and risks to further
                     inform reconstruction planning and resilience building within the Ha' apai affected areas.
                     The mapping will update mid-scenarios relating to sea-level rise with storm surge to
                     provide the basis for informed 'acceptable risk' decision-making as part of the
                     reconstruction.

    2.    B.2 Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction Framework

               i.   Operationalize and institutionalize recovery and reconstruction. Activities include:
                    (i) review and documentation of lessons learnt from Bank-supported reconstruction and
                    recovery of past major disasters in Tonga and other regions; (ii) review and update of
                    relevant legislation and institutional arrangements, such as the Emergency Management
                    Act 2007 and the National Emergency Management Plan 201 0; (iii) development of an
                    operations manual detailing implementation and planning arrangements for disaster
                    recovery and reconstruction, including standard assessment templates and procedures
                    (leading out of the draft National Housing Recovery and Reconstruction Policy); and, (iv)
                    conduct of a roadshow and broad community consultations on the draft Recovery and
                    Reconstruction Policy prior to its adoption by Cabinet.

              ii.   Improved post-disaster mapping capacity and damage assessments based on

5
  The database will provide an accurate, common information platform on pre-approved designs (either for
reconstruction or retrofitting), competitive unit prices of materials, progress of works, timeliness of advisory
assistance,- timeliness of inspectorate services, disbursement of household funding, and identify at risk households
requiring additional support.
6
  The CLO will provide advice and assistance to households regarding proof of eligibility for funding including tenure
arrangements, location of house, assembling own-resources and project funding. The BLO will provide advice and
assistance to households regarding selecting pre-approved building plans or building improvements, realistic pricing
of materials and labor, readiness to request Mol's inspection for progress certification and payment.
                 experiences to date in Tonga (including the project) to support future efficient disaster
                 response and recovery


Component C: Project Support <USD1.34 m including contingencies)

            i.   Technical support for construction activities including the mobilization ofMoi Bui~ding
                 Inspectors responsible for phased inspection and certification of all works. The Building
                 Inspectors will be closely supervised and mentored in the first six months by a
                 project-funded Senior Contracts Manager and then progressively absorbed into Mol's
                 staff establishment.
          ii.    Project support for procurement, financial management, contract and project
                 management.
          iii.   Social and environmental safeguards oversight, monitoring and evaluation.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project is located in the Ha'apai Island Group in the Kingdom of Tonga.

The Kingdom ofTonga consists of 169 Islands with a total population of around 120,000. The country lies
in the South Pacific and stretches over a distance of about 800 kilometers fro~ north to south, covering a
total land area of748 square kilometers with an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of about 700,000 square
kilometers. The population is primarily Polynesian, with a literacy rate close to 99 per cent and a relatively
low incidence of poverty. However, its small size, geographic dispersion and isolation, and limited natural
resources provide a narrow economic base. Agriculture, fishing and tourism account for most export
earnings and it has a high dependency on external aid (approximately 15% of Gross National Income,
GNI). Remittances from an estimated 100,000 Tongans abroad have historically been equivalent to about
40% ofGNI.

The Ha'apai economy is built around subsistence agriculture: 23% of the population is estimated to live
below the basic needs poverty line. TCI is expected to cause a short-term increase in poverty due to the: (i)
destruction of subsistence agricultural crops and lost fisheries and agricultural output; (ii) destruction of
inputs for handicraft production; and (iii) disruption to private sector business activity. The scale of losses
is very substantial relative to current incomes, given the u~der-developed nature of the Ha'apai economy,
and suggests a Ha'apai income loss of around 40% for 2014. The.other pillar of the economy, tourism
related to whale watching, has been seriously affected, but since TCI happened outside of the season, the
impact is ·lower than it would otherwise have been.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ross James Butler, Senior Safeguards Specialist (EASNS)
Beverley Ann McLean, Social Safeguards Consultant (EASNS)
Anil Somani, Environmental Consultant (EASNS)


6. Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       y          About 80% of the project expenditure
                                                                     is directed to facilitating the provision
                                             of housing and basic services, repair of
                                             affected housing stock and key public
                                             buildings, and undertaking climate
                                             resilience improvements to
                                             undamaged housing. The project will
                                             facilitate safe removal and disposal of
                                             asbestos waste and reuse, recycle and
                                             disposal of Construction Demolition
                                             Waste (CDW). Waste will be disposed
                                             of in Tapuhia Landfill in Tongatapu.
                                             The Policy is triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4~04              N   The Lifuka and Foa Islands, where
                                             most of the reconstruction work will
                                             take place do not have any critical or
                                             non-critical natural habitats, nor will
                                             the project affect critical or non-critical
                                             natural habitats. Therefore, the policy
                                             is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       N   The Project will not affect any forests.
                                             The policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  N   The Project does not involve
                                             procurement or use of pesticides. The
                                             policy is not triggered
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   N   The Project involves replacement or
                                             reconstruction of destroyed or
                                             damaged housing. Given the coral
                                             nature of the islands, physical culture
                                             resources are not expected.
                                             Nonetheless, a chance find procedure
                                             is included in the Environmental
                                             Management Plan.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            N   The population is 97.5% indigenous
                                             Tongan or part Tongan, is
                                             homogeneous and does not conform to
                                             the Bank's definition of Indigenous
                                             Peoples. The policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      y   The principle adopted by the project
                                             will be to replace housing on existing
                                             sites/allotments wherever possible.
                                             Notwithstanding the· above principle
                                             and the expectation that relocation is
                                             unlikely to be required, there remains a
                                             possibility that relocation of some
                                             houses may be required. Relocation
                                             may be due to safety, legal or
                                             occupancy security reasons.
                                             Accordingly, OP 4.12 is triggered to
                                             ensure appropriate safeguards are in
                                                                   place. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework has been prepared to
                                                                   document the process agreed for
                                                                   ensuring compliance with OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                               N          The Project does not involve dams.
                                                                   The policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP               N          The Project does not involve
7.50                                                               international waterways. The policy is
                                                                   not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                   N          The Project is not located in disputed
                                                                   areas. The policy is not triggered.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key physical aspect of constructing housing is not expected to create substantive environmental
issues. Any impacts will be readily mitigated. The two key aspects requiring safeguarding are the
management of asbestos products and CDW, as well as the issues associated with the provision ofbasic
s~rvices. The project will improve public health by facilitating the provision of basic services,
improving housing conditions by facilitating the replacement or repairing damaged houses or
retrofitting undamaged housing to cyclone resilience standard, thus leading to general improvements in
the environment. Works will also be undertaken to improve sanitation.
The likely environmental issues are:
    •   Some of the buildings damaged by TCI contain asbestos products (asbestos roofing sheets, tiles,
        or gutters). A firm specializing in asbestos waste management has been hired by the Ministry of
        Infrastructure (Mol) to prepare an asbestos management and removal plan and subsequently
        identify, remove, secure and dispose of asbestos products in an appropriate and safe manner.
    •   Ha'apai lacks a properly engineered landfill site. Much of the cyclone and CDW will be re-used
        (timber, iron sheeting, plastic piping/reticulation, some bricks and masonry) or recycled (bricks
        and masonry can be crushed to be used in the reconstruction). Asbestos waste will be shipped to
        the Tapuhia landfill in Nuku'alofa. CDW that cannot be reused or recycled, will be stored and
        shipped to Tapuhia Landfill in Tongatapu for disposal.
    •   The Tapuhia Landfill on Tongatapu is an engineered landfill with dual liners and leachate
        collection and treatment system, monitoring wells, and a separate hazardous waste disposal cell
        with its own leachate collection system. The landfill has ample capacity to receive and dispose
        of asbestos and CDW waste. At 1O,OOOt/y it has a lifespan of about 30 years.
    •   The project will facilitate the provision of water and sanitation services, which may include
        some septic tanks and soak pits. There will be minor excavation for new concrete pad footings
        and septic ·tanks and soak pits. Some of the excavated material will be reused in constructing
        soak pits, with the remainder spread in gardens or used in pothole filling or road construction.
        All construction material for housing will be sourced locally, from Tongatapu, or imported from
        overseas.
    •   All groundwater on the islands is saline and contaminated and is not fit for drinking or cooking.
        The islanders use rainwater or bottled water for drinking and cooking purposes. Tap water is
        used for bathing, cleaning and flushing toilets. Since the project does not involve heavy
        construction and civil works requiring lot of water, there adequate non-potable water supply
        readily available for construction use, except in condition of draught when pumping of the
        groundwater aquifer may be restricted.

    The likely social safeguard issues relate primarily to issues around ensuring land is available for the
    reconstruction of housing. As outlined above, it is expected that in most cases, houses will be
    constructed or repaired on the same allotment. At the time of appraisal, the situation in terms of land
    availability is as follows:

    •   Approximately 80% of lands have clear land title in favor of the beneficiaries.
    •   For the remaining approximately 20% of beneficiaries, some owners are absent, cannot be
        identified or contacted, and others have no formal or informal occupancy arrangements. In the
        Tongan context, where communal and/or familial sharing of land assets underpins much of the
        traditional land management arrangements, this is common. The Ministry of Lands,
        Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources (MLECCNR) is working to achieve a
        level of certainty for all beneficiaries by identifying the formal title holders and to confirm that
        the beneficiaries have consent to remain on the allotment and construct a replacement house and
        basic services on the land.
    •   If identified informal arrangements are disputed by the registered title holder and consent is not
        granted to reconstruct on the land, the GoT will consider other measures which will provide a
        security of occupancy to the beneficiary in accordance with the process defined by the
        Resettlement Policy Framework.
    •   The Act of Constitution ofTonga Clause 109 Beach Frontage includes a 17 meter (50 feet)
        foreshore building line from the high-water mark to establish a foreshore protection area. Some
        of the houses damaged by TCI are located within this protection area. Where land is available on
        the same allotment, the replacement houses will be located on that part of the allotment setback
        from the foreshore building line. In the event that land outside the protection area is not
        available on the allotment, the GoT will consider other measures to identify land and to provide
        a security of occupancy to the beneficiary in accordance with the process defined by the
        Resettlement Policy Framework.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The construction of housing, improved water supply and sanitation services, repairs to damaged housing
and retrofitting of undamaged housing, the removal and safe disposal of asbestos products and CDW,
and institutional strengthening, will all have net positive environmental, health and social benefits for
the residents of the affected Ha' apai Islands.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Given that this is an emergency project in response to a natural disaster, options available to reduce
social and environmental impacts are limited. The two exceptions are: (i) disposal of asbestos and CDW,
and (ii) the location of any housing outside existing allotments, if required.

After considering options for establishing a landfill in the Ha'apai Group, the Government of Tonga
decided to utilize the existing engineered landfill in Tongatapu to receive asbestos and CDW under this
project. This will minimize any negative environmental impacts from disposal, and is consistent with the
current GoT preferences. Measures to minimize the impacts from disposal of asbestos and CDW are
presented in the agreed Environmental Management Plan.
The likelihood of land for housing outside existing allotments be required is considered to be very low.
Notwithstanding this, if land is required, alternative sites will be identified as assessed based on the
requirements of the agreed Resettlement Policy Framework.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will be implemented by the Mol through the Transport Sector Consolidation Project Support
Team (PST). The PST is implementing the World Bank and Australian Aid funded Transport Sector
Consolidation Project and has gained experience and developed competencies to address safeguard
policy issues. A dedicated Project Management Unit will be established in Ha'apai for on the ground
implementation. The project will provide funds for social and environmental safeguards support and
oversight, including funds for a suitable qualified individual who will be appointment to be based in the
PMU in Ha'apai by the commencement of project implementation.

During preparation of the project, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed both in-country and in Infoshop on April 14, 2014. The
EMP covers mitigation measures to minimize the impacts from ,the construction of housing units, water
supply and sanitation ~sociated with the new houses and existing infrastructure, and the removal of
asbestos and COW. The document also covers the cumulative impacts from other donors and projects on
the environment, provides details on the Tapuhia Landfill in Tongatapu, and suggested monitoring
actions of the key construction/recovery issues. The EMP also provides links to the World Bank Group
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines and the World Bank Group 2009 Guidance Note on
Asbestos Management.

The RPF establishes the principles, objectives, procedures and rules to be used in the preparation
abbreviated resettlement action plans (ARAP), as well as identifying risks and associated impacts and
adopted approach of resettlement under the project. It is expected the borrower will take all necessary
measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate for adverse social impacts, including, but not
limited to, those impacts associated with involuntary resettlement. Every viable alternative project
design should be explored to avoid, where feasible, or minimize involuntary resettlement. If involuntary
resettlement cannot be avoided altogether, sufficient resources will be made available to implement
resettlement activities as sustainable development programs, in close consultation with displaced
persons.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Given the nature of the project as an emergency response, consultations have taken place and will
continue to take place to e~sure that project affected people participate actively in the project activities.
During project preparation a series of consultations with various groups of stakeholders including the
project affected people were undertaken. The preparation of safeguards instruments were part of the
consultations. Results of the ongoing consultations process will be captured in a Stakeholders'
engagement plan to be developed during implementation to guide Mol's engagement with beneficiaries
throughout the entire project, and incorporated into the Operational Manual and safeguards instruments
as needed. The revised EMP and RPF were disclosed in Infoshop on April14, 2014 and in-country on
May 8, 2014.

During implementation, additional information about the project will be disseminated by Town
Committees established under the project via public media in accordance with the project
Communications Plan. Intended beneficiaries and communities will be further consulted and engaged in
community meetings to discuss planning and implementation of the provision of houses, repair of
  damaged homes, and in planning works related to public facilities by the Town Committees. There will
  be a comments and complaints process (see below) through the Governor's office in Pangai, Lifuka
  Island.

  Furthermore, consultation will be carried out during implementation once the preliminary assessment of
  the volume of wastes and an assessment of suitability of sites have been completed to include the
  identification of suitable temporary site(s) on Lifuka and/or Foa islands for the temporary storage of
  asbestos waste and CDW where it cannot be re-used, prior to transport and end disposal in Tapuhia
  landfill in Tongatapu. This will involve consultations with the residents of Lifuka and Foa Islands and
  involvement of the Ministry of Health, Mol, MLECCNR.



  B. Disclosure Requirements

  Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       April14, 2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    April 14, 2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
  EA to the Executive Directors
  "In country" Disclosure                                                            May 8, 2014
  Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       April 14, 2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    April 14, 2014
  "In country" Disclosure                                                      I      May 8, 2014
  Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                            N/A
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                         N/A
  "In country" Disclosure
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
  respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




. C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
  OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]        No [ 1      NA [ ]
  OPIBP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ ]      No [ ]      NA [X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                                                           '
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/ policy framework/process Yes [X]          No [ 1            NA [ ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X]       No [ ]            NA [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]           No [ 1            NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X]         No [ 1            NA [ ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ X 1     No [      ]       NA [    ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X 1      No [ ]            NA [ ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [X 1      No [      ]       NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed w ith       Yes [ X ]     No [ ]            NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Christopher R. Bennett
Approved By:
                                                         d /J           A                         I
Region~(   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leona~z;,/G-M.M {                Date:   1Y: (o <f:( 1- & Jl.--)
Sector Manager:                 Name: James Reichert       \                Date: 16 April 20 14
