                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/4/2014                                       Report No.: 86714
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P064836                 Original Project Name: TN-Urban Water
                                             Supply
Country: Tunisia                             Project ID: P150033
Project Name: Additional Financing for Urban Water Supply Project
Task Team Leader: Philippe Marin
Co-Task Team Leader: Esther Loening
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2014      Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2014
Managing Unit: MNSWA                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Water supply (100%)
Theme: Other urban development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            27.5
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Additional Financing operation aims to sustain the quality of water service
in Greater Tunis and cities in the Eastern Coastal area, and enhance the operational
efficiency and customer management systems of SONEDE.

3. Project Description

The proposed additional loan would finance additional activities under the existing
Components One, Two and Three of the Project. These activities are: (ii) the
reinforcement of the existing water treatment plant of Greater Tunis, with the 1 m3/s
extension of treatment facility #4 (ST4) which was built under the original Project, and
the rehabilitation of the older treatment facilities (ST1, ST2 and ST3), (ii) the
rehabilitation of the Belli water treatment plant located close to Tunis, serving areas of
the Eastern coast at risk of water shortage in the short to medium term, (iii) replacement
of 70,000 customer meters. These activities for the most part close a financing gap due to
underestimates of the incremental water supply capacity needs to meet the project
development objective, and in particular the extension of the ST4 treatment facility
already financed by the Project and which is urgently needed. The total number of
beneficiaries from the AF is estimated at about 5 million (1.6 million connected
households) or 50% of the Tunisian population.

Details of the proposed activities are provided below:
Under Component 1 - Improvements to the Greater Tunis water supply system:
New component 1.a: Extension of capacity of the new ST4 treatment facility of the
Ghdir-El-Gollah plant in Greater Tunis by an additional 1 m3/s (US$11 million). This
activity will finance the urgent capacity extension of the recently completed ST4 water
treatment plant, from the current 2 m3/s to 3 m3/s. This higher capacity had been
considered in 2005 as one technical alternative for the Project, but it was decided at
appraisal to phase investments, reducing ST4 capacity from 3 m3/s (to satisfy year 2032
demand) to 2m3/s (to satisfy the demand then forecasted for 2022) due to the importance
of investments costs (ST4 modular design envisaged integration of the additional 1m3/sec
treatment module only ca. 2024). With demand pressures growing faster than the scenario
used at design, SONEDE is urged to carry out this 1 m3/s extension as soon as possible to
avoid water shortages as early as 2017.
New component 1.b: Rehabilitation of the other water treatment facilities of Greater
Tunis water treatment plant (US$7.4 million). The Ghdir-El-Gollah plant has been
producing all potable water to supply the Greater Tunis area since the 1970s. Its three
older treatment facilities (ST1, ST2, ST3, with a total capacity of 5.5 m3/s), require
urgent rehabilitation and upgrading works to avoid service interruptions and improve
treatment processes, to better control energy costs and treatment costs.
Under Component 2 - Improvements to water supply systems in other urban centers:
Rehabilitation of the Belli water complex (US$4.4 million). The Belli water treatment
complex, located in the South-East of Greater Tunis, produces potable water coming
from the Medjerda-Cap Bon canal that is then transferred to several large cities on the
Eastern coast, including Nabeul, Monastir, Sousse, and Sfax. The infrastructure started
operations in 1984 and also requires urgent rehabilitation/upgrade to avoid service
interruptions in upcoming years.
Under Component 3 - Management capacity building:
Replacement of 70,000 customer meters (US$3.0 million). Due to its recent difficult
financial situation, SONEDE reduced its rate of meter replacement, and many meters are
currently broken or under-performing (under-metering). A large program to replace
malfunctioning meters was launched in 2013 with support from donors. The replacement
of 340,000 meters is currently being financed by AFD. The proposed purchase and
replacement of an additional 70,000 meters will thus complement ongoing efforts. It will
directly improve SONEDE’s revenues, overall financial sustainability, and have a
positive impact on water conservation.
                   Table: Summary of Project and AF activities
Component                            Original activities               Activities under AF
Component 1:               Expansion of treatment and storage       1. a Extension of capacity of the
Improvements to the        capacity at Tunis’s Ghdir-el-Gollah      new ST4 treatment facility of the
Greater Tunis water        water treatment plant (construction of   Ghdir-El-Gollah water treatment
supply system              ST4 treatment facility)                  plant by 1 m3/s
                           Rehabilitation of transmission line      1. b Rehabilitation of the other
                           from Ghdir-el-Gollah water treatment     water treatment facilities of
                           plant to Ras Tabia storage tank          Ghdir-El-Gollah water treatment
                                                                    plant
                           Augmentation of storage, pumping and
                           distribution capacities in peripheral
                           subsystems (Mornag, Bir-el-Kassa, La
                           Gazelle, Borj Touil)
                           New – under revised procurement plan
                           (2013): Reinforcement of power
                           supply at Greater Tunis water
                           treatment plant
                           New – under revised procurement plan
                           (2013): Replacement of raw water
                           intake pumps
Component 2:               Upgrades in SONEDE’s northern and        Rehabilitation of the Belli water
Improvements to water      central operating regions (storage,      complex
supply systems in other    transmission, distribution)
urban centers
Component 3:               a. Corporate plan and organizational
Management capacity        audit
building
                           b. Financial model
                           c. Customer Service information          Replacement of 70,000 meters to
                           system to improve, inter alia, billing   facilitate billing
                           efficiency
                           d. Human Resources management
                           system
                           New – under revised procurement plan
                           (2013): Acquisition on rolling
                           equipment for network repairs


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The AF will be implemented in Greater Tunis and Belli which are serving areas of the
Eastern coast at risk of service interruptions in the short to medium term if additional
quantity of water is not treated for potable use immediately. Investments under the AF
will not trigger OP 4.12 since these will not require the taking of land or land use.

The water utility SONEDE provides universal service in its service areas. In terms of
access, as SONEDE provides universal access in all its service areas (100% coverage
through individual connections), the targeted areas supported by the AF –which includes
also poor families living in urban, peri-urban and some rural areas— will consequently
benefit from the new investments. In terms of affordability, the poverty diagnostic to be
conducted as part of the financial sustainability study that will be carried out in parallel
(including household surveys) will assist SONEDE in developing a progressive tariff
structure better targeted to the poor, if need be.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna, Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Specialist MNSEE
Mr John Butler, Lead Social Development Specialist, ECSOQ (during preparation)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The AF does not involve significant changes from the original Project and there are no
new environmental impacts associated with this additional loan and hence no new
safeguard issues arise. This additional financing does not involve resettlement /
displacement of people, houses or production entity. No risk to income or livelihood is
foreseen and the AF does not contribute to create or intensify poverty or vulnerability.
The components of the additional financing consists of the rehabilitation of two water
treatments plants belonging to SONEDE, and the purchase and installation of 70,000
water meters. As the treatment plants are within the existing public land which belongs to
SONEDE (intramuros) and there is no extension beyond the existing facilities, the AF
does not trigger the Resettlement Policy OP 4.12.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
n.a.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n.a.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

All the new investments to be financed will be subject to Operational Policy
Environmental Impact Assessment (OP 4.01). The Environmental Assessment (EA)
which was commissioned by the Government in 2005 remains in general valid for the
proposed AF and is being updated. The updated version will be re-disclosed in Tunisia
and the Bank’s InfoShop before appraisal. The revised EA will incorporate the provisions
of the new national legislation on EIA, and precise recommendations for limiting the
impacts during execution of the works and for the process to manage and dispose of the
sludge produced during treatment (mainly for Belli water complex). It will also include
specific environmental management plans and monitoring plans indicating the mitigating
and monitoring measures, responsible parties and timing. SONEDE’s institutional and
organizational capacities for supervision and implementation of the project's
environmental safeguards should also be reinforced to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the revised EA. This will include a training session for SONEDE staff on
OP 4.01 and Bank safeguards in general.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The draft updated EA has been elaborated, a national consultation workshop was held on
April 3, 2014, and the EA was finalized and disclosed in Tunisia on April 4, 2014 on the
website of SONEDE.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       April 3
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   April 4
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    April 4
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Updated
                                                                               2005 EA
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       April 4
Infoshop?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       April 4
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?

This additional financing will follow the same institutional set-up that has
been used for the implementation of the original Project. A calendar and
budget to ensure adequate implementation of safeguards will be determined
within the updated EA before appraisal and subsequently updated in the
Operational Manual.

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?
Yes

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
policies?
Yes, since 2006, quarterly implementation progress reports submitted by
SONEDE (original Project) include a dedicated section and a dedicated
Annex on safeguard implementation. This format will be revised to ensure
enhanced safeguard monitoring during the AF implementation.

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

This additional financing will follow the same institutional arrangements as
those put in place under the original Project. SONEDE operational staff is
considered adequate for the purpose of monitoring safeguards during
implementation and this function will be supervised by the Project PIU for
the specific new proposed investments in Greater Tunis and Belli. In
addition, further reinforcement of this staff’s safeguards skills will be
provided at the outset through training on environment safeguards in French
language in Tunis. Annual supervision visits by both the environment and
social safeguards Bank staff assigned to the project will also be conducted to
ensure that any changes during implementation does not lead to inadvertent
triggering of OP 4.12 and to monitor both the maintenance of the grievance
redress mechanism handling any complaints as well as any consultation and
disclosure on social issues that may occur in the future.
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Philippe Marin
Co-Task Team Leader:                Esther Loening                                  3/26/14
Environmental Specialist:           Taoufiq Bennouna                                 4/4/14
Social Development Specialist       John Butler (during preparation) A Social       3/26/14
                                    Development Specialist will later be assigned
                                    to the TT for the implementation phase
Additional Environmental and/or     Sherif Arif
Social Development Specialist(s):   Nina Bhatt

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Steven N. Schonberger                        4/7/14
  Comments:
