                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/03/2014                                      Report No.: 92991
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Turkey                              Project ID: P148858
Project Name: Long Term Finance Guarantee
Task Team Leader: Ilias Skamnelos
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12,       Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2015
2014
Managing Unit: GFMDR                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Banking (50%);SME Finance (50%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%);Other Financial Sector
Development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         IBRD Guarantee                                             400.00
                                                                    400.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to longer term finance
for micro, small and medium enterprises and export oriented enterprises.

3. Project Description
A single component will utilize estimated market finance to Halkbank of USD500
million for extending sub-loans to MSMEs and EOEs. Halkbank will utilize the total
volume raised to extend directly sub-loans to the final beneficiaries of the project.

For the purpose of this project, MSMEs will be defined as firms employing fewer than
250 people, and EOEs as exporting firms employing fewer than 1,000 people. The
definition of exports will follow the national account definition, and an EOE's exports
will have to constitute at least 10 percent of its annual sales.

At least 60 percent of the Guaranteed Loan will be used to fund MSMEs. Although micro
enterprises will be supported by the project, it is expected that the majority of the sub-
loans will be to small and medium enterprises. At least 15 percent of the market finance
raised and allocated for MSME sub-loans, shall be utilized for MSME sub-projects in
underserved Priority Regions. There will be no sectoral restrictions, and financing will be
extended on market terms to avoid any distortion.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Halkbank will provide loans to MSMEs and EOEs throughout Turkey, so the project
locations are unclear at this moment.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
   Ms Esra Arikan (GENDR)

 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered?         Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental         Yes                The Environmental Category of the project is FI, as all the
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    investments under the project will not be identified until
                                          project implementation. Environmental assessments for the
                                          sub-projects will be carried out by Halkbank in accordance
                                          with both the Government of Turkey Environmental
                                          Assessment (Regulation on Environmental Impact
                                          Assessment, from the Ministry of Environment and
                                          Urbanization-MoEU) and the World Bank EA (OP 4.01)
                                          requirements. Due to the nature of the project it is expected
                                          to receive working capital applications or investment loan
                                          applications which will include machinery
                                          purchase/replacement or small scale construction works.
                                          Therefore, it is expected that there will be no large scale
                                          significant and/or irreversible impacts. Sub-projects in
                                          environmental Category A will not be eligible for funding.
                                          The environmental assessment (including environmental
                                          due diligence) procedures will be conducted according to
                                          the environmental review framework which will be
                                          prepared by Halk Bank and approved by the World Bank.

                                          The environmental review framework also includes
                                          evaluation forms for assessing the environmental due-
                                          diligence of the existing facilities which will be applying
                                          for guarantee operation. The framework provides guidance
                                          for additional requirements if the application includes
                                          activities which will then lead to a classification of
                                          'Category B' of the sub-projects. The framework also
                                          includes a methodology for 'implementation support
                                          missions'. It is expected to have a prior review for an initial
                                          set of projects whereby WB will review all safeguard
                                          documentation, and then it is planned to have a sampling
                                          system where WB's environmental and social safeguard
                                          specialists will conduct site visits and safeguard
                                          documentation assessment for randomly selected sub-
                                          projects.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP No
 4.04
 Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
 Pest Management OP       No
 4.09
 Physical Cultural        No
 Resources OP/BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples       No
 OP/BP 4.10
 Involuntary              No              Land acquisition is not eligible under the proposed project
 Resettlement OP/BP                       so OP 4.12 is not triggered.
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
 4.37
 Projects on International No             Since the policy on international waterways is not triggered,
 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     there is a positive list of watersheds in Turkey in the
                                          framework which will guide Halkbank for the eligible
                                          locations of the actions. The waterways identified as NOT
                                          an international waterway (do not trigger OP 7.50) in
                                          Turkey are as follows: Susurluk, North Aegean, Gediz,
                                          Kuçuk Menderes, Buyuk Menderes, Western
                                          Mediterranean, Antalya, Sakarya, Western Black Sea,
                                          Yesilirmak, Kizilirmak, Konya Kapali, Eastern
                                          Mediterranean, Seyhan, Ceyhan, Eastern Black Sea,
                                          Burdur, Afyon, Orta Anadolu, and Van.
 Projects in Disputed     No
 Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is subject to environmental assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The
Environmental Category of the project is FI, as all the investments under the project will
not be identified until project implementation. Environmental issues of sub-borrowers
and their sub-projects will be addressed through the sub-loan environmental eligibility
assessments. Environmental assessments will be carried out in accordance with both
Government of Turkey Regulation on Environmental Impact Assessment and World
Bank EA (OP 4.01) requirements. National laws and regulations under environmental
law will also be monitored while conducting the due-diligence studies for the existing
facilities applying for sub-loans. No large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts
are anticipated within the scope of the project. Sub-projects in environmental category A
will not be eligible for funding. The procedures and institutional responsibilities are all
delineated in the Environmental Review Procedures Documents of each borrower. The
project may include small scale construction works related to buildings renovation and
construction. The possible environmental impacts associated with these small scale
rehabilitation or reconstruction works are minor, short-term and mainly during the
construction phase (including temporary emissions of particulate matter/dust to the air,
noise pollutions, etc.).

Any sub-loan applicant will apply to HalkBank for financing after all the necessary
environmental clearance is obtained from Turkish environmental authorities. Then it is
the responsibility of HalkBank to make the World Bank screening to the sub-projects. In
order for the World Bank to fulfill its fiduciary responsibilities, for the first five sub-sub-
project applications submitted to HalkBank, they will provide information on the sub-
project to the WB for "prior review", together with its proposed classification of the sub-
project (Category B or C) and the advice it proposes to give to the sub-borrower
regarding additional actions needed to fulfill World Bank requirements as detailed in this
Operational Manual. Following this "pilot" period, if the Halk Bank and the World Bank
agree, the World Bank will change to spot checking the screening and environmental
review process on a "post review" basis. Implementation of environmental procedures as
defined for Category B and C sub-projects above is the responsibility of Halk Bank as the
FI. Regarding the monitoring issues, HalkBank will monitor the sub-project
implementation to assure that all conditions specified in the granting of the approvals are
being followed. Environmental evaluations and review procedures will be subject to ad
hoc post review by World Bank supervision missions. The World Bank will have the
authority to review and post review all sub-projects.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:
This will be evaluated in individual sub-loan environmental documents as needed.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.
This will be evaluated in individual sub-loan environmental documents as needed.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
As part of the Operations Manual, the borrower HalkBank has prepared the
Environmental Review Procedures which serve as the Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) and define the environmental assessment procedures for the project.
According to the EMF, sub-loan applicants will be required to carry out an environmental
screening, due-diligence (for the existing facilities) and assessment of the proposed
subprojects according to the World Bank safeguards procedures and to obtain
environmental permits as prescribed by national legislation.

Halk Bank will be responsible for the quality assurance of these environmental
documents and monitoring of the sub-projects. In this regard, Halk Bank has been found
successful during the implementation of the previous SME credit line operations, and by
it is highly recommended that they sustaining their staff responsible for environmental
safeguards compliance and continue receiving guidance from WB on environmental
safeguard issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The environmental review/management framework (EMF) document has been prepared
and disclosed in country in Turkish and in English through the website of Halk Bank. In
case sub-loan applications are categorized as 'B' and public consultation is necessary,
these will be conducted while the sub-project EMPs are being prepared.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  24-Nov-2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              24-Nov-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               26-Nov-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why:
 An Environmental Review Procedures document (Environmental Review Framework) was
prepared by Halkbank and was disclosed on its website on 24 November, 2014, followed
by InfoShop disclosure on 26 November, 2014.
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ilias Skamnelos                            12/3/14
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esra Arikan                                12/4/14
Social Development Specialist       Ms Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler                 12/4/14
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Aurora Ferrari                             12/4/14
  Comments:
