                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC7073


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/28/2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Turkey                           Project ID: P148858
Project Name: Long Term Finance Guarantee
Task Team Leader: Ilias Skamnelos
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24,     Estimated Board Date: February 10, 2015
2014
Managing Unit: GFMDR                      Lending Instrument:
Sector: Banking (50%);SME Finance (50%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%);Other Financial Sector
Development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    0.00
        IBRD Guarantee                                           400.00
                                                                 400.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to medium and long term
finance for exporters and small and medium enterprises.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed instrument is a US$400 million IBRD Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) to Halkbank
that could allow raising at least US$500 million in a 7-12 year structure from the international
markets. Based on World Bank market soundings through October 2013, the PCG, indemnified
by the Turkish government, will help raise over US$500 million in a 7-12 year structure,
mobilizing resources beyond the IBRD guarantee while achieving a longer tenor and reduced all-
in cost for Halkbank. Halkbank is rated by Fitch (BBB-), Moody's (Baa3) and Standard & Poor's
(BB+). Currently, Halkbank has little to no access to commercial lending beyond a 1-year
maturity on a clean or unenhanced basis. It has access to the capital market for longer term
borrowing, however, any bond issuance under the prevailing conditions would require
unattractively high yields.
 Halkbank will utilize the total volume raised to extend sub-loans to private exporters and
SMEs, the final beneficiaries of the project. For the purpose of this project, and in line with
Government policy: (i) an exporter will be defined as an entity that exports according to the
definition of exports used in the national accounts; and (ii) an SME will be defined as a firm
employing fewer than 250 people and having annual turnover of less than TL 40 million.
Halkbank will assume the credit risk of the sub-borrowers who will be selected based on agreed
upon selection criteria. Credit will be extended on market terms to avoid any distortion.

 Leveraging the private sector will achieve a higher volume of funding, consequently helping to
reach a higher number of exporters and SMEs. The ultimate beneficiaries will benefit by longer
maturity at market rates, while the all-in cost for Halkbank will be at a level that does not
adversely affect its cost recovery over time. Moreover, the proposed transaction has the potential
to enhance Halkbank's financing base and diversify its funding sources. The completion of a
PCG transaction could also, over time, lead lenders to stretch uncovered loans to maturities
previously not considered, benefiting the banking sector and enterprises overall.

 Halkbank was selected for its experience with SMEs and the World Bank Halkbank, a public
sector bank with a lending portfolio of over US$30 billion, has extensive experience in offering
credit to SMEs in all regions of Turkey, thanks to a strong branch presence and a historic focus
on the SME sector. Additional criteria for selecting Halkbank include the bank's financial
soundness, performance of its credit portfolio, and its good performance as one of the Borrowers
in the recently closed SME I credit line project (P082822) financed by the World Bank.

D. Project location (if known)
Halkbank will provide loans to exporters and SMEs throughout Turkey, so the project locations
are unclear at this moment.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Halkbank has worked with the World Bank projects as a FI bank for several years and has
developed a good capacity regarding safeguards. Halkbank is experienced in screening and
evaluating the sub-projects regarding environmental safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Esra Arikan (GENDR)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The Environmental Category of the project is FI, as all the investments under the project will
not be identified until project implementation. Environmental assessments for the sub-projects
will be carried out by Halkbank in accordance with both the Government of Turkey
Environmental Assessment (Regulation on Environmental Impact Assessment, from the Ministry
of Environment and Urbanization-MoEU) and the World Bank EA (OP 4.01) requirements. Due
to the nature of the project it is expected to receive working capital applications or investment
loan applications which will include machinery purchase/replacement or small scale construction
works . Therefore, it is expected that there will be no large scale significant and/or irreversible
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No        TBD
impacts. Sub-projects in environmental Category A will not be eligible for funding. The
environmental assessment (including environmental due diligence) procedures will be conducted
according to the environmental review framework which will be prepared by Halkbank and
approved by the World Bank.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    Land acquisition is not eligible under the proposed project so OP 4.12 is not triggerred
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    Halkbank will do a screening for the sub-projects to make sure that the investments (if
related to water sources) are located in the basins which are listed as national waterways
(positive list of basins of Turkey).
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/15/2014

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Halkbank will prepare an Operational Manual which will include the environmental review
   procedures and implementation arrangements under this project. Environmental Review
   section will be shared with the World Bank and, after consent, the plan will be translated to
   Turkish and will be disclosed in Halkbank's web site.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Ilias Skamnelos   08/27/2014
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Agnes I. Kiss     08/27/2014
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Aurora Ferrari    08/27/2014
   Comments:
