                                                                                  85811
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Date prepared/updated: February 10, 2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Uganda                                  Project ID: P133318
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: IDA Guarantee for Renewable Energy Development Program
Task Team Leader: Raihan Elahi
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 2014       Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTG1                             Lending Instrument: IDA Guarantee
Sector: Hydropower (85%), Other Renewable Energy (15%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):            160.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [ ]                   No [X]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes [ ]      No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The Program Development Objective is to increase electricity generation capacity of
Uganda through renewable energy based small private power producers (SPPPs).

3. Project Description:
Project Components

This World Bank program will support a number of individual SPPP projects under the
Renewable Energy Development Program in the Republic of Uganda. The total capacity
of SPPP projects that could be supported under this proposed program is capped at 150
MW and the renewable energy technologies that could benefit from World Bank support
are all the technologies supported under Uganda’s REFiT framework and in addition
solar PV generation SPPPs, whose maximum capacity does not exceed 20MW per
project. The World Bank support to those projects will be availed in form of a series of
PRGs up to a cumulative Guarantee amount of US$160 million. This series of PRGs
represents the only component under this project and the details of the proposed PRG
instruments are described in the following section.
The SPPPs that would be supported under the proposed program are at different stages of
preparation. The Bank has reviewed a first batch of twelve hydropower projects that
requested IDA PRG support. After initial screening, the Bank visited eight hydropower
project sites to assess the readiness of the projects using the Bank’s eligibility criteria.
Accordingly, three projects have been selected as the first projects to benefit from the
IDA PRGs following further appraisal. These projects are: (i) Nyamwamba Small
Hydropower Plant (9.2 MW), (ii) Lubilia Small Hydropower Plant (5.4 MW), and (iii)
Rwimi I Small Hydropower Plant (5.5 MW). The details of the Bank’s appraisal of those
three initial projects are summarized in Section IV below.

For the selection of additional SPPPs (following those initial three projects) a suitable
implementation mechanism has been considered to minimize transaction costs for the
sponsors, the Bank and GoU. As part of this effort, the Bank and the GET FiT Secretariat
have aligned their project selection methodology. Each process is individually described
in Annex 4 as is the mechanism for how the processes will work together. The Bank and
the legal entities supporting the GET FiT Secretariat have entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) reflecting the agreements on cooperation and sharing of
information. The key parameters of the Bank’s proposed future selection process are
summarized below.

KfW, as GoU representative to govern the GET FiT program, has appointed a consultant
to staff and manage the GET FiT Secretariat. The major responsibilities of the GET FiT
Secretariat are as follows: (a) Day-to-day management of the GET FiT Secretariat; (b)
Preparation and implementation of up to two additional Request for Proposal Rounds
under the GET FiT Program, including organization and management of Investment
Committee meetings and contract negotiations with selected projects; (c) Detailed
technical, financial/economic, environmental/social and legal appraisal of Renewable
Energy projects applying for the GET FiT premium payment; (d) Supervision of
construction of projects supported by GET FiT Program along with managing the
disbursement of GET FiT funds; and (e) Preparation of relevant project reports to GoU,
and development partners supporting the GET FiT Program.

The eligibility criteria of the GET FiT Program and IDA PRG Program are similar. The
GET FiT Program follows a quantitative selection process with a pass/fail judgment on
legal issues, whereas, the Bank follows a qualitative review process. It is expected that in
most cases both processes would select the same projects. The Bank and GET FiT
Secretariat will therefore, align their evaluation process. The Bank will use the
information collected by the Secretariat to carry out its appraisal of the projects. This
scheme was tried in the first batch of RFP process and was found effective. In that
connection, it will increase efficiency in managing several players working for the same
objective. However, while the Bank will receive relevant appraisal information from the
GET FiT Secretariat and will also receive the GET FiT’s Semiannual Supervision
Reports, the Bank will remain responsible for the appraisal of projects and the
determination of eligibility for IDA PRGs. The Bank may also contact the sponsors
directly to supplement the appraisal when required.



                                             2
While the above methodology would work well for projects that would apply for both
GET FiT premium and IDA PRG, there could be SPPPs which would only apply for one
instrument. In case, a sponsor only applies for the GET FiT premium, then GET FiT
Secretariat shall carry out their evaluation process as usual and will not be required to
submit its appraisal information to the Bank. In cases when a sponsor only wants to apply
for the IDA PRG support and not the GET FiT premium, then the sponsor will have to
contact the Bank directly and the Bank will complete its own due diligence and appraisal
of such projects.

The proposed IDA PRG program’s eligibility criteria are a part of this proposal for which
explicit Board approval is being sought.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the assessment of
environmental and social risks and impacts:

The proposed IDA Guarantee program is being prepared for a pipeline of small
renewable energy projects in compliance with the new Operational Policy (OP) and Bank
Procedure (BP) 4.03, Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities, as the projects
in the pipeline are designed, owned, constructed and/or operated by a Private Entity.
While the projects are at different stages of preparation, preliminary assessment of the
projects do not indicate any major dislocation of communities and/or loss of livelihood.
Issues common to the first three projects include access road to the weir and power house
sites, and high expectation of project affected villages to receive electricity. After
physically visiting the proposed project sites, meeting with the sponsors or their
representatives, talking with some of the project affected people to understand the level
of consultation that has taken place about the project, and reviewing the feasibility study
documents the team decided to appraise the following three projects for Board
presentation as the first phase of the proposed IDA Guarantee program, as they were
considered to have least level of the above stated challenges.

Nyamwamba Small Hydropower Plant (NSHP): The proposed Nyamwamba Small
Hydropower Plant (NSHP) with an installed capacity of 9.2 MW, is located in the
township of Kilembe in South-West Uganda on the Nyamwamba River approximately 60
km south-southeast of Fort Portal and some 270 km West of Kampala. Kilembe is located
on the lower slopes of the Ruwenzori Mountains and east of the Ruwenzori Mountains
National Park. The project site is located on modified habitat with the proposed
alignment of the headrace canal on cultivated land on the steep valley slope and the
construction of the diversion weir, penstock and powerhouse on the valley floor in the
town of Kilembe.

Lubilia Small Hydropower Plant (LSHP): The proposed Lubilia Small Hydropower
Project (LSHP) is a 5.4 MW run of the river hydropower facility located on River Lubilia
close to the village of Busyangwa in the Kasese District of Western Region in Uganda.
The site is located 6.5 kilometers north of Bwera town. The weir at the selected location
will have a maximum height of 4 meters and a conventional drop type intake
arrangement. The channel intake controls and allows water from the pool at the weir to
the channel. The 2,250 meter long headrace canal conveying water from the stream will

                                            3
lie on the left bank of the stream; it will take the power water up to the reinforced
concrete fore-bay tank located at the end of the canal. The water will spill into a spill
chamber located 500 meter before the fore-bay. This shall dissipate most of the energy in
the spill water. The penstock will comprise of welded steel pipes approximately 780
meter, and laid generally above ground surface in a combination of buried pipe and above
ground pipes. The section from 380 meter to 750 meter will comprise of buried
penstocks. The penstock shall be a single pipe with diameters varying from 1.2 meter
down to 0.9 meter, and then shall bifurcate 42 meter before the powerhouse to two pipes
of Diameter 0.7 meter each, to individually feed the two Francis/Pelton type turbines.

Rwimi Small Hydropower Plant (RSHP): The proposed Rwimi Small Hydropower
project will be a 6 MW run of river scheme. The plant expects to add 24.8 GWh annually
to the Ugandan National Grid. A diversion dam, 42 meters long and 14.5 meter high, will
be constructed about 4 km up-stream from the Road Bridge over Kasase - Port Portal
main highway. The intake will be located at the right abutment of the weir. The water
conveyance works comprise with a 1,800 meter long low-pressure pipeline, a surge tank,
and a 1,200 meter long penstock. The powerhouse will be configured to accommodate
two 3 MW generating units along with the associated electro-mechanical equipment.
After passing through two Francis turbines, the water will be discharged back into the
Rwimi River. The 6MW power generated at 6.3kV at Rwimi I Small Hydropower Project
will be stepped up to 33kV by unit step up transformers and will be connected to the
National Grid through a 750 meter long 33kV transmission line. The civil works of the
project will be completed in about 20 months and require a projected work force of 215
people; the operational phase will require a workforce of 19 people.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Yasmin Tayyab, AFTCS
Martin Fodor, AFTN3

6. Applicable Performance Standards                            Yes            No
PS 1: Assessment and Management of                              X
Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                              X
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention              X
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                    X
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary                          X
Resettlement
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                 X
Management of Living Natural Resources
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                       X
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                         X

7. If PS 1 and PS 2 are NOT applicable, provide a brief explanation why:



                                           4
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
The proposed IDA Guarantee program is prepared for a pipeline of projects to comply
with the new Operational Policy (OP) and Bank Procedure (BP) 4.03; Performance
Standards for Private Sector Activities as the projects in the pipeline are designed,
owned, constructed and/or operated by a Private Entity in lieu of the World Bank’s
safeguard policies. The aim is to facilitate Bank support for private sector-led projects by
applying environmental and social policy standards that are better suited to the private
sector.
While the projects are at different stages of preparation, preliminary assessment of the
projects do not indicate any major dislocation of communities and/or loss of livelihood
and services, there will be minor loss of land and relocation of few homes in the three
sub-projects requiring Livelihood Restoration and Abbreviated Resettlement Action
Plans. The major common challenges faced by the first three projects are: access road to
the weir and power house site, and the high expectation of sub-project affected villages
for provision of electricity, additional schools, markets and roads despite the fact that
none of the communities will receive power directly from the projects. All three projects’
construction trigger PS 1 & 5, in response ESIAs, Environmental & Social Action Plans
(ESAP), Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRP) and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans
are being updated by the sponsors.
The Bank is coordinating closely with the government and other development partners
who are supporting the same set of private sector sponsors in order to streamline
information sharing and due diligence work for the different projects. The GETFiT
Secretariat has been equipped with significant project preparation/appraisal expertise in
line with the need to satisfy requirements of existing funders of the GETFiT premium
(which includes the EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund, German Development
Cooperation, the Kingdom of Norway, UK Department for International Development
and the International Climate Fund (ICF).
KfW, as GoU representative to govern the GETFiT program, has appointed Norplan to
house the GETFiT Secretariat. GETFiT Secretariat is following World Bank Performance
Standards to review safeguards standards of the projects. The GETFiT Secretariat has
shared its evaluation report template with the Bank for its review and input, the template
has been updated to the Bank’s satisfaction. This will ensure that GETFiT Secretariat
uses the similar level of evaluation standards as required by the Bank. Based on the
information provided by GETFiT, the Bank has prepared and disclosed ESRSs for the
three projects.
Nyamwamba Small Hydropower Plant (NSHP): The proposed Nyamwamba Small
Hydropower plant (NSHP) with an installed capacity of 9.2 MW, is located in the
township of Kilembe in South-West Uganda on the Nyamwamba River approximately 60
km south-southeast of Fort Portal and some 270 km West of Kampala. Kilembe is located
on the lower slopes of the Ruwenzori Mountains and east of the Ruwenzori Mountains
National Park. The project site is located on modified habitat with the proposed
alignment of the headrace canal on cultivated land on the steep valley slope and the


                                             5
construction of the diversion weir, penstock and powerhouse on the valley floor in the
town of Kilembe.
The project will consist of a flow diversion weir and a 1km long headrace channel
leading to a Fore-bay tank which is to be located at a slightly lower elevation. From there
the water will be conveyed down the hillside to the powerhouse using a 2km penstock
pipe, mostly buried below ground. The powerhouse is proposed to be located on the right
bank of the river, by the side of the main Kasese-Kilembe Road. In addition, the project
will construct a substation, a control room, relay rooms, workshop and storage facilities,
office accommodation, operator’s facilities and other necessary facilities for the operation
and maintenance of the Power Station.
The township which was created several decades ago with the commencement of the
copper mines is a cluster of large number of houses; mostly built by the mines
administration which are still occupied, and is managed by Kilembe Mines Ltd., (KML)
with the head office also located in the project Area of Influence. The presence of the
local council administrative office, several primary schools, at least two health centers,
small kiosks, religious facilities and road side markets makes the township fairly busy.
It is assumed that the construction phase of the project will continue for a period of more
than two years from its commencement. The scale of the construction work of NSHP is
considered to be reasonably heavy and will involve large amount of earthworks
(excavation, transport of spoils, cut and filling, removal of boulders etc). Construction
will be both extensive in terms of the area covered and intensive in terms of the nature of
the topography that is to be dealt with and the presence of human activities. Excavation
of over one and half kilometers along the steep slopes of land with agricultural lands and
human habitation on either side has been earmarked for the construction of the headrace
canal. Further excavation also will be needed along nearly a two kilometer stretch of
gentle slope parallel to the main roadway most of which will require substantial
modification of the existing landscape to prepare for the burying of the penstock pipes.
This area is almost inundated with houses, people, agricultural land, community and
other infrastructure facilities such as community clinics, hospitals, and schools, water
conveying pipes, septic tanks, play areas, access paths and drainage systems.
The most critical social impact is the land acquisition and the resultant impact on
livelihoods of those depending on agriculture. The number of potentially affected
families whose lands will be impacted due to the project structures will be around 92
(ninety two). The construction of facilities is estimated to require a total of around 7.5
acres of land, this is a collective total of very small parcels of cultivable land from the
front yards of households, mostly temporary, to lay down the 2 km penstock pipe from
the weir to the powerhouse, mostly buried below ground. The relocation of homes will
only be required for 2 (two) households) one along the Fore-bay area and another along
the penstock path. Several households will be temporarily affected during construction
period by way of loss of compounds, toilet pits, play area which can be replaced. The
impacts arising from such activities will be mitigated by properly implementing the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). During the construction as well as the operation and
maintenance phase, diversion of water to the channel may reduce the water used by the
communities for bathing and drinking purposes between the project weir points and the
tailrace point.

                                             6
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and RAP was approved by
NEMA in September 2010, these have been the main source document which outlines
strategies to mitigate the likely environmental and social impacts. Since the NEMA
clearance, the project area has been hit by a severe flood resulting in the design change in
response to the flooding. The sponsor is updating the environment and social documents
to reflect the changes due to flooding. The safeguards due diligence by the Bank confirms
that the environmental and social management system of the sponsor is acceptable to the
Bank. The ESAP includes a timetable for updating the ESIA and RAP. Lubilia Small
Hydropower Plant (LSHP): According to the socio-economic and valuation
information, it is estimated that a total of 83 households are affected by the project, of
which 14 will require physical relocation and the rest will lose a small portion of the land.
In addition there are a total of 10 graves in the area required by the project. About 7 these
are located in the access roads and the rest in canal. The graves in the access roads can be
bypassed by slightly changing the design of the access road.
The access road which starts from the bottom of the hill will no doubt improve
accessibility and mobility for the villagers to services and markets. Improved access will
therefore directly benefit the communities and increase service delivery to the area.
Construction of the proposed access road, the weir and diversion canal will directly affect
some of the water sources along the way which include Busyangwa protected spring
which is only about 5m from the proposed canal path way. Presently, river Lubilia is the
main source of water for the majority of the households, especially in Kihondo 1. The
access path to the river is extremely steep and poses a major undertaking for the women
to fetch water multiple times daily. Access to the river for household water use is a
common worry among a significant number of PAPs. There are fears that the
construction of the project will close the access to the main water source which will be a
huge loss for the communities, especially the women. The ESAP includes mitigation to
ensure improved access to water for the surrounding communities.
While the project will not directly provide electricity to the local community, the sponsor
is planning to bring the grid at the construction site during the project implementation
period as they plan to use electricity for their own construction activities. The villagers
consider this as an immediate benefit of the project as they can also receive electricity
once the grid is available and the power generated by the sponsor can be used by the
communities when the construction ends. During the construction phase, the proposed
project is anticipated to create employment opportunities for both skilled and unskilled
labor. About 220 people are expected to be recruited for this proposed project. Most of
the casual laborers will be hired from the project area and this will benefit the local
communities greatly thus boosting their incomes. In addition, the influx of construction
workers will provide additional business opportunities to the local communities for
indirect employment in the service industry like restaurants, food vending and rentals.
Temporary land take will result from construction of labor camps and access roads for
transporting construction materials. Most land required for construction of new structures
is all privately owned. Therefore, this impact will necessitate the resettlement of some
families from the corridor and in other cases lead to temporary or permanent
abandonment of activities that were being carried out in this corridor, depending on the
nature of the activity. This impact will be more pronounced in the three villages of

                                             7
Kihondo I, Kihondo II and Busyangwa where several homesteads will be directly
affected. The ESIA and RAP have been consulted upon and disclosed.
Rwimi Small Hydropower Plant (RSHP): The proposed Rwimi Small Hydropower
Plant is a 6 MW project, located in the middle reach of the Rwimi River, which is
frequently used for drinking water purposes and washing by the local villagers. The dam
will be located in a narrow canyon. The sponsor has acquired 8.75 hectares for the access
road and has paid compensation to 94 households, though none of the households have
resulted in any physical resettlement, the identified site impacts small sections of the
cultivable land resulting in economic resettlement of around 94 households. The access
road identified in the technical design will likely require a more appropriate site. The
three options for access road presented by the sponsor all will result in acquisition of
additional land, displacement of homes and services requiring an update of the RAP. The
ESMS for the sponsor is adequate to address such issues.
The RAP developed for the 94 households in 2012, provides a reasonable Livelihood
Restoration Framework (LRF). In general, the consultative process applied during
preparation of the RAP and LRF meets the legislative requirement of GoU and the PS 5
of IFC. It is understood that land acquisition was finalized and compensation to the 94
households was paid by end of 2012. The ESIA and RAP have been consulted upon and
disclosed.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental and Social Review Summary:
  Dates of "in-country" disclosure                                         02/06/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                           02/06/2014
  For Category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the client’s ESIA to the Executive Directors
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

Client’s Environment and Social Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone Environmental     Yes [ X]         No [ ]       N/A [ ]
and Social Assessment (including EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Yes [ X ]        No [ ]       N/A [ ]
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Client’s Environmental and Social Management System
Has the client developed an appropriately detailed       Yes [ X ]        No [ ]       N/A [ ]
ESMS, and does the client have the technical and
organizational capacity to implement it?
Labor and Working Conditions



                                           8
Does the client have a written human resources policy         Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
available to all employees that describes labor and
working conditions?
Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management
If PS 6 is applicable, would the project result in any        Yes [ ]    No [X ]    N/A [ ]
significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or      Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
If the project entails use of living natural resources, has   Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
certification been obtained or a time-bound plan
established to obtain certification?
Physical Cultural Resources
If PS 8 is applicable, does the project design include        Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
adequate measures related to physical cultural resources?
Indigenous Peoples
If PS 7 applicable, and have Indigenous Peoples               Yes [ ]    No [X ]    N/A [ ]
communities been consulted in accordance with
requirements of PS 7?
Have the requirements for Free Prior Informed Consent         Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
been met, and is there reasonable evidence of broad
community support by the affected Indigenous Peoples
communities?
Involuntary Resettlement
If PS 5 is applicable, have the requirements been             Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
complied with by the client?
Pollution Prevention and Efficient Use of Resources
Does the project comply with good international industry      Yes [ X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
practice as presented in the WBG EHSGs or a similar
internationally recognized benchmark?
Is the project designed for energy efficiency and waste       Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X ]
minimization?
Community Health and Safety
Has the assessment determined that local communities          Yes [ X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
could face significant adverse impacts in event of an
accident or emergency situation associated with the
project?
If so, has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been          Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X ]
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified by the Bank of the     Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
project?
Projects in Disputed Areas

                                             9
     Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [X ]
     international aspects of the project, including the
     procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
     dealing with the issue, been prepared by the Bank?
     Disclosure
     If Category A or B, has the ESRS been sent to the World      Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     Bank's Infoshop?
     Have relevant assessment documents prepared by the           Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     client been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
     form and language that are understandable and accessible
     to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
     Monitoring and Reporting
     Has the client agreed to submit an Annual Monitoring         Yes [X ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     Report to the Bank to report on the management of
     environmental and social risks and impacts, and does the
     Legal Agreement contain this provision?
     Has the client agreed to report at least annually to local   Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     affected communities on how the project is performing
     with respect to environmental and social risks and
     impacts of concern to those communities?

     D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                Raihan Elahi                                     02/26/2014
Environmental Specialist:        Martin Fodor                                     02/26/2014
Social Development               Yasmin Tayyab                                    02/26/2014
Specialist:

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards              Alexandra C. Bezeredi                            02/26/2014
Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                  Lucio Monari                                     02/26/2014
  Comments:




                                                 10
