                                                                                    89565
                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET


Date prepared/updated: May 28, 2014

I. Basic Information

       . Pro.]ec
1 B aSIC     . tD ata
Country: UGANDA                                  Project ID: P150872
Organization: Africa Freedom oflnformation
Centre (AFI C)
                                              Additional Project ID (if any): n/a
Project Name: Enhancing Accountability and Performance of Social Service Contracts in
Uganda
Task Team Leader: Macela Rozo
Appraisal Date: May 12, 2014                  Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: WBIGA                          Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sector: Education, Health, Agriculture
Theme:
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: GPSA Grant US$650,000

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X]                 No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]              Repeater    l
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes [ ]         No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The development objective of this proposal is to enhance transparency and accountability of
public contracting in the agriculture, education and health sectors in up to five districts of
Uganda, in order to improve service delivery in those sectors.

3. Project Description:

Component 1: Contract and service delivery monitoring in agriculture in five priority
districts.

This component focuses on the agriculture sector targeting five districts in Uganda by primarily
work with faith-based leaders, women and youth and build their capacity to actively participate,
jointly monitor and give feedback to the government on farmer needs, supply an equitable
                                                                                            under
delivery of advisory and extension services and distribution of goods in agricultural zones
the Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) program.

Activities under this component include:
   (I) Stakeholder identification and engagement in targeted districts to build consensu
                                                                                              s on
                                                                           as well   as roles  and
   stakeholders expected inputs, outputs and outcomes from the project
   responsibilities. ·
   (2) Information Gathering and Baseline Assessment: Establish baseline indicators on cunent
   levels of access and use of extension services through field visits, community feedback
   consultation and interviews with key respondents.
   (3) Resource Materials and Tools Development: Development of tools, approaches and other
   resources for monitoring contracts and service delivery.
   (4) Capacity Building: Training for community monitors to develop contract and service
                                                                                               and
   delivery monitoring skills, budget tracking, methods for citizens feedback, reporting
   policy advocacy skills. Capacity building will also include knowled         ge   and   learning
   exchanges among districts.
                                                                                               ion
   (5) Monitoring: Sub County joint monitoring committees monitor beneficiary registrat
                                                                                               use,
   and enterprise selection, advisory and extensions service delivery contracts, service
   clients satisfaction and recovery.
                                                                                                the
    (6) Demand for answerability: Monitoring reports and issues papers will be presented at
                                                                                                 to
    Barazas (Citizens Forum/Juries) organized and held by the local government biannually
                                                                            service  provider s. In
    demand for answerability on unrnet need and accountability issues from
    addition, National Citizens Forum will be held bringing together MAAIF/NAADS, Local
                                                                                                  s
    governments, UCMC, MoPs, MoLG and Parliament to agree on strategies to act on problem
    identified through monitoring.

Component 2: Contract monitoring in education and health in five priority districts.

This component will establish a network Qf health and education project community monitors
                                                                                           cture
and equipping them with the necessary tools and skills to disclose and monitor infrastru
                                                                              build constructive
contracts in education and health. The project will support these monitors to
                                                                                               e
partnerships with relevant government officials to ensure that government actors take conectiv
action based on feedback provided by citizens.

Activities under this component include:
                                                                                               re
    (I) Tools Development: Development of tools, approaches and other resources for disclosu
                                                                               informa tion  and
    and monitoring. This will include developing manuals on access to
                                                                                               to
    improving the AskyourGov.ug website that citizens can use to submit information requests
                                                                             r based  system   to
    government officials. It will also include the development of compute
    suppoti contract monitoring data entry and analysis.
    (2) Skills building: On the basis of the developed tools and approaches, training of CSO
                                                                                              the
    leaders and community monitors will be conducted who will be responsible for
    monitoring on the ground and reporting the data of the monitor     ing  results in  different
    districts.




                                                  2
   (3) Application of Monitoring and engagement with decision-makers: Support government
   officials and civil society stakeholders in conducting disclosure and monitoring activities and
   facilitate dialogue and partnerships among players to effectively address citizens' concerns.
   This will include the development and analysis of monitoring reports and monthly meetings
   with community monitors. For the health sector, monitoring activities will be conducted
   regarding improvements of infrastructure in existing health facilities under the Uganda
   Health Systems Strengthening Project (UHSSP). This includes renovation of facilities,
   provision of medical supplies, capacity for operations and maintenance and performance of
   the referral system. On education, monitoring will cover construction of schools under the
   Uganda Post Primary Education Training Project (APLl).
   (4) Media and advocacy campaigns: These advocacy activities include presenting monitoring
   report and recommendations during District Technical Planning Meetings, Ministry Top
   Management Policy Meetings, and Annual Sector Reviews. The project will also work with
   media organizations, especially, radio to disseminate information, education and
   communication materials and messages on open contracting, access to information, public
   procurement and whistle blowing.

Component 3: Enhancing Uganda Contracts Monitoring Coalition Technical &
Institutional Capacity.

This component is focused on strengthening the UCMC at both the technical and institutional
level. The project believes that having an active and strong CSO coalition for joint project
implementation, advocacy and learning will contribute to achieving changes on the local and
national levels in Uganda. Coordinating activities, leveraging resources and advocating with
one voice will put civil society in Uganda in a stronger position to effectively partner with
government agencies.

Activities under this component include:
   (I) Strengthen UCMC governance structure and update UCMC's strategic plan to ensure that
   the UCMC operate effectively, attracts new members and raises additional funding. This will
   include working with a local expert consultant.
   (2) Capacity building support to UCMC members on open contracting, constructive
   engagement, strategic communication and use of new media, advocacy, proposal writing and
   fundraising, social accountability tools and strategies.
   (3) Development and implementation of a communications and advocacy strategy around
   open contracting.
   (4) Monthly UCMC Steering Committee meetings and quarterly UCMC general meetings.

Component 4: Knowledge, Learning and Project Management.

This component focuses on documenting and sharing project tools, methodologies, experiences
and lessons learned from the application of contract disclosure and monitoring activities in
agriculture, education and health. Knowledge products will be shared with other UCMC
members and other CSOs, and goverrunent agencies in Uganda. Through AFIC's website, the
open contracting community of practice and the GPSA knowledge products the projects outputs
and resources will also be shared with other practitioners in Africa and globally. The Open



                                                3
                                                                              the project will
Contracting community of practice already includes over 600 practitioners and
actively share its lessons and tools on this platfonn.
                                                                                    that activities
This component also focuses on the overall management of the project to ensure
                                                                                d outcomes.
are delivered and outputs are produces to ensure achieving the project's intende

Activities under this component include:
                                                                                   information.
   (1) Development of tools, reports and FAQs on open contracting and access to
                                                                            ting  practiti oners to
   (2) Learning events both online and face to face with other open contrac
   share learning and insights.
                                                                                           through
   (3) Development of videos, blogs, reports, case studies, etc, and dissemination
                                                                                     CoP, GPSA
   various channels including, UCMC website and listserv, Open Contracting
   knowledge platform, OGP and FOI regional and internationalli  stservs and  blogs.
                                                                                    AFIC. In the
   (4) Active management of the project -including reporting and audit- by
                                                                                     d Action for
   implementation of the project AFIC will closely collaborate with Interfaith-base
   Ethics and Integrity (INFOC Uganda) and Transparency International Uganda     .
                                                                                    ng audits.
   (5) Project Management, monitoring and evaluation of project activities includi

5. Enviro nmenta l and Social Safegn ards Specialists on the Team:
n/a
                                                                             Yes            No
6. Safegu ard Policies Trigge red (please explain why)
                                                                                            X
Enviro nmenta l Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                                                                                            X
Natura l Habita ts (OP/BP 4.04)
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)
                                                                                            X
                                                                                            X
Pest Mana~:ement (OP 4.09)
                                                                                            X
Physical Cultur al Resour ces (OP/B P 4.11)
                                                                                            X
Indi~:enous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
                                                                                            X
Involu ntary Resettl ement (OP/BP 4.12)
                                                                                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
                                                                                            X
Projec ts on Interna tional Waterw ays (OP/BP 7.50)
                                                                                            X
Projec ts in Disput ed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)

II. Key Safegu ard Policy Issues and Their Manag ement
A. Summa ry of Key Safegu ard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed
                                                                              project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                                                                  mental or social
The project will not finance any physical activities, no risks related to environ
                                                                                 There are possibly
safeguards policies are anticipated during implementation of project activities.
                                                                                     of the project,
pockets of Batwa (IPs) in Kabale District. However, given the nature and context
                                                                                      H. Khawaja.
OP 4.10 is not triggered after evaluation by Alexandra Bezeredi and Afshan
Accordingly, the EA category for the project should remain a C.




                                                  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
  N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
 N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
This project is not expected to trigger any safeguards policies as the project screening identified
minimal environmental or social risks related to project activities. The project does not anticipate
any civil works to be financed under this Grant. The project is assigned the Environmental
Category C, requiring no further environmental and social assessment.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Project's main direct beneficiaries are:

(I) Government agencies in Uganda. The project will directly benefit the Public Procurement
and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA), the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES),
the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), the Ministry of Health
(MoH), the National Agricultural Advisory Services Secretariat (NAADS) and the Ministry of
Local Government and the respective local governments of five targeted districts where the
project will be implemented. Other government agencies who will benefit from the project are
the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic
Development (MoFPED), the National Agricultural Research Organization, and the Ministry of
Ethics and Integrity (DEI).

The Uganda Contracts Monitoring Coalition (UCMC) under the coordination of AFIC will work
with these government agencies to improve access to contracting information and to collect
citizens' feedback on contracting procedures and contracting performance. Through the project
government agencies will get information on the effectiveness, efficiency, transparency and
accountability of contracting procedures and processes. Based on the information, they will be
able to address identified problems.

(2) Targeted communities. The project will benefit up to 2,537,100 people living in the Ugandan
districts of Lira, Oyam, Ama, Kabale and Ntungamo. In the agriculture sector, the project will
target local communities, specifically faith-based leaders, women and youth. From the
government side, the project will work with local government district and sub county NAADs
departments and social service departments. The project will facilitate collaboration among all
these players to monitor farmer supplies, equitable delivery of advisory and extension services
and distribution of goods in agricultural zones. In addition, the project will work with citizen
fora on budget transparency, constmctive engagement on access and use of advisory service and
recovery issues. In the health and education sectors, beneficiaries include community monitors



                                                 5
in five targeted districts. Community monitors will be equipped with the necessary tools and
skills to monitor infrastructure contracts in education and health sectors.

(3) Uganda Contracts Monitoring Coalition. The UCMC consists of 22 CSOs. These CSOs are
organized in 6 topic specific clusters: Education, Health, Agriculture, Works and Transport,
Extractives and Water and Environment. Through component 4, the project will strengthen
UCMC's capacity to engage in contract monitoring and successfully advocate for greater
disclosure and participation in public contracting at all stages.

Project's indirect beneficiaries are:

(I) Citizens and CSOs outside of target districts who will benefit from the increased level of
publicly available contracting data and information. In addition, the tools and methodologies that
the project will developed will be disseminated through list-serves, forums and other channels to
make them accessible for a broad audience. To do so, the project will engage the Uganda Social
Accountability Forum coordinated by the National NGO Forum tlu·ough which it will share its
lessons, tools and experiences.

(2) Media in Uganda who will benefit from disclosed procurement and contract information and
from the evidence, reports and recommendations generated from the monitoring in this project.
This will contribute to credible reporting on issues related to procurement and contracts in
Uganda.

(3) CSOs working on procurement and contract monitoring in other countries and regions,
including the Open Contracting community. Tools, approaches and learnings will be shared as
part of this project with other practitioners through websites, community of practices and
workshops. AFIC will also share via GPSA knowledge portal the experiences, knowledge and
learnings gained from the implementation of this project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   N/A
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  N/A
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                                  N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   N/A


                                                6
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Pest Mana~ement Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N!A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tire Corporate Level (to be filled in when tire ISDS is
finalized by tire project decision meeting)


OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No[]         N/A [X]
de~radation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measure's acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [ ]       N/A [X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]    No [ ]       N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]    No [ ]       N/A [X]
cultural property?



                                                 7
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary·Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60- Pro.iects in Disputed Areas




                                                8
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the               Yes [ ]      No [ ]        N/A [X]
 international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been orepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to               Yes [ ]      No [ ]        N/A [X ]
the World Bank's Infoshoo?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ ]     No [ ]         N/A [X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the oroject cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted bv:                                       Name                             Date
 Task Team Leader:                       Marcela Rozo                     'b<:T~
                                                                \ : j,.,..,          ~~~      5/28/2014
 Environmental Specialist:                                        I              ~




 Social Development Specialist
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):
                                                I
 Aooroved bv:                                  n
                                               ~
                                      AlexAhdra Bezeredi
                                                                  ~
                                                                  I
 ReQional SafeQuards Coordinator:                                                          5/28/2014
 Comments: No safeguards specialist required if project remains as defined in Project Paper and ISDS.
 Later, should project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts,
 consult with the RePional Safe2uards Secretariat.
 Sector Manager:                        Robv Senderowit sch                                   5/28/2014
   Comments:                                         (J ~/,
                                                          <":




                                                      9
