                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/09/2013                                     Report No.: AC7043
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Uganda                              Project ID: P146135
Project Name: UG Energy for Rural Transformation 2 - Clean Cooking Sector Support
Task Team Leader: Somin Mukherji
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: November 18, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTG1                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Climate change (30%);Infrastructure services for private sector development
(25%);Other Financial Sector Development (15%);Rural services and infrastructure
(30%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Russian Trust Fund                                             1.50
                                                                        1.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
There are no changes being proposed to the development objectives of the original
project. The parent PDO is to increase access to energy and ICTs in rural Uganda.

3. Project Description
The components of the parent project-Energy for Rural Transformation 2-include 1)
Rural Energy Infrastructure, 2) Information Communications and Technologies (ICTs)
and 3) Energy Development, Cross Sectoral Links, Impact Monitoring. Under sub-
component 1.5 of the Rural Energy Infrastructure support component of ERT2, Private
Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) the implementing agency for the additional
financing, is supporting private sector investors in reaching financial closure or meeting
other specific market enhancement targets through the provision of targeted technical
assistance for renewable energy power generation and solar PV sales.

 The proposed additional financing will expand on the activities of the sub-component
1.5 of ERT2, implemented by PSFU to focus on: (i) provision of business development
support to promote targeted enterprises and the clean cooking sector broadly; (ii)
provision of seed grants to address financing needs of entrepreneurs; and (iii) consumer
awareness, outreach, and mobilization to strengthen demand for clean cooking solutions;
and (iv) Capacity building and training for PSFU and Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Development (MEMD).

 Business Development Services: This activity will (i) promote sector development by
facilitating market linkages and information (such as generating and disseminating of
business and market information such as best practice guides) and (ii) provide technical
assistance and training for enterprises in business development through consultancy
services, business planning, management, and development training for
groups/institutions (such as artisan associations) and targeted consultancy services (on a
cost-share basis) to entrepreneurs.

 Access to finance: This activity will i) provide any necessary funding to entrepreneurs
whose business development services assessment revealed a need to address them with
seed funding; ii) make the grants available for other entrepreneurs selected independently
on the basis of well-developed business plans.

 These grants could support the enterprises in carrying out marketing strategies,
enhancing production capacity (buying tools and equipment for production, enhancing
workshop space, improving production models, etc.), improving quality and performance
of technologies (such as receiving technical training), implementing distribution
strategies (such as through more advanced sales models, decentralized sales outlets, etc),
and other needs identified as requiring financing in the business plans. The grants could
also complement the consumer outreach efforts with below-the line marketing as
entrepreneurs conduct marketing for their unique products.

 Consumer Engagement and Mobilization:This activity focuses on communication and
outreach to link producers/distributors to their consumers (communication materials,
demonstrations, road shows, feedback groups, etc.) and will include implementation of a
consumer engagement strategy to catalyze adoption of clean cooking solutions. In
addition, there is significant potential for impact and demonstration of scale by promoting
efficient cookstoves in institutions such as schools. This activity, therefore, includes:

 (i)     Design and implementation of a consumer engagement strategy to catalyze
adoption of clean cooking solutions in households and institutions. The consumer
engagement strategy will be based on the recommendations of the ongoing consumer
research study for Uganda.
 (ii) Pilot outreach to institutional consumers such as schools through advocacy and
demonstration. PSFU will coordinate with MEMD to facilitate promotion of institutional
cookstoves including liaising with the Ministry of Education. Under this activity, PSFU
will support MEMD carry out advocacy with head teachers association, engagement with
district education officers, and demonstrate efficacy of efficient institutional stoves in
select schools. PSFU will select and procure institutional stoves on a cost-share basis to
support dissemination of quality stoves.
  Capacity Building, Institutional Development, and Operation Costs: This activity will
include (i) capacity building and training for PSFU including technical training,
procurement of a Business Advisor with specific, relevant, and extensive experience in
the clean cooking sector, and provision of funding for operating costs to support project
activity implementation; (ii) capacity building for MEMD including local and regional
technical training, awareness, and policy development.

 The proposed additional financing for ERT II does not trigger any additional safeguard
policies. Progress with safeguards implementation has been satisfactory; the framework
documents (ESMF and RPF) have been complemented with Environmental and Social
Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans. Environmental and social issues such
as occupational safety will be considered in the selection process of the seed grantees and
proposed investments. The screening criteria with these considerations will be included in
the addendum to PSFU's operations manual.

 ISDS of ERT2 first additional financing for reference

 Project Objectives
 The objective of the original project is to increase access to energy and ICTs in rural
Uganda.

 Project Description
 The proposed Project would focus on meeting the financing gap and scaling-up in
meeting the target number of connections to the lines being constructed under the original
project as well as from previously constructed lines through: (a) procuring the materials
required for service connections; (b) grid intensification of the networks contracted
under ERT-1and ERT-2 to enable clusters of consumers at a short distance away from the
existing lines to be connected; and (c) technical assistance, including, carrying out a
consumer mobilization program with assistance of suitable consultants.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented country-wide. The specific locations of the future sub-
projects are not known at this time and will be determined during project implementation
based on demand.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
   Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The ERT II project has been assigned an environmental risk Category B, because some of
the interventions to be supported like renewable energy power generation facilities are
likely to result into impacts on the ecosystem, and habitat for some endemic aquatic and
terrestrial species. Despite the fact that the project is expected to provide significant
environmental and social benefits onsite, some of its subprojects are likely to have
potential environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important
areas – including wetlands, grasslands, and other natural habitats. At screening stage, the
proposed subprojects will be classified as category B, or C, depending on the type,
location, sensitivity, and the scale of the project and the nature and magnitude of its
potential environmental impacts. For Category B: A limited EIA will be adequate, since
the projects may have site-specific environmental impacts, and their mitigation measures
can be designed more readily. Under the Category C: Projects are likely to have minimal
or no adverse environmental impacts, thus exempted from EIA.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)

  The OP 4.01 is applicable because the program will support renewable energy power
generation investments under the component 1.As the works and sites had not been
finalized for the original project, an ESMF was prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
before appraisal. To date, Environmental and Social Management Plans for Lines 1-3
were prepared, cleared by NEMA and the Bank; and disclosed in-country on June 18,
2012, and in the World Bank's Infoshop on June 20, 2012. ESMPs for Lines 4-9 were
prepared, cleared by NEMA and the Bank; and disclosed in-country and at the World
Bank's Infoshop on March 19, 2013.

 The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for subprojects,
which will enable the national and local governments, as well as communities, to
simultaneously identify potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed
subprojects; and to address them by incorporating the relevant mitigation, prevention, and
management measures. To ensure that negative impacts are minimized or eliminated, the
ESMF requires the inclusion of mitigation impacts at the design of subprojects prior to
implementation. The screening process has been developed as the locations and types of
subprojects are not yet defined, and therefore potential impacts cannot be precisely
identified. The ESMF present guidelines and procedures consistent with the
Environmental Management Laws of Uganda and the World Bank's Safeguard Policy on
Environmental Assessment OP/BP4.01.

 Further, the ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts that may
arise during the project implementation, including the following: (a) Guidance on
preparation of comprehensive checklists of potential environmental and social impacts
and their sources; (b) Systematic procedures for participatory screening of subproject
sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) A guided
approach for forecasting the main potential environmental and social impacts of the
planned project activities; (d) An institutional arrangement for mitigating, preventing, and
managing the identified environmental impacts; (e) A typical environmental management
planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project
implementation; (f) A monitoring system for implementation of mitigation measures; and
(g) An outline of recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning
and monitoring of project activities.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

 The OP/BP 4.04 is applicable because some ERT II interventions are likely to impact on
the area ecosystem, and habitat for many endemic aquatic and terrestrial species. The
ESMF will address issues pertaining to this policy. In short, ERTP II will not finance
activities that are likely to destroy terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. Instead, it will
support those interventions that contribute to the reversal of degraded natural habitats,
such as over-exploited forests and grasslands by promoting energy efficient stoves and
alternative sources of energy.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

  The OP/BP 4.12 is applicable because ERT II will support interventions in selected
areas that are likely to result into land taking or restriction of access by local
communities. Involuntary resettlement policy is triggered not only when land acquisition
is evident, but also where there is no physical relocation, such as project activities impact
assets, restrict access to other natural resources, and/or negatively impact on livelihoods.
Since the interventions in Component 1 are not determined in advance and by appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed. The RPF
document outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement and/or compensation of
subproject-affected people, and establishes standards for identifying, assessing and
mitigating negative impacts of project supported activities. In addition, the RPF guides
the preparation, and implementation of the resettlement action plans (RAPs) for each
individual subproject that triggers the involuntary resettlement policy (OP/BP 4.12).

 To date, RAPs for Lines 1-3 were prepared, cleared by NEMA and the Bank; and
disclosed in-country on June 18, 2012, and in the World Bank's Infoshop on June 20,
2012. RAPs for Lines 4-9 were prepared, cleared by NEMA and the Bank; and disclosed
in-country and at the World Bank's Infoshop on March 19, 2013.

 The resettlement action plans have been prepared in consultation with the affected
individuals and communities. Resettlement assistance and compensation for impacts is
also being determined in the project through the same consultative process to ensure that
no one is left worse off as a result of the project. RAPs preparation and implementation
are based on existing laws and regulations of Uganda, as well as the World Bank policy
OP/BP 4.12. The stakeholder groups like the local government institutions, private sector
and CSOs where necessary will be provided with training necessary to equip them with
the skills to screen subproject activities for impacts, prepare RAPs, and implement
activities set out in the RPFs and subsequent RAPs. The national and local level
institutions have been undertaking both desk and field appraisal of the planned
interventions, and approving RAPs prior to commencement of the subprojects. Similarly,
all compensation will be completed prior to commencement of the subproject.
Compensation and resettlement issues will be funded from government counterpart funds
or sectoral budget.

 The grievance mechanisms have been well laid out in the RPF, and they utilize the
existing systems and structures from the lowest levels through local governments. If all
these channels of handling grievances fail, then the aggrieved individuals can resort to
Uganda's courts of law.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Under Phase I of the program, the environment and social safeguards have been handled
through the existing government mechanisms. The National Environmental Management
Agency (NEMA) reviewed and approved ERT sub-projects. In addition, REA provided
oversight for environmental and social due diligence and safeguards compliance for the
larger investments (e.g. the Kakira Sugar Mill cogeneration facility, and the West Nile
3.5 MW hydropower station), some of which were done through IDA technical support.
Overall compliance monitoring, including a database, was done by REA, which was
assisted by a Safeguards Consultant who established a RAP monitoring and tracking
system. To coordinate work between NEMA and REA, an Inter-agency Steering
Committee was established. The coordination between NEMA and REA on
environmental and social due diligence has been satisfactory. These arrangements and
capacities for compliance with safeguard policies and Ugandan regulations have been
working satisfactorily in Phase I and will continue to be utilized in Phase II.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Bank's safeguards policies applicable to ERT II Project are: (i) Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); and (iii) Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12. The initial safeguards documents prepared were an ESMF
and RPF; during implementation several ESMPs and RAPs have been prepared as well.
The safeguard documents were prepared following consultations with selected
communities, local governments/authorities, national institutions and the private sector.

 All safeguards documents were cleared by the Uganda National Environmental
Management Authority (NEMA) and the Bank. They were then disclosed at the World
Bank's Infoshop on October 31, 2008; and in country on November 10, 2008. The
proposed mitigation measures and their monitoring plans are an integral part of the
project design and costs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  10/07/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/29/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/07/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  10/07/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/30/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/07/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Somin Mukherji                            09/30/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Martin Fodor                              09/30/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis                      09/30/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     10/02/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                              10/02/2013
  Comments:
