                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                            Report No.: 89642
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         July 15, 2014


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Ukraine               Project ID:                 P151927
 Project Name:                Advisory Services and Technical Assistance to NJSC "Naftogaz of
                              Ukraine" and the Government of Ukraine on the Reform of the Natural
                              Gas Sector
 Task Team Leader:            Yadviga Semikolenova
 Estimated Appraisal Date: July, 25 2014            Estimated Board Date:
 Managing Unit:               GEEDR                 Lending Instrument:
 Sector(s):                   Oil and Gas
 Theme(s):                    Corporate Governance; State-Owned Enterprise Restructuring and
                              Privatization; Regulation and Competition Policy
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       EURO 2,035,000               Total Bank Financing:
 Total Cofinancing:                                     Financing Gap:
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                               0
     Single Donor (EC) Trust Fund                                                     EURO 2,035,000

     Total                                                                            EURO 2,035,000
 Environmental Category       C
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The objective of the project is to provide advisory services and technical assistance to NJSC "Naftogaz
 of Ukraine" and the Government of Ukraine on the reform and restructuring of the natural gas sector
 through:
      providing support the Government of Ukraine to develop and implement the outstanding key


                                                    1
        reforms in the gas sector that are necessary for Ukraine to fulfill the legal commitments
        undertaken in the framework of membership of the Energy Community; and
       providing advisory services, in the form of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), to NJSC
        "Naftogaz of Ukraine" to prepare bankable projects and to oversee their implementation
        together with the IFIs (EBRD and EIB).

C. Project Description
The proposed activity would be implemented over two years, through a hybrid trust fund, financed by
the European Union, represented by the Commission of the European Communities, in the total amount
of EURO 2,035,000. The implementing agency for the recipient-executed component will be NJSC
"Naftogaz of Ukraine".

The proposed project will consist of the following components (costs are net of the Central and
Managing Unit fees):

Component 1 (Recipient-Executed; EURO 850,000): The purpose of this Component is to support
the staffing of the Project Implementation Unit of NJSC "Naftogaz of Ukraine," which will be
responsible for implementation of the Gas Transit System (GTS) modernization project being financed
by EBRD and EIB. The objectives of strengthening the PIU are to ensure:
       Timely and effective preparation and implementation of the EBRD/EIB-financed Gas Transit
        System (GTS) modernization project , including design and all issues related to environment,
        procurement, financial and accounting management and disbursement according to the
        applicable EBRD and EIB rules for project implementation;
       Preparation of the broader GTS modernization project by supporting NJSC "Naftogaz of
        Ukraine" in finalizing the design and preparing the project including all issues related to
        technical design, environment, preparation of project documentation and loan negotiations etc.
For this purpose, this Component of the Advisory Services and Technical Assistance project will
finance the staff in the PIU who will be responsible for the following tasks:
       Finalization of technical designs and technical project support;
       Procurement according to applicable IFIs standards;
       Finalization of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for the Emergency
        Project and development of ESIA and other relevant safeguard documents for the broader GTS
        modernization project according to applicable IFIs standards;
       Setting up a project financial management system;
       Setting up a project control and quality system;
       Contract and claim management including final acceptance/testing;
       Legal advice and support in compliance with documentary requirements from the IFIs; and
       Training.
Component 2 (Bank-Executed; EURO 1,185,000): The purpose of this Component is to provide
advisory services to the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industries of Ukraine and National Electricity
Regulatory Commission (NERC) in the implementation of outstanding conditionalities related to the gas
sector reforms and the corporate restructuring and financial transparency of NJSC "Naftogaz of
Ukraine".
The implementation of key reforms in Ukrainian gas sector would allow to the IFI's (EBRD, EIB) to be
in a position to consider the financial support for the modernisation of Ukraine's Gas Transit System.
For this purpose, under this Component the Bank will assist the Government of Ukraine with the

                                                 2
following tasks:
    (a) Preparing the set of legislation and regulations which aligns the structure of Ukrainian gas
        market with the provision of the EU 3rd Energy Package; and
    (b) developing comprehensive corporate and financial restructuring concept, together with the
        short-and medium term implementation plan to restructure transmission, storage and
        distribution businesses of NJSC "Naftogaz of Ukraine" including their financial transparency
        based on International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) requirements.

Specifically, the Component support the following activities:

   assisting NJSC "Naftogaz of Ukraine" with refining their restructuring concept and helping them to
    develop a feasible and realistic implementation plan;
   financial audit and projection for the upcoming 5 years for transit and storage parts of NJSC
    "Naftogaz of Ukraine" business;
   preparing the set of legislations which aligns the structure of Ukrainian gas market with the
    provision of the EU 3rd Energy Package;
   developing methodologies to calculate appropriate transit and storage tariffs; and (with the
    availability of additional funds)
   developing methodology of determining and allocating transmission capacity.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be located in Kiev.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Component 1 (Recipient-Executed): The PIU of NJSC "Naftogaz of Ukraine", supported through
Component 1, will have the environmental and social safeguards specialists. It will be the responsibility
of EBRD and EIB to monitor environmental and social issues related to their project. EBRD and EIB's
safeguards policies are substantively consistent with the World Bank’s policies.                As the
EBRD/EIB-financed project is considered to be an associated activity to this component of the Advisory
Services and Technical Assistant project, the Bank team will be doing its due diligence during
implementation of the Component through confirming that the environmental and social aspects are
being appropriately addressed by EBRD and EIB. More details on how EBRD and EIB propose to
manage these aspects will become available by the end of 2014 as they complete preparation of their
associated project.

Component 2 (Bank-Executed): There may be potential financial implications of environmental or
social issues to NJSC "Naftogaz of Ukraine". The environmental/social aspects that could have financial
implications include: compliance to safety standards; possible environmental or social liabilities
associated with past or current pollution (e.g. from storage facilities); etc. The team will follow up
whether environmental aspects are included in calculating financial projections and if not, will
recommend to include those.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Alexei Slenzak, Senior Environmental Specialist, GENDR
Klavdiya Maksymenko, Social Development Specialist, GURDR



                                                  3
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                               Triggered ?        Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP                   NO
 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      NO
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                               NO
 Pest Management OP 4.09                          NO
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP                NO
 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    NO
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              NO
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        NO
 Projects on International Waterways              NO
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 NO

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

      Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
 A.
      N/A
    Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
 B. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
      N/A

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                     Name: Yadviga Semikolenova
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                   Name: Agi Kiss                                          Date: July 10, 2014
 Coordinator:
 Acting Practice Manager:              Name: Jas Singh                                         Date: July 16, 2014



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.




                                                             4
