                                                                                               95356
                            mTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 (FCPF READINESS FUND)
                                    CONCEPT STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:                 March 27, 20 15


I. BASIC INFORMATION
FCPF Readiness activities relate to strategic planning and preparation for Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus (REDO+). Specifically, countries prepare for REDD+ by:
        1.  Assessing the country's situation with respect to deforestation, forest degradation, conservation
            and sustainable management of forests and relevant governance issues;
       ii.  Identifying REDO+ strategy options;
      iii.  assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDO+,
            and developing a management framework to mitigate these risks and potential impacts;
      tv.   Working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas emissions
            and uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDD+ activities, and potentially
            forward-looking projections of emissions; and                                             ·
       v.   Designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of the REDO+ strategy
            on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to monitor the drivers of
            deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other variables relevant to the implementation
            ofREDD+.                                                           .
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant activity (referred to as "Project" in the ISDS) will finance some of
this preparatory work; it will not finance any implementation of REDD+ activities on the ground (e.g.,
investments or pilot projects).

       . Project
A B a sac   .    D ata
Country:                         Vanuatu              Project ID: Pl24806
Project Name:                    Vanuatu- FCPF Readiness Plan Preparation Project
Task Team Leader:                Stefanie Sieber
Estimated Appraisal Date: NA                          Estimated Board Date: NA
Managing Unit:                 GENDR                  Lending Instrument:       IPF
Sector(s):                       Forestry
Tbeme(s):                      Climate Change
Is tbis project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:        3.6                         Total Bank Financing:    3.6
Total Cofinancing:                                     Financing Gap:           n/a
 Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT
 IDA Grant


                                                                                                           1
    Forest Carbon Partnership Facility Grant                                                              3.6
    Total                                                                                                 3.6
    Environmental Category: B
    Simplified Processing Simple [X] RepeaterLJ
    Is this a transferred project Yes [ ] No [X]

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 ofR-PP Assessment Note]:

The development objective of Grant is to assist Vanuatu to carry out the Readiness Preparation Activities
by supporting the preparation of its REDO+ strategy through a participatory and inclusive process and by
producing technical and policy advice to help strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices.

C. Project Description [from section 3 ofR-PP Assessment Note]:

The R-PP Roadmap 1 includes all activities necessary for Vanuatu to achieve a state of REDD+
Readiness. The proposed Readiness Preparation Grant will provide US$ 3.6 million over a period of four
years (20 15 to 20 19) to finance a subset of those activities, with the remainder to be mobilized by the
Government from other sources, including Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Jntemationale Zusarnmenarbeit
(GIZ).

The Readiness Preparation Grant will finance key elements of the R-PP Roadmap that will not only
help Vanuatu develop its REDD+ strategy, but strengthen sustainable land and forest management
practices through targeted technical and policy advice. In particular, it will fund three components,
which aim to: (i) strengthen existing institutions for REDO+ at the national and decentralized level through
the establishment and operation of a Vanuatu National REDO+ Unit and Provincial REDO+ Committees,
as well as support to the REDO+ Technical Committee, the National Advisory Board on Climate Change
and Disaster Risk Reduction (NAB) and its Project Management Unit (PMU), (ii) strengthen the
stakeholder engagement at the decentralized level, including the assessment and strengthening of existing
FGRMs for REDO+, and (iii) develop a National REDO+ strategy and Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), which will be validated by a broad spectrum of stakeholders through the
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) (Table 1). These activities will also strengthen
existing forest policy, practices and management systems, information and data, participatory methods and
human and institutional capacity, which will directly support sustainable land and forest management.




       the
   I. I. Set-up of Vanuatu National REDO+ Unit and support to REDO+
         Technical Committee
>-----                       =----------- -----------+---
   1.2. Su~port to NAB and its PMl.l_ _ ...,..---------------1--
   1.3.         of Provincial REDO+ Committees
l. Streqtheolng of the stakeholder engaaemeat process at the
   deeeatnlizecl
     2.1. Strengthening of the decentralization structures for stakeholder
                                                                                                   la-c
              ent


1
    Please see Component 5 of the R-PP for a summary of all the activities and budget.

                                                                                                            2
Other development partners will be identified to support the remainder of the activities outlined in
the R-PP, most notably the meas urement, reporting and verification (MRV) systems and Reference
Emission Levels (RELs). The achievement of the proposed REDO+ Readiness Activities will not depend
on these more technical aspects of REDO+ Readiness, which will, however, need to be accomplished before
Vanuatu can engage in a future performance-based system for REDO+. There are several partners currently
active in climate change and natural resources management in Vanuatu, which are likely to fund follow-up
work. For example, GIZ has funded preparatory work on MRV and REL and is currently testing these
approaches on Santo Island, as well as the European Commission and AusAID. Vanuatu has also recently
applied to join the UN-REDO program. The main CSO is Live & Learn Vanuatu, an environmental
education NGO, which has supported the development of the Consultation and Participation Plan. The
participation of international NGOs such as Oxfam, World Vision, Red Cross, and Save the Children is
under discussion. Involvement of national NGOs in REDO+ is limited due to the lack of awareness and
resources, as well as limited t~chnical capacity.

Component 1: Institutional Strengthening for REDO+ Management Arrangements at the national
and decentralized level (US$ 1.30 million)
This component will support the structures responsible for leading the REDO+ Readiness Preparation
process in Van uatu, including the Vanuatu National REDO+ Unit within Department of Forestry (DoF),
the REDO+ Technical Committee, the NAB and its PMU, as well as the Provincial REDO+ Committees.
Given the low levels of capacity and limited understanding of REDO+, extensive capacity building,
awareness raising and outreach efforts will be necessary. These activities will also help strengthen existing
land and forest management practices more broadly, providing important co-benefits. Strengthened
decentralized government structures will in tum ensure a better service delivery of extension for forestry
and agriculture. This component has three sub-components:
    a) Sub-component 1.1: Set-up of Vanuatu National REDD+ Unit and support to REDD+ Technical
        Committee (US$ 0.80 million). The REDO+ process in Vanuatu will be led at the national level by
        the REDO+ Technical Committee, which will establish ad-hoc working groups (AWGs) to provide
        thematic technical guidance as needed. To further strengthen their capacity, the Readiness
        Preparation Grant will finance training, workshops, and associated operational costs. The Vanuatu
        National REDO+ Unit will be established within DoF to manage day-to-day implementation of the
        REDO+ Readiness Preparation process. It will comprise ofthe Vanuatu REDO+ coordinator (to be
        funded by GoY) and a REDO+ Technical Specialist (an international consultant to be funded by
        the Readiness Preparation Grant), who will support the Vanuatu REDO+ coordinator and help
        strengthen the DoF' s capacity more broadly.2 The FCPF resources will also support the recruitment
        of an Outreach and Extension Officer (a local consultant to be funded by the FCPF Grant), who
        will coord inate the extensive consultations required for REDO+ Readiness and the development of
        the REDO+ strategy. Key tasks include: (i) ensure effective delivery of the Consultation and
        Participation Plan, (ii) develop and implement the communication strategy/plan and outreach,
        which are culturally appropriate to fit the target audience, (iii) ensure the results of the consultations

2
 It is important to note that the FCPF grant will only fund the salaries of contractual staff for the Readiness Preparation
Activities. It will not fund consultants' services and salaries of officials for Vanuatu' s civil service.

                                                                                                                         3
       are properly documented and effectively disseminated to the relevant stakeholders using the right
       channel/ medium of communication, and (iv) ensure the procedures for how these consultations
       influence REDO+ strategy development are followed . An operational budget will also be provided
       to the Vanuatu National REDO+ Unit to procure office furniture and equipment, and one vehicle.
    b) Sub-component 1.2: Support to NAB and its PMU (US$ 0.42 million). The NAB is the supreme
       policymaking and advisory body for all climate change and disaster risk reduction (ORR)
       programs, projects, initiatives and activities in Vanuatu, but has limited capacity and knowledge of
       REDO+. To support its strategic and advisory role, capacity building will be financed under the
       Readiness Preparation Grant through trainings and workshops. The PMU of the NAB will be
       responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the grant consistent with its existing management of all
       climate change and ORR projects in the country. The Readiness Preparation Grant will support the
       position of a procurement officer and procurement advisor to ensure the PMU can take on this
       addi~ional grant. Sufficient financial management capacity already exists, which is supported by
       two other WBG projects.
    c) Sub-component 1.3: Set-up ofthe Provincial REDD+ Committees (US$ 0.08 million). It is expected
       that the REDO+ projects in the provinces will generate knowledge that will enrich the development
       of the REDO+ strategy and inform the choice of legal and institutional options for the national
       REDO+ implementation framework. It will thus be critical to assess existing provincial structures,
       including the Technical Advisory Commissions (TACs), forest and agriculture extension officers,
       Cultural Center field workers, farmers' associations, island councils of chiefs, women's
       associations, and churches, to identify those that could form the basis of Provincial REDO+
       Committees. The Readiness Preparation Grant will finance this assessment as well as training,
       ~orkshops, and the operational costs of the Provincial REDO+ Committees.


Component 2: Strengthening of the stakeholder engagement process at the decentralized level (US$
0.98 million) .                                                    .
This component aims to ensure broad stakeholder engagement and use of stakeholder feedback in shaping
the REDO+ Readiness program and the REDO+ strategy. Activities will be guided by the Consultation and
Participation Plan prepared in conjunction with the R-PP, and by the Communication, Partnership and
Engagement Strategy developed by the Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department (VMGD). The
strengthened decentralized stakeholder engagement process will also support the GoY in improving
governance and transparency and ensuring active community level participation in the management of
Vanuatu's forests. The same structures will be able to support more active engagement and feedback from
related sectors, most notably agriculture and disaster risk management. This component has two sub-
components:
    a) Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening of the decentralization structures for stakeholder engagement
        (US$ 0. 78 million). This sub-component will fund strengthening of participatory structures at the
        provincial and area council levels in order to enhance stakeholder engagement in REDO+.
        Structures to be supported include provincial governments, TAC, forest and agricultural extension
        workers, local NGOs/CSOs and community-based forest associations, custom institutions,
        women's and youth associations, and farmers associations. The DoF has already initiated the
        establishment of community-based forest associations in some provinces. This component will help
        strengthen those associations where they exist, and will help in setting up others as required. The
        resources shall be used to strengthen stakeholder structures specifically in prioritized areas/regions
        where Vanuatu expects REDO+ to be concentrated .. Given low levels of capacity and limited
        knowledge of REDO+ at the local level, strengthening decentralized structures will be costly but
        critical to ensure the communities on the ground are actively involved in and contributing to the
        REDD+ Readiness process.
    b) Sub-component 2.2: Assessment and strengthening of existing FORMs for REDD+ (US$ 0.20
        million). This sub-component will fund the assessment of existing FORMs at the national and


                                                                                                            4
        decentralized levels, assess the capacity of institutions and customary mechanisms that would
        handle grievances, and support their strengthening specifically for REDO+.

Component 3: Development of a REDD+ strategy for Vanuatu (US$ 1.32 million)
This component will support the GoY in developing its REDO+ strategy, which will help identifY the best
balance of land use options to promote sustainable and inclusive economic growth in Vanuatu. This will
require developing a deep understanding of the multi-sectorial drivers of deforestation and forest
degradation, integrating social and environmental concerns into the REDO+ strategy and building broad-
based support across all relevant stakeholders. The policy and technical analysis produced under this
component will also help strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices. It will also help
inform possible future programs to implement some of the proposed REDO+ strategy options aimed at
reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, improving SFM, strengthening agricultural
practices and enhancing climate change resilience. This component has three sub-components:
    a) Sub-component 3.1: Analytical work to inform REDD+ strategy options (US$ 0.27 million). The
        current state of knowledge indicates that Vanuatu has relatively low rates of forest loss compared
        to other countries in the region, but that its forests are highly degraded. National forest policy is
        based on the assumption that the largest pressures on forests stem from small-scale activities by
        Ni-Vanuatu subsistence farmers. However, there has not been a comprehensive assessment of
        Vanuatu's deforestation and forest degradation processes. The Readiness Preparation Grant will
        thus finance several studies to (i) comprehensively assess-the multi-sectorial drivers and underlying
        causes of deforestation and forest degradation in Vanuatu,3 (ii) analyze the land ownership and title
        to Emission Reduction (ER), (iii) identify and prioritize REDO+ strategy options, and (iv) review
        and analyze the existing benefit sharing systems in the country and how they will be affected by
        REDD+.
    b) Sub-component 3.2: SESA process and development of the ESMF (US$ 0.25 million). To ensure
        that negative impacts offuture performance-based REDO+ programs are eliminated or minimized,
        social and environmental concerns will need to be taken into account during the development of
        the REDO+ strategy. This sub-component will fund the SESA process, which will assess the extent
        to which the proposed REDO+ strategy options address the environmental and social issues
        associated with Vanuatu's customary and present patterns of land use and forest management. Any
        identified gaps will be addressed throughout this process. ln addition, the SESA will develop           an
        ESMF that outlines the procedures for managing potential environmental and social impacts
        resulting from REDO+ implementation including guidance for the preparation of future
        environmental and social safeguard instruments.
    c) Sub-component 3.3: Consultation and participation activities (US$ 0.80 million). This sub-
        component will fund consultation on key activities of the FCPF, including on (i) the multi-sectorial
        drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and degradation, (ii) the identification of strategy
        options, (iii) legal harmonization concerning land and title to ER,4 and (iv) benefit sharing. It will
        also fund the development of targeted communication materials and tools for all components
        supported by the Readiness Preparation Grant. Since a large part of the population lives in remote
        and often inaccessible areas with high levels of illiteracy, considerable awareness raising and
        outreach efforts will be necessary. Activities will be guided by the Communication Strategy and
        Consultation and Participation Plan that were developed during preparation of the R-PP. This sub-


3
  This analysis will include assessing the economic competitiveness of the REDO+ strategy options against other
potential uses of land such as leasing of land for cash arising from development pressure.
4
  As has been discussed in paragraph Error! Reference source not found., Vanuatu has chosen an activity-based
approach for REDO+. As a consequence, beneficiaries will receive in-kind technical assistance and/or extension
services instead of REDO+ revenue. This will help avoid complex legal changes, e.g. land registration. However, the
legality of this approach needs to be more fully assessed during the REDO+ Readiness, which this study will help
inform.

                                                                                                                 5
         component will also support further strengthening of the Communication, Partnership and
         Engagement Strategy developed and implemented by VMGD.

 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to tbe safeguard analysis (if
 known):

 The proposed REDO+ Readiness Activities are relevant to all of Vanuatu, but does not entail any activities
 on the ground.

 E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

 Responsibility for day-to-day implementation and technical leadership of the overall REDO+ Readiness
 process will lie with the Vanuatu National REDD+ Unit at the DoF, headed by the Vanuatu REDO+
 Coordinator. This unit will work in close collaboration with the REDO+ Technical Committee and the
 AWGs, including the SESA A WG, to be created during the Readiness process. The A WGs will be
 responsible for helping move some of the analytic work forward. They will work closely with the National
 REDO+ Coordinator and report directly to the REDO+ Technical Committee, which will oversee the
 process and ensure that activities are being implemented in accordance with the work plans and schedules.
 DoF capacity limitations will be addressed by the hiring of a REDO+ Technical Specialist and Outreach
 and Extension Officer to support the Vanuatu REDO+ Coordinator during the REDO+ Readiness
 Preparation process. Overall technical oversight to ensure timely progress and completion of activities shall
 be a responsibility of the REDO+ Technical Committee.

 Component 1 will finance the provision of adequate human, technical and operational resources specifically
 for recruitment of necessary human resources, institutional and capacity strengthening for implementation
 of the grant. More specifically, capacity strengthening will be targeted at the members of the Vanuatu
 National REDO+ Unit, the REDO+ Technical Committee, the ad hoc Working Groups (including the SESA
 Working Group), and six Provincial REDO+ Stakeholder Committees (to be set up), all of which will be
 responsible for leading and providing technical inputs to the implementation and strategic planning process.
 The grant will finance training, workshops, and associated operational costs.

  A team of international consultants and local specialists will be hired to carry out the SESA. Including local
  and regional consultants on the team would encourage greater ownership by the Government while helping
· to fill capacity gaps. The consultant team hired to conduct the SESA will work closely with the SESA Working
  Group, the National REDO+ Coordinator, and the Extension and Outreach team responsible for implementing
  the Consultation and Participation Plan as described in the R-PP.

 The SESA Work Plan will include an analysis of the institutional arrangements for integrating
 environmental and social issues into REDO+ Readiness. Whenever possible, the SESA will build upon
 existing knowledge and coordinate with institutions that carry out similar strategic planning studies or
 impact assessments.

 The capacity for implementing the SESA at the national level will need to be significantly increased to
 ensure that social and environmental risks are mitigated; therefore, mitigation measures include close
 supervision of the SESA process by the World Bank Group (WBG) task team; provision of capacity
 building to the Government team by the consultants leading the SESA process; and inclusion of
 environmental and social specialists from government and civil society in the SESA Working Group.

 The Department of Environmental Protection and Conservation (DEPC) is a crucial stakeholder and
 participant in REDO+ but may require additional resources to actively and meaningfully engage in the
 SESA Working Group. The Director of DEPC is on the REDD+ Technical Committee, was involved in the

                                                                                                            6
R-PP, understands the purpose and processes of the SESA, and has access to infonnation on other REDO+
programs in the Pacific. The DEPC staff does not have a working knowledge of WB safeguards, but this
can be overcome with training which will be provided through the grant.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Haddy Jatou Sey, Senior Social Development Specialist, co-TTL
Ross Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist I Regional Safeguards Coordinator
Ann McLean, Social Safeguards Specialist
Penelope Ferguson, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Claire Forbes, Social Safeguards Specialist


ll. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The operation is classified as Category B. The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will support the
Government of Vanuatu to make wide-ranging changes to the way forests and forest resources are accessed
and managed, and how benefits are shared, and may have both positive and adverse impacts on existing
forest uses and livelihoods of people dependent on forest resources.

The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant must comply with WB safeguard policies regarding the management
of environmental and social impacts. This grant will, in part, support the country's activities to identifY the
potential risks associated with REDO+ and mitigation options. In order to do this, the FCPF is using a
SESA to integrate key environmental and social considerations into REDO+ Readiness by combining
analytical and participatory approaches. The SESA allows: (i) social and environmental considerations to
be integrated into the REDO+ Readiness Preparation process, in particular the REDO+ strategy; (ii)
stakeholder participation in identifYing and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and
capacity gaps to manage these priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD
Country's progress reports on Readiness preparation; (iii) an ESMF to be put in place to manage
environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts; and (iv) development of a
Resettlement Policy Framework or Process Framework (if required) to identify specific provisions to
address potential displacement or restriction to and use of natural resources

It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below will be triggered in the REDO+ Readiness
process.

 Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                    I     Yes      I    No      I    TBD
 Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                I      X       I            I
 The REDO+ Readiness preparation stage is meant primarily for technical assistance and capacity
 building activities. The grant will not finance any implementation of REDO+ activities on the ground
 (investments, pilot activities etc.), but will directly influence such activities. The policy is triggered for
 the REDO+ strategy and for the future potential investments. The proposed Readiness Preparation
 Activities seek to positively impact Vanuatu's forest management by designing a national strategy for
 REDO+. However, the analytical and other products of this grant will have some potential
 environmental risks and impacts in its area of influence. A SESA is to be carried out under the
 readiness phase and will help ensure compliance with the WB's safeguards policies. It will serve to
 identity, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts associated with
 the final REDO+ strategy. It will also serve to identify and promote potentially positive impacts and
 benefit sharing opportunities in connection with the strategy. The SESA will influence the final
 national REDO+ strategy, by ensuring that the consideration of social and environmental risks and
 potential impacts is a factor in its preparation. It will also provide guidance and key elements for the
 preparation ofthe ESMF.


                                                                                                                  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain wlty)                 I    Yes     I    No      I    TBD

Future investments and carbon finance transactions will require specific environmental assessments
and social assessments, which will benefit from the strategy context created by the SESA and ESMF.
The ESMF will include standing methods and procedures, along with appropriate institutional
arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing, and monitoring specific risks to prevent adverse
impacts, including cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                         I X           I            I
The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the national REDD+ strategy
take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental services and
products that natural habitats provide to human society. Overall, REDO+ activities are expected to
have significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the country puts in place an effective strategy
to reduce Joss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues related natural habitats and potential
impacts of the national REDD+ strategy, and findings will feed into the ESMF.
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                  I X           I            I
REDD+ activities in forest lands aim to reduce deforestation, enhance the environmental services
contribution of forested areas, promote reforestation, reduce poverty, and encourage economic
development, therefore the Forests safeguard policy is triggered. Overall, REDO+ activities are
expected to have significant positive impacts on forests, in that the main goal of the program is to
reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent
communities. Potential impacts of the National REDD+ strategy on natural forests will be assessed
through the SESA and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF will reflect the
requirements of the WB's Operational Policv regarding forest management.
Pest Manaeement(OP 4.09)                                              I X           I            I
This policy is triggered because, depending on the scope of REDD+ strategies, the program might
include reforestation activities or the intensification of agricultural activities on degraded lands. SESA
will assess the application of this policy and if appropriate, a Pest Management Plan with mitigation
(including consideration for Integrated Pest Management) will be developed and included in the
ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                              I X           I           l
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result in drafting of REDD+
Strategy Options, which could affect areas containing sites with physical cultural resources (e.g.
monuments, historical buildings, archaeological or paleontological sites, holy sites, etc.). The SESA
(and ESMF) will assess if ground implementation of REDO+ Strategy Options is likely to include
these sites and ensure the appropriate measures are adopted in order to protect them.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       I             I X          I
Recent analytical work completed by the East Asia Pacific Regional Safeguard Secretariat found that
three out of the four defining characteristics of IPs under OP 4.10 are not met in Vanuatu. Accordingly,
OP 4.10 is not triggered for projects in Vanuatu.

Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.1:D                               I X I                     I
The Readiness Preparation Grant will not finance operational activities, including site-specific carbon-
reduction projects. Ni-Vanuatu, especially in remote areas, derive a substantial proportion of their
livelihoods from land-based resources. Depending on the strategy options selected under Component 3,
downstream REDD+ activities might impact land-dependent groups and trigger voluntary land
donation or land acquisition/involuntary resettlement in situations involving restrictions of access to
present or future legally designated parks, protected areas, or forest management/reforestation areas.
This policy is triggered to ensure landowners, leaseholders and land users and forest-dependent
communities and/or individuals are properly consulted and not coerced or forced to accept or commit
to REDO+ activities or other forest management/reforestation activities involuntarily, and that best

                                                                                                             8
 Safe2uard Policies Tri22ered (please explain wlty)                  I Yes 1 No I TBD
 practice approaches as infonned by OP 4.12 are adopted. Through the SESA process, any issues
 related to land acquisition, voluntary donation or involuntary resettlement will be identified, and
 management processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The ESMF may include, as required, a
 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework (PF), all of which will be part of the
 SESA, in order to ensure avoidance, minimization, and/or appropriate compensation for adversely
 affected persons or populations in downstream implementation. Sub-component 2.2 of the Readiness
 Preparation Grant will fund assessment of existing grievance mechanisms at the national and
 decentralized levels, assess the capacity of institutions and customary mechanisms that would handle
 grievances, and support their strengthening specifically for REDO+.
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                        I            I X           I
 The REDO+ activities do not involve the construction of, nor will be affected by, new or existing
 dams.
 Projects on International Waterwa}'s (OP/BP 7.50}                  l           1 X            I
 The REDO+ activities do not involve international waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                             I           I X           I
 The REDO+ strategies and activities will not be located in any disputed areas.


Ill. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country's mid-term progress report, at which time
   the ISDS may be updated as needed:

June 30, 2017

B. Time frame for launching and completing tbe safeguard-related studies tbat may be needed. The
    specific studies and their timingS should be specified in tbe initial ISDS and/or updated ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be applied is the SESA. The SESA includes the preparation of an ESMF.
The ESMF may evolve and be updated over time when new REDD+ strategy options and projects or
activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation of REDO+.
The SESA addresses the key environmental and social issues associated with the analysis and preparation
of REDD+ strategy options as well as REDO+ projects, activities (including investments), policies and
regulations. In this manner SESA can ensure compliance with WB's environmental and social safeguards.

The SESA process requires that the selection of REDO+ strategy options should take into account the
country's institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks and the
potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any identified gaps to
manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant WB's safeguard policies should be identified
along with the strategy options to feed into the preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF should provide a
framework to manage and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts related to specific
projects and activities (including investments and carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future
implementation of REDO+.




s Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the lnfoshop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.

                                                                                                                     9
The ESMF will be stmcturcd to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant requirements
of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies, including, as required, a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework (PF).


IV. APPROVALS

 Signet/ ami submitted by:

                                                          ~-
 Task Team Leader:                                                                        February 19,
                                                                                             2015
                                      Stefanic Sieber
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards                  Peter Leonard /)             v/ r                   February 28,
 Coordinator:                                           .,,,tf1n lfv:lr1f- ·                 2015
   Comments:                                                       I
 Practice Manager:                    tain ShukerJ.A~                                      February 21 ,
                                                                                              2015
    Comments:
                                                                       .
                                                                   (1 em plate Vers1on November 12, 20 I 0)




                                                                                                           10 .
