                                                                              83231


                       INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                               APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: November 19,2013

I. Basic Information

 .
lB    ''P
   a SIC   '
         roject Data
Country: Republic of Vanuatu                 -1 Proiect ID:   P145311
                                              I Additional Project ID:
Project Name: Energy Sector Development Proiect
Task Team Leader: Kamlesh Khelawan
Estimated Appraisal Date: Mav 22, 20 13        -I Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASNS                            I Lending Instrument: RETF
Sector: Financial and Private Sector Development
Theme: Regulation and Competition Policy
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (US$m.): 1.5
ESMAP SIDS-DOCK(US$m.): 1.0
SREP (US$m.): 0.25
Environmental Category: B                                                     c·


Is this a transferred project                   I Yes-fXl                No fl
Simplified Processing                            I Simple fXl            Repeater   l
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes []         No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The proposed Project aims to provide technical assistance to the Department of Energy (DoE)
and the Utilities Regulatory Authority (URA) of Vanuatu in the development and execution of
their work programs.

3. Project Description:

Component 1: Policy Support US$1.25 million. This support would be geared towards the
implementation of policy, legislative and regulatory reforms and appropriate institutional
arrangements. It would consist of advisory assistance and capacity-building for the DoE in the
following areas:

        i. Policy, legislation, regulations and institutional arrangements (consultant and
           advisory services, workshops and communication);
       ii. Capacity Building: build capability in Vanuatu, within the Government and the DoE
           to support the development of policy, legislative and regulatory arrangements, and
           compliance framework to support renewable energy and energy efficiency
           investments; and

    iii.         Preparation of the Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP) Investment Plan,
                 including an energy sector overview and a renewable energy technologies
                 assessment.

Component 2: Regulatory Support (URA) US$1.50 million. The component would finance
consultant services (sector regulator, legal and regulatory specialists, economist/market analysts),
which would also provide on-the-job training, mentoring, and formal training (in country and
overseas, including training/internship arrangements). The component also comprises a program
of advisory assistance and capacity building for URA in the following areas to address
continuing as well as emerging regulatory challenges:

            i.    Energy (to be extended to include petroleum and LPG) and water regulation
                  (consultant and advisory services and communication - media, publication and
                  presentations and URA website content management- and workshops); and

           ii.     Capacity Building: build capability in the URA through on the job training,
                   seminars and workshops for URA staff on energy and water sector regulations.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will finance advisory support, capacity building and regulatory support and will not
involve physical interventions. It will however involve preparation of a SREP Investment Plan,
including an energy sector overview and a renewable energy technologies assessment. The
preparation of the Investment Plan will include assessment of potential safeguard impacts of
specific investments included in the Plan.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Josefo Tuyor- Environment
Svend Jensby - Social
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes   No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X

The policy is triggered since the project will support the
development of theRE Investment Plan that may lead to the
identification and implementation of priority RE projects that may
have environment and social impacts. The preparation of the RE
Investment Plan will include screening of environmental and social
impacts of priority investments included in the plan. The priority
investments identified from the Investment Plan will be covered by
separate environment and social assessments, if and when they are
proposed, and as part of the detailed feasibility studies of these
projects/investments.
Natural Habitats(OP/BP 4.04)                                    '
                                                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X

The policy is triggered because of the presence of indigenous
peoples in Vanuatu. The vast majority (98.5%) of the population in
Vanuatu is of Melanesian descent and considered as indigenous
peoples under OP 4.1 0. The remainder of the population is made up
of a mix of Europeans, Asians and other Pacific islanders. Since the
majority of project beneficiaries are indigenous peoples, no stand-
alone Indigenous Peoples Plan is needed. The project is mainly
capacity building and TA and does not include physical investments
on the ground ai:td will have no adverse social impacts.

· The preparation of the RE Investment Plan will include screening of
  social risks, impacts, mitigation measures and benefits to local
  communities, and will involve consultations with stakeholders,
  including civil society and traditional organizations. The priority
  investments identified from the Investment Plan will have provisions
  for the conduct of social assessment and the preparation of
  Indigenous Peoples Plan, where applicable, if and when they are
  proposed, and as part of the detailed feasibility of these
  projects/investments.
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
  Proiects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
  Proiects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project will provide policy, advisory and regulatory support to the Government, including
helping build capacity. It will not involve nor finance any physical investment.

The project will ·support the preparation of a SREP Investment Plan .that may lead to the
identification and implementation of Renewable Energy (RE) projects which may be funded by
SREP funds, if and when, the funds become available. The implementation of the RE projects
identified from the Investment Plan will have environment and social impacts, which will be
covered by separate environment and social assessments, if and when they are proposed, and as
part of the detailed feasibility studies of these projects. The preparation of the RE Investment
Plan supported by the project, will include a screening of environmental and social impacts,
risks, mitigation measures and benefits following WB safeguard policies and national legislation.

As there is no physical investment, no separate safeguard instrument is required. Safeguards will
be imbedded!mainstreamed into the Bank's support to the Government and in the development
of the investment plan.

2.       Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The proposed project aims to deliver significant social benefits. It will help increase utility
coverage, and quality and reduce tariffs for energy throughout the country, including the
underserved communities and islands. Remote communities will benefit from greater coverage
and access to utility services. The project will also significantly contribute to a positive
assessment of investment opportunities in the country. The capacity building activities will
improve the oversight activities of the agency including implementation of environmental and
safety regulations.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts: nla

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: n/a

The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the development of the RE Investment Plan through a
Recipient-executed grant, particularly the identification and prioritization of specific prospective
renewable energy projects, will inClude environment and social screening of the candidate
projects to ensure that environmental and social issues and other safeguard requirements are part
of the criteria for inclusion in the investment plan. If and when in the future, the investment plan
is implemented, the investments identified will be required to fulfill safeguards requireme.nts
identified in the screening; this will be spelled out in the RE Investment Plan.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The project as such will not have safeguard impacts and will not include consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies. However, the preparation of the draft REInvestment Plan will
include consultations with stakeholders, including civil society representatives and traditional
organizations. These consultations will involve discussions of potential environmental and social
safeguard issues of investments included in the Investment Plan.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit!Mana2ement Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               n/a
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               n/a
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to Info Shop
Indi2enous Peoples Plan/Plannin2 Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                n/a
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
 ·Date of submission to Info Shop
Pest Mana2ement Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               nla
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to Info Shop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tile Corporate Level (to be filled in when tile ISDS is
finalized by tile project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including
EMP) report?
                                                          IYes [ ]       No [X]        N/A []
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
·Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [X]    N/A[]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest Manal!ement
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No []    N/A [X]
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No[]     N/A[X]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
 project team include aPest Management Specialist?
 OPIBP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes []    No []    N/A [X]
 cultural property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
 the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
 resources?
 OPIBP 4.10 -Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]   No [X]    N/A []
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
 consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
 safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
 design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
 Social Development Unit?
 OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No[]     N/A[X]
  framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
  prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
 safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
  plan/policy framework/process framework?
  OPIBP 4.36 -Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No[]     N/A[X]
  issues and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
 overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification svstem?
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ 1   NoD      N/A[X1
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Pro.iects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes f 1   No f l   N/A[Xl
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No[]     N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ 1   No [ ]    N/A [X]
the World Bank's lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ 1   No [ 1    N/A [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system ofthe
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 SiJ!11ed a11d submitted bv:                             Name                     Date
 Task Team Leader:.                  Kamlesh Khelawan
 Environmental Specialist:           Josefo Tuvor
 Social Development Specialist       Svend Jensby
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Peter Leonard   " ""~
                                                     »'                      (e{~\26>~
   Comments:                                         \        \..J
 Sector Manager:                     Michel Kerf         \   }.,     ,)/   I\ 2.../ O<//ZCJ13
   Comments:                                                 =---
