                                                                                                   84075

                                 INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE


Date prepared/updated: 20/12/2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vanuatu                                          Project ID: Pl33701
                                                          Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Vanuatu Global Partnership on Output Based Aid (GPOBA) Grid-Based Electricity Access Project
Task Team Leader: Mr. Kamleshwar Khelawan
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 2014              I Estimated Board Date: March 7, 2014
Managing Unit: EASNS                                    I Lending Instrument: Small RETF Grant
Sector: Energy
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor, Rural services and infrastructure, Social inclusion.
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: (US$m): GPOBA US$4.85 million; US$0.52 million User Contribution

Enviromuental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                              Yes [X]                        No[]
Simplified Processing                                      Simple [X]                     Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                     Yes []            No [X]
Emergencies)                                                                                            I
2. Project Objectives:
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase sustainable access to formal grid-based electricity
services within Vanuatu's electricity concession service areas for low-income customers through targeted
subsidies.

Access in the context of this project means a direct consumer connection to the electricity grid, as opposed
to a shared connection or no connection due to lack of affordability

The objective will be achieved by subsidizing the cost of grid-based household service connections for
approximately 4,375 households that will be eligible to connect as "small domestic consumers". The
project will also contribute to improving household safety standards by subsidizing the cost of household
wiring, where wiring is not to standard or in place, for eligible households and provide energy saving light
bulbs.

3. Project Description:
The project has four components. These are: I) Output Based Aid (OBA) subsidies for new electricity
service cotll1ections for low-income households; 2) OBA subsidies for household wiring for low-income
households accessing electricity services under the project; 3) Implementation support to the Department of
Energy (DoE) for project management, communications and outreach, and training, and 4) Independent
verification of outputs. The proposed activities under each component are presented below.

Component 1: OBA subsidies for new electricity service connections for low income households. This
component provides one-off OBA subsidy to cover up to 80 percent of the cost of cotmecting low-income
households to grid-based electricity services in Vanuatu. The subsidy will be available for both post-paid
electricity meters and pre-paid meters (where available). The component will be implemented through
existing private sector utilities - Union Electrique du Vanuatu Ltd (UNELCO) and Vanuatu Utilities and
Infrastructure Limited (VUI), and will be subject to verification by the DoE.

Component 2: OBA subsidies for household wiring for low-income households accessing electricity
services under the project. This component provides one-off OBA subsidies to cover the cost (up to a
predefined limit) of household wiring for low-income households accessing grid-based electricity services
under the project, where wiring is not to standard or not in place. The households will be wired according
to a standard design for the project in accordance with Australian and New Zealand standards (AS/NZS
3000). Household wiring will include cabling and backfilling (in a trench prepared by the consumer) from
the utility meter box to a Ready Board in the consumer's premises. The Ready Board will include
necessary protection, two light sockets with switch, two power outlets and two energy saving light bulbs.
For safety reasons, the wiring will be carried out and/or authorized by qualified (Grade A, Australian
ElectricaVMechanical Fitters license or equivalent) electrical contractors contracted or authorized by
UNELCO or VUI to carry out the works. The utilities will supervise the electrical contractors and on
completion, provide verification that the internal wiring has been completed to standard.

Component 3- Implementation support to DoE for project management, communications and
outreach, and training. The DoE will require support throughout the project's life to oversee
implementation and develop longer-term institutional capacity for managing energy-related subsidies.
Funding from this component supports the DoE with the following:

              (a) Development and adoption of technical standards and licensing for household wiring in
              technical project implementation;
              (b) Monitoring and evaluation and financial management of OBA subsidies;
              (c) Outreach and education to raise beneficiaries' awareness of the project, outreach to raise
              consumer awareness on electrical safety;
              (d) Technical training and related support for DoE staff, if required;
              (e) Services from an independent auditor, if required;
              (f) Outreach and project implementation activities such as hiring training facilities, printing
              of training and awareness raising material, travel to outer islands for implementation of key
              project activities; and
              (g) Goods required for project implementation such as project related office equipment and
              supplies.

Component 4- Independent verification of outputs. This component will fund a suitably qualified
consultant or firm as an Independent Verification Agent (NA) to undertake the verification of outputs
under the project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis:
The project will be located within the geographical boundaries of the electricity grid concession areas in
suburban-residential areas ofLuganville (on Espiritu Santo), Port Vila (on Efate), and the islands ofTanna
and Malekula. The Luganville grid is operated by VUI, and the remaining grids are operated by UNELCO.
Most of the low voltage distribution lines are above ground, although there is some below ground
reticulation (e.g. the new Bladiniere Estate in Port Vila).

Connections will be made either above ground or below ground and will comprise a wire from the existing
distribution line to dwellings, and a meter. Poles may be included if necessary. No involuntary land
acquisition or compensation is involved. Disruptions during construction will occur within the distribution
corridor (within I OOft of any line) and on the property of the subsidy recipient. There is flexibility as to the
route of the poles and lines. These will predominantly be on land already acquired for public purposes, such
as road reserve. This flexibility means that physical cultural resources can be avoided and there will be a
low likelihood of impacts on assets such as productive trees or cropping areas.

Where it is unavoidable to remove trees, crops or structures in the access way in order to connect, voluntary
land donation protocols will apply. As such, work will occur only after due consultation, at the request, and
with the informed consent ofthe affected potential beneficiary(ies) and other affected parties.
Compensation for affected land or assets is therefore not foreseen. Normal compensation provision for
unforeseen damage will be included in the obligations of the Contractor(s).

Eligible consumers will "self-select" for this program. That is, the consumers will request a connection (as
per current processes) to the grid from their utility and ensure access to the utility for a connection to be
made. The GPOBA subsidy is to be targeted to low-income consumers. Low-income consumers in
Vanuatu benefit from subsidized tariffs and there is already a targeting mechanism in place in Vanuatu for
such consumers. The GPOBA program will utilize the existing targeting mechanism and targeting is based
on a 5A mono-phase connection.

A communications strategy will be implemented to ensure that target beneficiaries will be made aware of
the project, especially in areas where there are concentrations of low-income households. Women's
organizations will be consulted and requested to assist in disseminating information to female heads of
household.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Penelope Ferguson (Consultant)               Environmental Specialist (EASNS)
Ann McLean (Consultant)                      Social Specialist (EASNS)


6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes               Adverse environmental and social impacts are
                                                                  predicted to be minor, because of minor civil
                                                                  works components. There are social benefits to
                                                                  the electrification oflow income households.
                                                                  However since the location of works are not
                                                                  known at this time. the Environmental and
                                                                  Social Management Framework (ESMF) lays
                                                                  out the procedures for identifYing and managing
                                                                  environmental and social risks, and includes a
                                                                  Code of Practice for connection work to cover
                                                                  waste, soil management, vegetation clearance
                                                                  and health and safety. It also contains a
                                                                  grievance mechanism.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No                The project involves minor civil works within
                                                                  urban areas, with some flexibility around
                                                                  location and route. Physical cultural resources
                                                                  (including graves) can be identified prior to
                                                                  works, and avoided.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   Yes               The majority of the project beneficiaries in
                                                                  Vanuatu are Indigenous Peoples and therefore
                                                                  no Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is needed and
                                                                  policy requirements will be directly integrated
                                                                  into project design. The potential impacts of the
                                                                  project are limited and the project is not likely
                                                                  to have any impacts on IPs' use of natural
                                                                  resources. A social assessment commensurate to
                                                                  the potential effects on the indigenous people
                                                                  has been undertaken. The Bank and client will
                                                                  ensure that: (i); free, prior and informed
                                                                  consultation takes place resulting in broad
                                                                  community support to the project; (ii) particular
                                                                   attention is given to ensure culturally
                                                                   appropriate mitigation measures and project
                                                                   benefits to the people; and (iii) a qualified
                                                                   Social Development Specialist is included in the
                                                                   Task Team.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes                Beneficiaries will self-identifY by applying for a
                                                                   subsidized connection. Even though land
                                                                   acquisition is not foreseen, land (however
                                                                   small) will be required for poles, guy wire
                                                                   anchors and transformers. It is anticipated that
                                                                   some of the required land may be in existing
                                                                   easements on public land and some of the land
                                                                   may be privately used. In addition it is foreseen
                                                                   that there will be voluntary land donation by the
                                                                   beneficiaries and other affected parties as is
                                                                   current practice to enable the concessionaire
                                                                   access to their properties for connections.
                                                                   Therefore, in order to address any resulting
                                                                   impacts, the project has prepared a Resettlement
                                                                   Policy Framework, which will guide discussions
                                                                   related to access to private properties and
                                                                   preparation of supporting documentation during
                                                                   project implementation. If land donations are
                                                                   made by the community or individuals then the
                                                                   project will ensure that in line with the
                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework: (i) such
                                                                   donations meet the Bank's criteria for voluntary
                                                                   land donations, i.e. there has been prior
                                                                   consultation, and the donation is indeed
                                                                   voluntary without coercion; and (ii) the required
                                                                   protocols are in place to confirm and document
                                                                   the land donation or transaction, whatever is
                                                                   applicable.
Safety ofDams OP/BP 4.37                        No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No

ll. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. IdentifY and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The potential for adverse environmental and social impacts is low. There are no potential large scale,
significant and I or irreversible impacts. The ESMF describes potential impacts as tree trimming and crop
loss along the connection access way, disruptions to households during connection, and dust, sediment and
waste issues during connection (particularly if poles or trenches are required). These are all mitigated by
good housekeeping, in line with the Utilities' standard operating practices.

The social benefits are increased access to grid electrification for those households that had not previously
connected. This will enable in particular better quality and lower cost lighting, better indoor air quaiity,
access to media and amenities and improved quality of life.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area:

Indirect benefits of access to electricity include ability to study or undertake income generation activities at
night, improved health where electricity has replaced hydrocarbons or biomass fuels, greater awareness due
to access to information and entertainment media, improved amenity for elderly or disabled persons, and
greater sense of security and social inclusion.

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts:

The project has no anticipated adverse social impacts and no alternatives were considered.

4. For those safeguards to be addressed through OP/BP 4.00, characterize in general terms the extent to
which borrower systems are equivalent to the Objectives and Operational Principles of OP 4.00, Table AI.
For those safeguards to be addressed through conventional OP/BPs, identifY the reason for the decision to
not apply OP 4.00 (e.g. absence of equivalence and/or acceptability report).

Not applicable.

5. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues to identifY any significant
gap-filling measures necessary to fulfill the conditions for application ofOP 4.00. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Not applicable.

6. IdentifY the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, including the Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR) with an emphasis on potentially affected
people:

Not applicable.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                                                                                         I
   Environmental and Social Management Framework
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                            Yes
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                               19December2013
   Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                            09 January 2014
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary ofthe EA to           NA
   the Executive Directors
   "In country" Disclosure- See below
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                            Yes
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                               19 December2013
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                            09 January 2014
   "In country" Disclosure

   Prior to project appraisal, a draft version of the ESMF and RPF was reviewed by institutional stakeholders and
   interested civil society organizations, and public disclosed in Vanuatu at the Department of Energy's offices.
   Hard copies ofthe ESMF and RPF were also placed at the Utility Regulatory Authority, and UNELCO offices
   in Port Vila, Tanna, and Malekula, and VUI office in Loganville. This took place during the period of public
   consultations from November I I - November 22, 2013.

   High-level information about the project and the ESMF and RPF was announced via a Project Information
   Bulletin (made available in Bislarna, French and English) to the Radio Vanuatu public broadcasting service
   and the local press, the Vanuatu Daily Post and the Independent on November 9, 2013.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tile Corporate Level (to be filled in wllen tile ISDS is finalized
by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?       Yes [X]  No []   N/A[]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager        Yes
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.00- Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
Bank-Supported Projects
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit (QACU) and the            Yes [ ]  No [ ]  N/A [X]
ESSD and International Law Practice Group (LEGEN) review and
approve the Safeguard Diagnostic Review report?
OP/BP 4.04 -Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [ ]    No [X]   N/A []
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 -Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?              Yes [ ]  No [ ]  N/A [X]
Is a separate PMP required?                                             Yes [ ]  No [X]  N/A[]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards
specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP requirements included in
project design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to physical cultural      Yes [ ]  No [ ]  N/A [X]
resources?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as           Yes [ ]  No [X]  N/A []
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or        N/A
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been     N/A
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process       Yes [X ]  No [ ]  N/A []
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or        Yes.
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy
framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and     Yes [ ]  No [ ]  N/A [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
      Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]       N/A [X]
      Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
      Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
      Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
      arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
      OP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
      Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                     Yes [ ]   No [ ]       N/A [X]
      If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
      requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
      the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
      What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
      Has the RVP approved such an exception?

      OP 7.60 -Projects in Disputed Areas
      Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                    Yes [ ]   No [ ]       N/A [X]
      international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
      followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
      prepared
      Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in
      the OP?
      The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
      Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World          Yes [X]   No [ ]           N/A[]
      Bank's Infoshop?
      Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place        Yes
      in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
      project-affected groups and local NGOs?
      All Safeguard Policies
      Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional                 Yes [X]   No [ ]           N/A[]
      responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
      related to safeguard policies?
      Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the       Yes
      project cost?                                                                                                 ·.
      Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include           Yes
      the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
      safeguard policies?
      Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the         Yes
      borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
      documents?


      D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                   Name                                      Date
Task Team Leader:                      Mr. Kamlesh Khelawan                                    24 December, 2013
Environmental Specialist:              Ms. Penelope Ruth Ferguson                              24 December 2013
Social Development Specialist:         Ms. Beverley Ann McLean                                 24 December2013
Approved by:                                                          I      I
Sector Manager:                        Mr. Michel Kerf           \.A./\                        I'   I   I   I   ·'U>/'1
  Comments:                                                               ~
