                                                                                        94631

                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                         ADVANCE AGREEMENT (AA) ACTIVITIES



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        12-Feb-15
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Vanuatu               IProject ID:              jP154149
 Project Name:               Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P 154149)- Advance Agreement
                             (AA)
 Task Team Leader(s):        Christopher R. Bennett
 Estimated Board Date:       NA
 Managing Unit:              GTIDR
 Sector(s):                  Aviation ( l 00%)
 Theme(s):                   Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50         No. The preparatory activities are processed under
 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid          Paragraph 12 of OP I 0.00 Because of a situation of
 Response to Crises and Emergencies) ?           Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       55.50                     Total Bank Financing:    148.25
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            7.25
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                 48.25
     Total                                                                                        55.50
 Environmental Category:      B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       No
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The project development objective is to facilitate the preparation of the proposed Vanuatu
 Aviation Investment Project by immediately commencing ·final design and procurement of
 project activities..

 3. Project Description
Airports Vanuatu Ltd. (AVL) is a State Owned Enterprise which is responsible for the
management and operation of Vanuatu's three international (Bauerfield, Pekoa and
Whitegrass) airports. Safety and regulatory oversight is provided by the Civil Aviation
Authority (CAA). Bauerfield International Airport (VLI) is the international gateway to
Vanuatu, processing some 500,000 passengers per year. A 2012 IFC analysis suggests that the
demand could be as much as 1 million per year by 2030.

As long ago as 2011, the paving ofBauerfield's runway was identified as an issue that needed
to be addressed, along with the preparation of a master plan. With the runway deterioration
accelerating rapidly, the repair ofBauerfield has become critical to ensuring continuity of jet
operations-the major source of international tourists.

The Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (VAlP) will address emergency remedial works on
the Bauerfield International Airport (VLI) runway and apron pavements to ensure the
continuation of international flights. The project will be presented to the World Bank's Board
as an Emergency Operation under paragraph 12 ofOP/BP10.00 on the premise that the
immediate risk of complete pavement failure on some 600.meters of runway would result in the
cessation of all jet operations, which would have a major detrimental impact on the national
economy which relies heavily on tourism. The specific activities under VAlP include:

   a. Invest in key aviation infrastructure (repaving of runway, apron and turning bays),
      navigation aids and communications equipment at Bauerfield International Airport;
   b. Review the rescue fire service capabilities and address any major issues;
   c. Prepare an aviation strategy and international airports master plan to support the long
      term strategic development of the sector; and,
   d. Support capacity development for regulatory oversight, and operations and
      management of Vanuatu aerodromes.

The aviation strategy and master plan could lead to a future follow on project to support
investments in the other international airports, and increased private sector participation. The
program also foresees investments into strengthening Vanuatu's regulatory oversight capacity
through targeted training and funding for support services from PASO.

The VAlP represents a third phase of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAlP), an
on-going Series of Projects with the overarching objective of improving international aviation
safety and security in the region. Phase I included work in Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu; Phase II
includes work in Samoa, as well as reform of the 'Pacific Aviation Safety Office' (PASO) in
Vanuatu. Unlike the other PAIP projects, the proposed project does not have any institutional
strengthening or policy activities beyond the preparation of the master plan which will be a
roadmap for potential future investment programs and sector reform.

This ISDS applies only to preparatory activities of the VAIP that will be financed by a Project
Preparation Advance (PPA). A separate Appraisal Stage ISDS for the VAlP activities proper
will be prepared and submitted to RSS prior to apprai~al . The PPA activities comprise:
       a. conducting core sampling and pavement strength and deflection testing, including
          preparing an engineering design brief, for the Bauerfield International Airport's main
          runway and apron areas;
       b. finalizing, publishing, and holding consultations on Project safeguard instruments;
       c. undertaking an independent assessment of the condition of fire tenders and preparing
          bid documents for their repair, refurbishment and/or replacement;
       d. preparing detailed engineering designs and bid documents for civil works to rehabilitate
          the Bauerfield International Airport's main runway and apron areas under the VAIP,
          including support during bidding;
       e. procurement, financial management and Project coordination support provided by the
          PAIP Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU).

    The PPA may also finance temporary emergency patching to the runway in the intervening
    period before the main contractor can mobilize to undertake the civil works under the V AlP, as
    well as navigation aids. Initial pavement investigations will determine the need or otherwise for
    any civil works. Based on the Bank's assessment these may include minor patch work on the
    pavements, sealing of cracks and the renewal of runway markings. No substantial civil works
    are envisaged.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    The Republic of Vanuatu is a small Pacific Island nation located in the South Pacific.
    Comprising of about 80 islands, the country's 12,336 sq. km of land spread over 1,300 km.
    Vanuatu's population of approximately 266,000 are 98.5% Melanesians. The largest island,
    Efate, hosts the country's capital Port Vila and is home to a quarter of its population. Vanuatu it
    is located in the "ring of fire" and at the centre of the Pacific "cyclone belt". This results in a
    relatively high frequency of volcanic eruptions, cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, storm surges,
    coastal and river flooding and landslides.

    Tourism and travel make a significant contribution to Vanuatu's economy representing about
    23.2% ofGDP in 2013. Tourist arrivals have been steadily increasing, recording around
    330'000 visitors in 2013. A quarter of these tourists arrive by air 1• In 2013, tourism and travel
    services directly engaged 12,500 workers representing around 18.2% of total employment. The
    direct contribution of Travel & Tourism to GOP is expected to grow by 4.3% per annum to
    25.0% by 2024 2• To accommodate this projected growth, efficient and functional aviation
    services are critical.

    Tourism activities provide significant opportunities for women in Vanuatu, where gender
    inequality remains a development challenge. Women have poorer access to health care,
    particularly in rural areas, and prevalence of gender-based violence (GBV) is reportedly very
    high, affecting up to 60% of women aged 15-49. Lower levels of secondary school attainment

1  Statistics from Vanuatu Hotels and Resorts Association.
2
  World Travel and Tourism Council. 2013. Travel and Tourism. Economic Impact 2014 Vanuatu. Available at:
http://www. wttc.orglfocus/research-for-action/cconomic-impact-analysis/country-rcports/
and literacy pose barriers to women's equal participation in economic activity with half as
many women active in formal employment as men. With no formal national private sector
organization to represent their interests, ni-Vanuatu women continue to operate informally or
semi-formally as micro-enterprises.

The activities proposed under the PPA (including potential minor patch work on the pavements,
sealing of cracks and the renewal of runway markings) will be undertaken within the existing
airport boundaries, hence no new land or asset acquisition will be required. Should minor civil
works be required, materials would be sourced from existing commercial operations within
Vanuatu. Minor noise, dust and vibration impacts could potentially be experienced by those
living and working on or near the airport and the transport route. The impacts during the PPA
period are expected to be site-specific and none of them irreversible.

It is not anticipated that the project will have an impact on people's lands, assets, access to assets
or livelihoods. Investments are taking place on existing airport grounds, and therefore no land
acquisition or resettlement is envisioned. These lands are not used in any way by any persons
outside the airports, as all airports are fenced and secure and are used for aviation operations
only. No businesses will be affected in any way by the project.

Should civil works be required to be funded through the PPA, a brief Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared addressing these works. This ESMP will
include mitigation measures for any potential environmental or social impacts and will be
approved by the World Bank and disclosed prior to works commencing. Similar works have
been undertaken previously in Kiribati, Tuvalu and Tonga with satisfactory environmental and
social outcomes. A separate; more detailed, ESMP will be prepared for the VAlP activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Julie Babinard, Senior Transport Specialist, GTID~ Nicholas John Valentine, Consultant,
GSURR, Ross James Butler, Extended Term Consultant, GSURR.


6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes             The activities to be supported by the PPA
                                                             are associated with the preparation of
                                                             Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project
                                                             (V AlP), which will address emergency
                                                             remedial works on the Bauerfield
                                                             International Airport (VLI) runway and
                                                             apron pavements to ensure the
                                                             continuation of international flights.

                                                             An Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Plan (ESMP) will be
                                                             prepared by the contractor- using
                                                             guidance from the PAIP Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework
                                                             (ESMF)- should emergency civil works
                                                            be required ..




Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No              The project activities under the PPA are
                                                            within the existing footprint of the airport
                                                            and do not trigger this policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No              The project activities under the PPA are
                                                            within the existing footprint of the airport
                                                            and do not trigger this policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No              The activities under the PPA do not
                                                            involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No              The project activities under the PPA are
                                                            within the existing footprint of the airport
                                                            and do not trigger this policy ..
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.1 0              No              Based on the institutional stocktaking
                                                            conducted by the World Bank for the
                                                            Pacific Island Countries, including
                                                            Vanuatu, the four defining characteristics
                                                            of indigenous peoples per OP 4.10 are not
                                                            met; hence the policy is not deemed
                                                            triggered in Vanuatu.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No              The project activities under the PPA are
                                                            within the existing boundaries of the
                                                            airport and do not trigger this policy.
                                                            During the pre-identification mission the
                                                            Bank was advised by A VL that there are
                                                            no land claims or issues related to the
                                                            existing airport footprint. All civil works,
                                                            including equipment and materials
                                                            storage, are envisaged to only be on the
                                                            existing airport boundaries.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No              The project activities do not involve
                                                            construction of dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                The project activities are terrestrial.
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No              The project activities under the PPA are
                                                            not in Disputed Areas

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities proposed under the PPA (including potential minor patch work on the pavements, sealing
of cracks and the renewal of runway markings) will be undertaken within the existing airport
boundaries, hence no new land or asset acquisition will be required. Should minor civil works be
required, materials would be sourced from existing commercial operations within Vanuatu. Minor
noise, dust and vibration impacts could potentially be experienced by those living and working on or
near the airport and the transport route. The impacts during the PPA period are expected to be
site-specific and none of them irreversible.

All issues can be managed within standard good practices for civil construction and transport-related
impacts (traffic management, limits to noisy work, waste management etc.) based on the screening
criteria provided in ESMF prepared for the PAIP. Issue management will be documented in an ESMP.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
No long term environmental or social impacts are anticipated as a result of any works carried out under
the PPA stage of the project to which this ISDS relates. Improved safety and security will be beneficial
to both travelers and residents in the vicinity of the airports.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no feasible alternatives to rehabilitating the runway.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The client may have low capacity to supervise implementation of any ESMP. This potential risk will be
mitigated by having the project's Supervision Consultant to monitor and report on safeguard compliance
as part oftheir project supervision activities. Furthermore, any ESMP will have a very short life-span
(until the main project is approved) and will cover a very restricted scope of works. The Bank and the
Supervision Consultant will also provide training to the Airports Vanuatu Ltd. (AVL) operational staff
and the environmental staff in Vanuatu.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Institutional stakeholders in safeguards compliance are the implementing agency (VPMU) and A VL.
Local stakeholders are the communities surrounding the Government owned buffer zones around the
airports. Local stakeholders will be informed and consulted at the time of the preparation of the draft
ESMP, and at a meeting coordinated by the AVL to consult airport neighbors. Stakeholders will
continue to be consulted at other times during implementation (for example to announce the start of
works,). Neighboring communities will be made aware through various media of the procedure for
registering any complaints or grievances in relation to the project.

B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    C Cotnplifutce Monitoring lntlicators ttt tlte Co.
                                                     rporate Level
    The World B.a nk Policy on Disclosure of 111forn1ation
    Have rele ant safeguard I) H ~cies docurnent b ~en sent to the \Vorld Yes [ ]        .o   [X]      A [ ]
    Bank's lnfoshop? Safeguard docutnents wiU be prepared a· part of
    the proj ct pr~eparatton. Th instrumnents win be disclosed prior lo the
    appraisa] of the project (V AIP).
            elevant documnents been discJosed in-country in a public place Yes [ 1
    1-Iave r·                                                                            No   l[X]    NA I[   )
    in a [! nn and language that are understandabl and accessibl to
    project-affected groups and local GO.s'?
I   AU Safegua1..d Policies
    l-Iave satisfactory cal~endar budget and clear institutional           Yes   [X]     No [ 1 NA [ 1
l
    respon ibilities been pr _pared for the ilnplctnentation of n1easure
    r~e1ated to safeguard po1 icie ?

    Have c, st related to safeguard policy 1nea ure been included in the                 ~0       [    AI
    project co t?
    Does the Monitoring and valuation syst~en1 of the project include
                               1
                                                                           Yes [X]       No[          NA [
    the rnonitoring of safeguard ilnpacts and Enea.sures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have sad factory impleJnentation arrange1nents been agreed ith         Yes   [X)     No [ 1 NA [ 1
    the borr w~er and the arne been adequatdy reflected in the proj ct
    legal doctunents?


    III. APPROVALS

    Task Temn Leader(s):
    Appro\ eel By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:          VJJ CFo                          Date:   ,,_...

    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Michel Kerf                        Date:   2/15/2015
