                                                                          82659


                     INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                 APPRAISAL STAGE (Updated for Restructuring Project)

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: Nov.3, 2013

I. Basic Ioformatioo

 .    . Proiect
1 B&SIC    .    Data
Country: Vietnam                               I Project ID: P083581
                                               I Additional Project ID (if any): P085393
Proiect Name: Hanoi Urban Transport Development Project
Task Team Leader: Ajay Kumar
Appraisal Date: May 17, 2007                I Board Date: July 3, 2007
Managing Unit: EASTR                        I Lending Instrument: SIL and GEF grant
Sector: Transport
Theme: Urban development, transport
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                   .
IDA Amount (US$m.): US$155.21 million
GEF Amount (US$m.): US$ 9.8 million
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: Government of Vietnam (Hanoi): US$139.68 million

Environmental Category: A
Is this a transferred project                 TYes []                    NofXl
Simplified Processing                          I Simple[]                Repeater f]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)             Yes [ l T No [X]

2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the IDA Credit is to increase urban mobility in Hanoi by (i)
increasing the use of public transport in two existing and one new corridors [thereby increasing
corridor capacity]; and (ii) reducing travel times by all modes between the city center and the
west and northwest sections of the city (west of west lake).

Its GEF strategic objectives are to promote a shift to more environmentally-sustainable transport
modes and urban development plans, and to promote the replication of these approaches in the
country and region. Its global environment objective is to lower Hanoi's transport_.related
greenhouse gas emissions, relative to a business-as-usual scenario.
The project is being restructured with a proposed 18-month extension. The main reasons behind
slow implementation are:
       • Decision by the government to make some changes to the project design due to the
           proposed construction of an urban railroad along the original corridor proposed for
           the Bus Rapid Transit system to be implemented under this project; and
       • Delays in compensation to the project affected people due to difficulties in
           determination of residential land compensation price.
3. Projectt Description:
The Project has three key components:

The Bus Rapid T ransit Component (BRT) {total US$77.19 million, IDA US$67.88 million,
Government of Vietnam US$5.31 million, GEF$4.0 million] will support the development of
24.5 km of segregated busways and bus priority along the Giang Vo- Lang Ha and Le Van
Luong - Yen Nghia corridors, the construction of BRT stops, interchange stations, terminals and
maintenance facilities. It will also support the establishment of a modern BRT management
system, including bus ticketing and financial controls. Lastly, the component will fmance the
implementation of a public consultation, communications and media strategy for disseminating
information on the BRT system.

Modifications to tile BRT Component. There are three main modifications made to reflect the
overlapping scope of other transport projects. First, an urban rail project is currently under
construction along the same alignment as the original BRT plan (K.huat Duy Tien - Nguyen Trai
- Ba La), resulting in competing public transport modes rather than complimentary services.
This component is therefore adjusted to realign the western section of the BRT corridor (along
Le Van Luong extension road - Le Trong Tan) in order to maximize the design capacity of the
public transport systems. The route would also be extended to Yen Nghia Bus station as a new
corridor. Second, another urban rail line is under implementation along the planned BRT route
No.2 (Giai Phong corridor). Therefore, the BRT Line 2 investments, as well as the associated
investments for a terminal and interchange at Quang Lai (Giai Phong corridor) will be cancelled.
Third, the planned depot at Vinh Quynh will be relocated, with a new depot at Yen Nghia. The
permanent depot will be financed by counterpart funds after site plans at Yen Nghia are
finalized. In the meantime, a temporary depot will be set up at the existing Yen Nghia site for
initial stages of the BRT operation. In addition, a BRT terminal will also be set up at the Yen
Nghia site.

The Road Infrastructure and Sustainable Urban Planning [total US$162.67, IDA US$59.52
million, Government of Vietnam US$101.40 million, GEF US$1. 75 million] component includes
the construction of a section of the Second Ring Road (RR2) between Nhat Tan Bridge and Cau
Giay on the main western radial arterial and construction of a resettlement site to house persons
displaced by the proposed road, together with support for sustainable urban land development
and transportation planning in Hanoi. There are some changes in detailed design of this
component to reduce land acquisition in Dao Tan and Buoi intersections.


The Institutional Development Component (ID) [total US$8.49 million, IDA US$4.44 million,
GEF US$4.05 million] supports equipment procurement and technical assistance (TA) to: (a)
strengthen Air Quality Management; (b) support traffic management; (c) support establishment
and strengthening of a new Public Transport Authority; (d) support transport planning and policy
development; and, (e) finance replication activities that have been designed to address GEF's
priority on replication (to be agreed/confirmed by negotiations).
Modifications to the Institutional Component. Project financing of two components is proposed
to be cancelled as these are being financed and implemented directly by city authorities. These
include i) air quality monitoring equipment; and ii) technical assistance for traffic and demand
management.                                                  ·

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project area lies in Hanoi City and its ecological envirorunent is highly artificial including
some agricultural envirorunent. The surface water system in Hanoi includes 2 major rivers (Red
river and Nhue river), 4 small rivers and 118 lakes and ponds. West Lake is the largest and most
rich in ecosystem, however it is located about I km away from the proposed RR2. Literature
review and field survey showed that the major features of the flora include agricultural plants
and road side plantation trees, and no protected fauna species were identified. There was no
indication of the existence of valuable nature habitats.

Water Quality. Baseline water quality monitoring was conducted in June and October 2005.
The results showed that the water qualities of rivers and po'nds along the proposed alignments
often exceeded the relevant standards in terms of COD/BOD, ammonia and coliform due to
domestic and industrial wastewater.

Air Quality. The baseline air quality was assessed based on the existing air quality monitoring
data, as well as supplementary monitoring data conducted in July 2005 along the proposed
alignments. In general, air pollution levels in the city exceed the national ambient air quality
standards with respect to PM, and CO and N02 at some urban street locations sometimes exceed
the air quality standards. The result of supplementary monitoring was almost the same as the
general situation, i.e. the concentrations of PM were mostly higher than the standards while those
of N02, S02 and CO did not exceed the standards.

Noise. Baseline noise monitoring was conducted in July 2005 together with the supplemental air
quality monitoring. Noise levels along the proposed aligrunents were roughly around the
relevant standard levels and often exceed the standards both in day-time and night-time.

C ultural Relics. A cultural relics survey identified II cultural relics sites along the proposed
alignments. They include 7 temples, 2 pagodas, 1 memorial house and ancient tree and ancient
dike, however, no deteriorated impacts is expected or relocation is needed due to the construction
of proposed new alignment.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
   Ms. Hoa Thi Mong Pharo, Sr. Social Development Specialist (EASVS)
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EAP SD), Sr. Social Development Specialist (EASVS)
   Mr K.hang Van Pharo (EASVS), Envirorunent Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                               Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                          X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                                 X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                          X
Pest Ma nagement (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                          X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                       X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Environment Assessment (OPIBP 4.01). Although HUTDP would significantly contribute to
promoting the use of public transportation, reducing traffic congestion, and eventually improving
air quality in Hanoi, construction and operation of Second Ring Road (RR2) and Bus Rapid
Transit (BRT) might cause potential large scale impacts on the environment as follows:

•   ~   Noise levels would exceed the relevant standards at sensitive sites along RR2 and BRT
        routes. Since the proposed aligrunents go through populated areas, heavy machinery and
        transport vehicle operation during the construction phase would cause noise problems.
•       Predicted results of CO and N02 showed general improving trends towards 2020 due to
        anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened vehicular emission control. On
        the other hand, dust and toxic air pollutants from hot asphalt mixing plants during the
        construction work were identified as a major air pollution problem.                        .
e       Wastewater from bus transit and terminal stations and oily waste from bus cleaning and
        maintenance during the operation phase, and slurry wastewater produced from construction
        sites and domestic wastewater from construction camps during the construction phase might
        cause adverse impacts on water bodies and aquatic life.
•       The changes in the BRT component do not lead to changes in the project type and scale,
        project location, sensitivity of environmental issues, and nature and magnitude of potential
        impacts.

Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4./2) continues to be applied for the project. The Resettlement
Action Plan has been updated to reflect more precise number of households affected by the RR2
construction activities after the detail design. The cancellation of the second BRT line and the
resettlement site CT5 has made RR2 the only component causing involuntary resettlement. It is
noted that the proposed BRT alignment is totally based on the public land and the existing road
and station, so no economic or livelihood impact on the local residents are expected. Land
acquisition area of the RR2 has decreased by about 2.5 ha thanks to realignment of Dao Tan
intersection and Buoi interchange to minimize impact to the local people. The number of
Displaced People (DPs) under the RR2 has increased from 1,374 as in the original Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) to 1,506 and the number of relocated DPs increased from 653 to 780
respectively. The entitlements for affected households have also been updated to reflect the
changes introduced under the new Government regulations including the requirement of land
appraisal to ensure compensation rates reflect replacement costs. The new estimated resettlement
cost has increased from US$105 million to US$273.4 million. Because the resettlement site CT5
was dropped and many DPs want to be relocated in the vicinity, additional resettlement
apartments have been provided from available apartments of the city to meet the DPs demands.
In order to expedite compensation and resettlement activities and provide advisory services to
the Project Management Unit (PMU), the frequency of resettlement independent monitoring will .
increase from every 6 months to every 3 months. Similarly, it has been requested that the PMU
will submit to the Bank internal monitoring report monthly instead of quarterly as in the original
RAP. The updated RAP has been disclosed locally from August 26, 2013 and in Vietnam
Development Center (VDIC) in Hanoi on August 29, 2013.and sent to Infoshop for disclosure on
the same day August 29, 2013.

Regarding RAP implementation, the delay of·compensation and resettlement activities has been
significant for the RR2. Up to now, 68.7% of the needed land has been acquired for the project
and the project has mostly compensated for affected agricultural land only. The total of 476 out
of 497 PAHs affected by agricultural land had received the compensation and cleared the site.
There have so far been no significant problems with regard to acquisition of agricultural land
because the Government and Hanoi compensation policy for agricultural land has improved
substantially. According to independent monitoring report, most of the Project Affected
Households (PARs) have restored or improved the livelihood compared to pre-project level.
Problems remain with regard to residential land, which is about 70% of the remaining land to be·
acquired, however, because of difficulties to determine their market values due to highly volatile
and inflammatory land markets in Hanoi. It took more than year for the city to detennine land
compensation price till September, 2013, when Hanoi People's Committee (PC) approved the
prices, which are higher than the PPC established prices by 1.8 times for Tay Ho district and 2
times for the remaining three project districts of Ba Dinh, Cau Giay and Dong Da. These new
prices were based on proposals from the district authorities and were determined after reviewing
land market prices in their respective areas and taking into account opinions from the city
agencies such as Department of Finance (DOF), Department of Natural Resources and
Environment (DONRE), Department of Construction (DOC), Tax department and the City
Compensation and Land Clearance Board. The newly approved land prices have been informed
widely to the PAHs and the compensation payment for the affected residential land has just been
started. According to the agreed action plan, all compensation and resettlement activities will be
completed by November, 2014 to allow completion of the civil work by May, 2015.

About 600 graves have to be relocated under the project. The Physical Cultural Resources policy
is thus triggered. For the time being, 578 graves have been relocated smoothly. Grave relocation
and its mitigation measures have been described and budgeted in the project RPF and RAP as
there had been practice in the region in the past to manage graves though OP 4.12.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future ·
activities in the project area:

The HUTDP is fully in compliance with the Hanoi Urban Master Plan and Hanoi Urban
Transport Master Plan. Predicted results of air pollution showed general improving trends
towards 2020 when anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened vehicular
emission control are in pJace. In order to make sure this air quality improvement, besides BRT,
Air Quality sub-component of HUTDP will support the development of improved air quality
management policy making system, motorcycle pollution control measures and air quality
monitoring system in Hanoi.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

In the design of the BRT component, three kinds of alternatives were considered before the
choice of a closed BRT system trunk and feeder BRT system with special-buses running
primarily on a network of exclusive bus routes was chosen. In addition to the chosen alternative
simple bus ·priority measures (rejected because of their relatively little success in environments
similar to Hanoi where there is the potential for significant problems of non-observance and
enforcement) and open BRTs such as in Seoul, Kunming and Taipei where a variety of buses and
access and egress from the exclusive lane system (rejected because of the potential for control
problems leading to excessive bunching) were considered. The BRT system has been designed
to be physically integrated with a potential urban rail system under consideration for financing
from French bilateral donors. Discussions with Hanoi on the Public Transport Authority (PTA)
have been coordinated with the relevant 'French donor agencies.

In the design of the RR2 a series of different alternatives were considered in view of significant
technical, social, economic and financial constraints. The final solution chosen has many features
of interest. First, the inclusion of bus-lanes on the main carriageways in the initial phases (to
avoid congestion and conflict with local traffic and non-motorized traffic) and the subsequent
reservation of an alignment for mass rapid transit compatible with longer tenn growth proposals
for the area north of Red River and west of West Lake. Secondly, there are significant reductions
in the area within the previously defined planning line at Buoi Interchange resulting in a
significant reduction in involuntary resettlement and associated costs. The final design chosen
for the section between Cau Giay and Buoi reflects an extensive analysis to provide forecast
capacity needs in a very tightly constrained space bounded by the dyke and the drainage canal.
As mentio ned above, further minimization of land acquisition during project implementation has
been conducted to reduce impact to the local people.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Environment impacts: A stand-alone EMP was developed, and the proposed measures are to be
incorporated into bidding documents and contracts. Six civil works contracts have been awarded
and another six contracts will be awarded in 2014. The EMP defines mitigation measures and
costs, training plan, environmental monitoring plan, and environmental management
organizations. The PMU established under Hanoi PC is responsible for the implementation of
EMP. Environmental monitoring will be carried out by a qualified independent monitoring
institution to be selected through procurement process.

For the proper implementation of EMP, a specialized social and environmental Wlit has been set
up under the PMU with at least one professional staff designated to supervise the overall
implementation of EMP. In addition, key staffs engaged in environmental management in
contractors, construction supervision consultant, road operation company and government
organizations have received intensive training. Noise, surface water and ambient air monitoring
have been carried out at selected sensitive sites throughout project implementation and will
continue to be carried out during the first two years of operation.

During implementation, the original EMP for BRT component was updated by the PMU and
cleared by the Bank. This updated EMP was subsequently disclosed locally in the project sites
and VDIC.

All safeguard instruments that were prepared for the original project will continue to be
implemented with updating to reflect some changes. The EMP has been updated to reflect (i)
revisions to the proposed BRT routes, and (ii) revised details for the road components. The
updated Environment Management Plan (EMP) for BRT component was found satisfactory and
cleared by the Bank. The proposed restructuring does not change the safeguards category nor
trigger any new enyironrnental safeguards policies. The safeguards Wlit of the PMU has
coordinated with consultants and contractors to deal with project environmental safeguards
issues in a timely manner. An environmental monitoring program is being adequately
implemented by PMU and other relevant agencies. The first quarter monitoring report of year
2013 showed that implementation of mitigation measures by the contractor is fairly good and the
ambient environmental quality (e.g. air and water) has not deteriorated, and as such, the civil
works do not seem to have caused negative impacts on the environment. In general, project
implementation meets the Bank environmental safeguards policies.

Social impacts: A Resettlement Policy Framework and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) have
been prepared in line with the local laws, regulations and the World Bank's policy on
Involuntary Resettlement. As mentioned above, the RAP has been updated to reflect the changes
introduced under the new Gov. regulations. Its objective is to ensure that all project affected
people (PAPs) will be compensated for their losses at replacement cost and will be provided with
rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain, their pre-project living
standards

A multi-level organization has been established for the management and implementation of the
resettlement program at Hanoi Municipal, district and ward levels. Ha Noi People Committee
will have overall responsibilities for implementation of the RAP. A City Steering Council has
been established to assist the People Committee in carrying out its overall responsibility. The
Department of Ha Noi Urban Transport Project Management Unit (PMU) is responsible for
implementing the RAP on behalf ofHa Noi People's Committee.
Both internal and external monitoring mechanisms have been established. While internal
monitoring serves largely as a PMU internal tool for managing the resettlement program, an
external agency has been engaged to carry out an independent monitoring, and evaluation of the
RAP's implementation. As mentioned above, the frequency of both internal and external
monitoring will be increased to expedite compensation and resettlement activities as well as to
provide advisory services to the PMU to implement RAP properly

Cultural Property: There are no significant impacts expected on cultural relics along the
alignments due to their distance from the alignments and environmental considerations
incorporated in the engineering design, except about 600 graves have to be relocated under the
project. For the time being, 578 graves have been moved smoothly. Grave relocation and its
mitigation measures have been described in the project RPF and RAP as there had been practice
in the region in the past to manage graves though OP 4.12.. In order to minimize any unexpected
envirorunental consequences during construction, prior to the construction the PMU and
contractors will conduct consultation with relevant authorities and local communities on
necessary protection measures. The civil work contracts will include a procedure in the event of
chance finds during construction.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentiaUy affected people:

Environment: Two rounds of public consultation were carried out according to the World Bank's
guideline in August 2005 (first round), and January/February 206 (second round). During this
process, a total of more than a thousand project-affected individuals, groups and representatives
of district PCs, NGOs, wards and communes were intensively consulted. The participants
showed concerns about envirorunental issues during construction and operation such as dust,
exhaust gas and noise, and requested adequate mitigation measures. Their feedback was reflected
in the engineering designs and EMP. The Envirorunental Impact Assessment (EIA) and EMP
were disclosed locally at DONRE, TUPWS offices and relevant 4 districts as well as at InfoShop
in May 2006. The revised EMP for the BRT component was disclosed locally on May 4, 2013
and at the Infoshop at October 14, 2013.

Consultations with the affected people during update and revision of EMP were done by the
PMU, the feedback waS incorporated in the final revised EMP. During construction,
consultations with affected people continue to be carried out by the PMU to address EA-related
issues in a timely manner.

Social: During the project preparation phase, project information and resettlement policy were
disseminated through household visits, public meetings, group and focus group discussions and
the household socio-economic survey. They were intensively consulted and actively participated
in discussions on their development needs and priorities, about their perception towards project
objectives. Their views, concerns and recommendations have been taken into consideration in
the project design.      This consultation process has been continued during the project
implementation as further project design information becomes available. The RAP details the
plan for consultation during project design and implementation, including the procedures,
methodologies and subjects of consultation. A Public Information Booklet (PIB) was prepared
and distributed to all affected population in the project area. The consultation process is going
on through every step of the RAP implementation, including detailed measurement survey,
entitlement and price application, relocation site selection and so on. The project has developed
grievance redress mechanism and described it in the RAP. It describes the steps and procedures
for grievance filing as well as the responsible institutions and timeframe for receiving and
addressing the grievances. The original RAP was disclosed locally and in Infoshop on Nov.l7,
2006. The updated RAP has been disclosed locally and in Infoshop on Aug. 29,2013.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Mana~ement Plan/Other:
 Date of receipt by the Bank
                                                                       - 05/10/2006 for original
                                                                         EA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
                                                                       - 05/04/2013 for the
                                                                         revised BRT component
                                                                       - 05/10/2006 for original
                                                                         EA
 Date of submission to lnfoShop
                                                                       - I 0/14/2013 for the
                                                                         revised BRT component
 For category A projects, date of dis~buting the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Updated Resettlement Action Plan:
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         Aug.29, 2013 (Nov.17,
                                                                         2006 for Original RAP)
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                                              Aug. 29,2013
                                                                           (Nov. I?, 2006 for
                                                                             Original RAP)
lndi~enous   Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to lnfoShop
Pest Management Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in wizen the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including          Yes [X]    No [ ]         N/A []
EMP} report?
If yes, then did the Regional Envirorunent Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No[X]          N/A [ ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical} natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest Mana2ement
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [   J       NIA [X]
 issues?
 Is a s~arate PMP required?                                   Yes [ ]    No[]           N/AfX]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
_Qroject team include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OPN 11.03- C ultural Property
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [X]    No []          N/A []
 cultural prop_erty_?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
 the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?                                '
OPIBP 4.10 - lndi2enous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]    No []          N/A [X J
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peo_Q).es?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
 Social Development Unit?
OPIBP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy               Yes [X J   No [ ]         N/A []
framework/process framework (as appropriate} been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]   No []      N/A[Xl
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]   No [   1   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60· - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [   1   N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes {X]   No [ ]     NIA []
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
AU Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]   No [ ]     N/A ( ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaiuation -     systein o-f tlic -- ---- Yc:s                  --
                                                                         --·--- - - - - -
projt:(;t include the tnonitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satistf\cto~y implementation ~;~i:iutgementS-been_
                                                      ____
                                                         _--Yes -~ -----
agreed with the bmrower and the same been adequately
reflcct~d in_ tl~f? pmjec~ ~ef~~~ <!~cl1fl1:tznt-s'? ___ _
