                                                                                             93720


                             mTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                    APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                 Report No.:
    Date ISDS Prepared:                  15-0ct-20 13
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
       l. Basic Project Data
     Country:                     Vietnam               IProject ID:              jPt10477
     Project Name:                VN-CPF-Vietnam Renewable Energy Development (PI 10477)
     Task Team Leader:            Ky HongTran
     Estimated Board Date1:       NA
     Managing Unit:               EASVS
     Sector(s):                   Other Renewable Energy (50%), Hydropower (490/o),       Public
                                  Administration -Energy and Mining (1%)
     Tbeme(s):                    Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%),    Climate
                                  Change (33%)
     Is tbis project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
     (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
     Total Project Cost:      318.05                     Total Bank Financing:     j202
     Financing Gap:            I 16.05
          Financing Source                                                                         Amount
          BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          63.98
          International Development Association (IDA)'                                                  202
         Swiss SECO                                                                                    2.28
          Borrowing Country's Fin. lntenneidary/ies                                                   49.79
          Total                                                                                      318.05
         Carbon Finance from the World Bank                                                           16.44
     Environmental Category:      FI - Financial Intermediary Assessment
     Is tbis a Repeater project? No
     Is this a Transferred       No
     project?


1
 There is no Board approval for the CF operation but the signing of the ERPA between the Bank and the
Government, expected in late Oct/early November 2013
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Bank and the Ministry of Industry and Trade {MOI1) have signed a Carbon Finance
Intermediary Agreement (CFIA) that sets the framework for a pipeline of Carbon Finance
Project (CFP) in Vietnam. The objective is to scale-up the implementation of CF in the
renewable energy sector, focusing on renewable non-fossil energy sources such as wind,
solar, geothermal, hydropower, and biomass. The Bank will assist in building capacity of
MOlT, Participating Banks (PBs), and developers in terms of safeguards, as .well as Clean
Development Mechanism (COM) project cycle- from project identification and evaluation, to
registration by the COM Executive Board and monitoring.

3. Project Description

The carbon finance operations for the REDP will be based on a Program of Activity (PoA)
which will scale up the development of renewable energy projects and reduce the project - by
- project carbon fmance transaction costs. The potential carbon fmance revenue for the
renewable energy proj~cts seeking support from the REDP will help to overcome numerous
barriers preventing widespread investment in the renewable energy sector in Vietnam,
enhancing the financial attractiveness of the subprojects as well as improve their long-term
sustainability through performance based payment in hard currency.

The proposed PoA is proposed to be initially financed by IDA Credit - Vietnam Renewable
Energy Development Project (P/03238). The carbon finance related component of the IDA
Credit is the Renewable Energy Investment Component consisting of two subcomponents: (i)
Credit to Support Renewable Energy Investments; and (ii) Technical Assistance for
Investment Project Implementation. Within the REDP program, private developers will
develop sub-projects not exceeding 30MW based on small hydro, wind, and biomass in
accordance with REDP criteria including environmental and social safeguards. They will
commit at least 20% in equity funding and will approach participating banks for lending of up
to 80% of each sub-project's total project cost. This COM program of activities (the REDP
PoA), however, only supports the development of small hydropower projects.

A typical COM Project Activity (CPA) under this PoA will be small run-of-river hydropower
plants with an installed capacity below or equal to 30 MW connecting to Vietnam national
electricity grid. Although detailed technical characteristics may differ among CPAs, the
general design conditions outlined below apply to all CPAs.

REDP seeks to implement environmentally friendly practices such as the maintenance of
minimum ecological flow. From the water intake, water is diverted through a channel
(headrace) to a surge tank so as to always maintain a minimum ecological flow in the natural
river bed. From the surge tank, water goes through penstock(s) to run turbines situated inside
a power house and generate electricity by generators connected to the turbines.

As per the geology, a small reservoir may be necessary to ensure minimum power generation
during the dry season. In the power house one or more turbines and generator(s) are located.
From there the plant connects to the next nearby sub-station through a new or existing power
line. A discharge channel returns the water to the natural river bed.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Except for few subprojects selected upfront, all renewable energy subprojects will be
identified during implementation. Majority of the subprojects would be small hydro power
plants which are typically located in hilly or mountainous areas in the Northern and Central
regions. Biomass subprojects would be located in the Southern delta areas while wind
subprojects are likely situated in Central coastal areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Son Van Nguyen ( EASVS)
Nghi Quy Nguyen ( EASVS)

Since the CFP is directly related to the REDP, the safeguards policies triggered for REDP are also
triggered for the CFP.

6. Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 l      Yes             The project is expected to provide
                                                          additional energy to the grid to
                                                          improve the quality and availability of
                                                          power, especially in rural remote
                                                          areas. It is also expected to lead to
                                                          improvements of local productive
                                                          capacity, business environment as
                                                          well as social, educational and
                                                          cultural life. It is also expected to
                                                          generate local employment
                                                          opportunities and improve access of
                                                          rural communities.

                                                          Nevertheless, previous experience in
                                                          Vietnam in developing renewable
                                                          energy projects, especially small
                                                          hydropower plants shows t.hat these
                                                          projects cause some change in land
                                                          use and impact the lives of people
                                                          living in the project areas. The
                                                          project can have other local
                                                          environment consequences as well,
                                                          including impacts on natural habitats
                                                          and forests, and to landscapes.

                                                          These sub-projects are also likely to
                                                          be located in hilly areas where, in
                                                Vietnam, ethnic minorities live.

                                                The RE subprojects will be scre.ened
                                                using the Environment Safeguards
                                                Framework (ESF) developed under
                                                the REDP for environment and social
                                                impacts. The ESF was developed in
                                                compliance with Bank safeguard
                                                policies and GoV's environment
                                                policies. It provides guidance in the
                                                screening of subprojects for eligibility
                                                to receive funds from the REDP, and
                                                identifies additional information that
                                                may be needed to ensure
                                                compliance with WB Safeguards.
                                                Each subproject is required to
                                                prepare its Environment Impact
                                                Asses. s ment (EIA) or Document for
                                                Environment Protection Certification
                                                 (EPC) in accordance with
                                                Vietnamese laws and regulations.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
Pest Management OP 4.09               No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes       Sub-projects are also likely to be
                                                located in hilly and mountain areas
                                                where ethnic minorities live.

                                                The project will adopt the Ethnic
                                                Minorities Planning Framework
                                                (EMPF) developed under REDP to
                                                ensure that the development of
                                                subprojects fully respects the dignity,
                                                human rights, economies, and
                                                culture of affected·ethnic minority
                                                peoples. The subproject developer
                                                must be able to demonstrate that
                                            .   they have obtained broad community
                                                support for the subproject through a
                                                process of free, prior, and informed
                                                consultations with the affected ethnic
                                                minority communities. In this regard,
                                            the EMPF sets out guidelines to (a)
                                            ensure that the ethnic minority
                                            peoples receive social and economic
                                            benefits that are culturally
                                            appropriate; (b) avoid potentially
                                            adverse effects on the ethnic
                                            minority communities; and (c) when
                                            such adverse impacts cannot be
                                            avoided, minimize, mitigate, or
                                            compensate for such effects.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   RE sub-projects may displace
                                            people and/or require land
                                            acquisition.

                                            A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                            (RPF) developed under REDP will
                                            be used to address the various types
                                            of land acquisition and resettlement
                                            that may occur during a sub-project
                                            preparation and implementation. It
                                            lays down the principles and
                                            objectives, eligibility criteria of
                                            displaced persons, modes of
                                            compensation and rehabilitation,
                                            participation features and grievances
                                            procedures that will guide the
                                            compensation and potential
                                            resettlement of these persons. It
                                            further describes the planning and
                                            documentation requirements for
                                            such activities under the project
                                            The developers would need to follow
                                            these policy guidelines and
                                            procedures, and prepare necessary
                                            documents during the planning and
                                            design of the project proposals.

Safety of Dams OP/BP. 4.37            Yes   For both new and rehabilitated small
                                            hydropower projects, the Dam Safety
                                            (OP/BP 4.37) will be applied. For any
                                            dam that is considered large by the
                                            World Bank and GoV will be treated
                                            as large dam and subject to the
                                            additional safety requirements, a
                                                          Dam Safety Safeguards Framework
                                                          has been prepared and developed
                                                          under ~EDP to include the relevant
                                                          requirements in accordance with OP
                                                          4.37.
Projects on International Waterways       No
OP/BP7.SO .
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The net impact of the CFP is positive because they seek to overcome multiple barriers that prevent
investment in the renewable energy sector in Vietnam and contributes to the greenhouse gas emission
abatement. However, the CFP is directly linked to the subprojects under REDP, its potential impacts
are also related to those of the REDP (P 103238).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The CFP itself would have positive long term impacts in sustainable renewable development of the
sector in emission reduction and economic development in rural and disadvantage areas. However, the
CFP is also directly related to the REDP with its potential indirect and/or long term impacts described
in the REDP ISDS (Report No.: AC3584)
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The alternatives to the grid connected renewable energy power plants are thermal power
generation. The CFP is superior environmentally because it encourages production of low
emission electricity, and therefore reduce overall local and global pollutants resulting from
thermal power generation. The environment benefit of the project has even greater value to
Vietnam given the increasing reliance of the country to the coal fired generation to meet its
electricity demand. Renewable energy generation is also superior in social terms compared to
large thermal power plants because it catalyzes economic development in rural and
disadvantaged areas through creation of associated infrastructure and employment
opportunity.

At the CFP subproject level, each developer is required to consider alternative options to
minimize adverse social and environment impacts during design and execution, including
-selection of sites for its subproject facility and infrastructure. The requirements are included
in the safeguard frameworks that each participating developer has to follow in order to get
access to the project financing.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of boa:rower capacity to plan and implement tbe measures described.
  To be eligible for a CPA, a subproject must be fmanced under REDP and follow all the
· safeguards requirements of the parent project, REDP allows subprojects to be refinanced
  provided that they meet basic eligibility and quality criteria that will help ensure the
  subprojects meet good international practice in technical, environmental and social terms and
  meet minimwn levels of financial and economic performance. An Environmental Safeguards
  Framework (ESF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Minority Planning
  Framework (EMPF) were prepared for the REDP project to ensure that the subproject to be
  financed under REDP meets the government regulation and World Bank safeguard policy
  requirements. The ESF provides guidance on screening of subprojects for eligibility to receive
  funds from the REDP, and identifies additional information that may be needed to ensure
  compliance with WB Safeguards. The framework also describes the roles and responsibilities
  of MOlT, Ministry of Finance (MoF), the participating banks (PBs), and the developers
  involved in meeting these requirements. The RP specifies all mitigation measures related to
  the involuntary resettlement, and includes details compensation payments. The purpose of the
  policy framework is to clarify resettlement principles, organizational arrangements, and
  design criteria to be applied to subprojects to be prepared during project implementation.
  According to the RPF, the compensation for alllosses·as the result of involuntary resettlement
  for the subproject will be at replacement level. The EMPF describes the implementation
  process for screening for the presence of indigenous peoples in areas covered by a specific
  REDP sub-project, social assessment, free, prior and informed consultations leading to broad
  community support, and the preparation of an Ethnic Minority Development ,Plan (EMDP).
 MOlT has prepared the dam safety safeguards framework (DSF) includes the relevant
 requirements in accordance with the World Bank's Safeguard Policy. The Independent Dam
 Safety Panel of Experts (DSP) will review and advise the REDP Project Management Board
 (PMB) on matters relative to the safety of new large dams or high hazard dams, or the
 rehabilitation of existing large or high hazard dams. PMB will screen and select subprojects
 for the Panel's review. PMB views the Panel as an objective reviewer, whose independence
 and integrity will be safeguarded. The DSP has been appointed. Dam Safety Assessment
 Reports (DSRs) have been prepared for the five CPAs which are classified as large and
 already approved for refinancing (Sung Vui, Song Rieng, Nam Tha 4, Pa Chien and Hoa Phu)
 and found satisfactory by the Bank.
 During the implementation of the REDP, close safeguards supervision has been maintained by
 the Bank and the client. Some non-compliance has been identified; corrective action plans
 have been developed and implemented to address environinental and social safeguard issues.
 To date, the overall environmental and social performance of the REDP can be assessed as
 moderately satisfactory. The developers are relatively active in developing close relationship
 with local authority and community. Compensation for affected land/assets and supports for
 displaced people have been implemented. In addition, the developers contributed significant
 effort in improving local basic infrastructures (rural road, primary school, hostel for pupils,
 etc) and in enhancing the use of local labor in construction/operation work. Generally, the
 dams under the program are safe and construction quality varies from site to site but in
 acceptable standards. The PMB and DSP continue its close supervision, identify technical
 risks and provide technical advices to developers and its contractors. Currently 5 CPAs have
 been identified and additional 14 CPAs are expected to be included.
The processing and approval of the ERPA will be adhered to the following requirements:
   ./ The approved ESF, RPF and EMPF will be applied to every CPA that is accounted for under
      the ERPA signed between MOlT and the Carbon Finance Project (CFP). An Environmental
      Management Plan (EMP), and where applicable, a Resettlement Plan and an Ethnjc Minority
      Development Plan acceptable to the Bank will be required for every CPA.
   ./ The same supervision agreements approved for subprojects under the REDP will be applied to
      CPAs, namely, prior review of the use of the ESF, RPF, EMPF for all the CPAs to ensure that
      these frameworks are being used adequately, and the EMP, RP and -EMDP meet the Bank
      safeguards requirements .
   ./ The ERPA to be signed between MOlT and the CFP shall include a description of the agreed
      safeguards and supervision provisions
   ./ The duration of the ERPA between MOlT and the CPF will be limited to the life of the REDP
      Loan.


S. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disdosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentiaUy.affected people.
Key stakeholders are developers, participating banks, affected communities and NGOs,
relevant district, provincial and central governments. Consultation on the project design and
requirements with the key stakeholders has been carried out during preparation. Consultation
workshop for dam safety framework of the REDP was held in October 2007. Consultation
workshop for social and environment policy frameworks was held in November, 2008. The
frameworks were circulated for comments among concerned ministries before approved by
MOlT.

All safeguard frameworks will be disclosed at the provincial people's committees of the
affected provinces. In addition, RPF will be disclosed at the affected district people's
committees. The frameworks will be posted at MOlT website. At CFP subproject level, public
consultation with potentially affected people on social and environment impacts of each
subproject is mandatory for all participating developers as an important requirement of the
safeguard frameworks. The consultation results are required to be documented in the RP,
EMDP and EMPs. The developers will also be responsible for disclosing the EMPs, RPs and
EMDPs at a public location near the subproject sites and in the offices of 'the Provincial
DONRE and/or over the Internet. If the subproject is located in more than one province, the
documents shall be disclosed at public locations nearest the subproject site in each
province and at the local offices of DONRE..

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             25-Nov-2008 (ofREDP)
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          0 1-Jun-2009 (of REDP)
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                                 20-Nov-2008 (of REDP)
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   25-Nov-2008 (ofREDP)
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                01-Jun-2009 (ofREDP)
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                                       20-Nov-2008 (ofREDP)
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   25-Nov-2008 (ofREDP)
Date of submission to Info~ hop                                               Ol-Jun-2009 (ofREDP)
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                                       20-Nov-2008 (ofREDP)
Comments:
If the project triggers tbe Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resou~es policies, tbe
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of tbe Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of tbe above documents is not expected, please explain wby:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP/4.01 -Environment Assessment (ofREDP)
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]         No [ 1 NA [ 1
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager        Yes [XJ   No [ 1 NA [ I
(S\Vt) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in       Yes (XI   No[    )   NA [     ]
the credit/loan?
OPIBP 4.1.0 - Indigenous Peoples (ofREDP)
                                                                    '
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [X 1 No [        I   NA [ ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement (of REDP)
Has a resettJement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X)         No [   )   NA [     1
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes. then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or        Yes [X]   No [   )   NA [     )
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information (ofREDP)
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X J        No l   )   NA [     J
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a pubJic       Yes [X 1     No [   1 NA l     1
place in a fonn and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies (of the REDP)
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes (X 1    No [   1 NA [     ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to ~feguard policy measures been included in      Yes (X 1    No [   )   NA [   1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X 1    No [   1 NA [     1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X 1    No[    1 NA [     1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


10. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:
Approved By:


Sector Manager:                                                          Date:   4
