                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 84674
Date prepared/updated: Dec. 16th, 2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: West Bank and Gaza                       Project ID: P147235
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any): N/A
Project Name: Masar Ibrahim/ Abraham Path: Economic development across fragile
communities
Task Team Leaders: Ali H. Abukumail
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2014            Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: MNSFP                              Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                  Grant
Sector: Industry and Trade (other industries; tourism)
Themes:
Finance and Private Sector Development (60%)
Social development/gender/inclusion (20%)
Rural Development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source : (State and Peace Building Fund): US$2.32
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                     Yes [x]                   No [ ]
Simplified Processing                             Simple [x]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]       No [x]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The development objective is to contribute to job creation and income generation for
marginalized rural communities along the Abraham Path in the West Bank, with a particular
focus on women and youth, and to capture lessons from piloting job creation through
experiential tourism that could be applied in other FCS settings.

3. Project Description:
The Masar Ibrahim/ Abraham Path project represents an innovative pilot approach to tackling
rural development, employment, and women’s empowerment in communities normally excluded
from mainstream economic development and investment and often disconnected from one
another. The Abraham Path is a long-distance walking trail across the Middle East. The path
retraces the cultural memory of the journey of Abraham and his family and celebrates its story of
hospitality and kindness to strangers.1 The complete Path presently consists of a 270 mile (430
km) route, which crosses 40 communities in 4 countries, but it may eventually cross 3,100 miles
(5000 km) and 10 countries in the Middle East.

With local partners, the Abraham Path Initiative (API) is uncovering the footsteps of Abraham as
a walking route for local and international visitors. The route presently starts in Urfa (also called
Sanliurfa) in Turkey and ends at Abraham’s burial site in Hebron in the West Bank. Since 2008,
some 4,000 travelers have walked the Path, the majority of them passing 21 rural communities
and villages in Jordan and the West Bank. Walkers contribute to the local economy by staying in
villages with families in homestays, buying homemade meals, and walking with local guides
through attractive natural and archeological spots between rural communities.

Nearly 114 miles (182 km) of trail has been developed in the West Bank, with hospitality, local
guiding, and homestay houses in communities along its way. The Palestinian segment of the Path
passes 13 communities and villages in areas A, B and C2 in the West Bank; starting from Nablus
in the North of the West Bank, and ending with Hebron in the south.3 The route goes well
beyond the traditional hub for tourism (Bethlehem) and helps in diversifying the tourism offering
of West Bank and Gaza.

In Israel, a 30-mile (48 km) segment of the Path from Arad to Be’er Sheva has been scouted and
includes sites linked to Abraham such as Tel Sheva, Tel Arad, various Bedouin villages, the
Falahin village of Derijat and Abraham’s Well in the city of Be’er Sheva. People from different
backgrounds – Jews and Arabs - have worked together to make the path come to life in this area.
A walking connection between the Israeli and Palestinian segments of the Abraham Path does
presently not exist, even though the concept of inter-linkage ultimately lies at the heart of the
regional project. The current Path in Jordan connects between Pella and Ajloun in the north,
while the future extension will reach Wadi Rum in the south. The Palestinian and the Jordanian
segments of the path are not connected in the meantime, but the future plan is to extend the Path
to connect between Nablus and Pella. The Jordanian and the Palestinian segments have great
potential for integration, both supported by the geographic proximity, and the societal interest in
solidifying relations between the two communities.




1
  The Initiative is a socio-economic and cultural project connecting East and West and not affiliated with or endorsing any
religion or religious message. Along the route, the Initiative and its local partners highlight Abrahamic culture and memory in the
widest sense of the term and in particular emphasise the ethos and values of hospitality and kindness to strangers which are
present across the Middle East.
2
  The West Bank is divided per Oslo Accords into 3 areas: Area A is under Palestinian security and civilian control and
correspond to all major population centers; Area B concerns mostly rural communities and is under Palestinian civilian control
and some security control, while overall security remains under Israeli control; and Area C is under Israeli control for both
security and civilian affairs related to territory, including land administration and planning.
3
  The Path communities are located in areas A and B, but the walking segments between the communities are mostly crossing
area C. The shortest segment between communities is 4.3 miles (7 km), while the longest one is 14.3 miles (23 km). Each
segment can be covered in a walking day, and there are no requirements for additional physical infrastructure between
communities. While the Palestinian use of land and resources in area C is very restricted, walking in area C is allowed for both
local and international visitors and groups have been walking through area C unimpeded since the Abraham Path was launched in
2008.
In West Bank, the Path presently employs 5 guides, actively involves 28 homestays, and
generated US$218,280 of direct annual revenues (2012), and 63 direct new job opportunities
since its inception in 2008.4

Potential Economic Impact
The direct impact on the rural communities along the Abraham Path can be measured in a model
using data from the number/ type of walkers, average expenditure, group size, need for guides/
home-stay services, and the number of communities along the Path. A multi-scenario model
using 2012 numbers as base data projects (i) the generation of US$1 million in direct annual
revenues, and the creation of 105 direct jobs, following a low growth (9% year-on-year) scenario
by 2020; and (ii) the generation of US$3.1 million in direct annual revenues, and the creation of
146 new jobs, following a high growth (25%) scenario by 2020. The indirect annual impact of
these scenarios is estimated at US$2.4 million (low growth) and US$ 7.2 million (high growth)
respectively.5

The World Bank Group Engagement
Based on its multi-regional experience in the tourism and rural development sectors, this World
Bank engagement is favorable to scale up activities that integrate private sector development,
rural development and job generation in West Bank and Gaza, building on the success of
Abraham Path Initiative since 2008, and responding to increasing demand for assistance to the
sector. The World Bank’s engagement will invest in rural communities and support value chain
integration between civil society organizations, private sector operators and travelers seeking to
connect with these groups. Strengthening forward and backward linkages makes experiential
tourism a more effective and sustainable vehicle of job creation and economic growth as
demonstrated by lessons learned from other World Bank tourism development engagements.

Project Components
Starting small with just 4 days of walking route, the Abraham Path has been growing steadily
since its inception in 2008, attracting thousands of travelers and media attention, expanding in
length and community coverage, and gaining the support of government and non-government
organizations. Because of the overlap of initiatives and geography, investment in the “hub? of
the Abraham Path will support the natural evolution of experiential tourism in West Bank and
Gaza more broadly, and will grow the economic impact of this type of tourism in rural
communities that are otherwise economically marginalized. The project would scale up the
economic impact of the path and strengthen the capacity of its main drivers and stakeholders: the



4
  This number excludes fees for tour operators and direct revenues generated in tourism centers outside the path communities
(e.g. Jerusalem and Bethlehem) and it excludes homestays in the community of Beit Sahour/Bethlehem where some 40
homestays are active. The latter homestay network has been in existence before the establishment of the Path and in contrast to
other communities on the Path, the hosts receive a mixture of guests through other experiential tourism programs as well.
5
  The data on indirect effects should be interpreted with much caution. Tourism multiplier effects are notoriously difficult to
estimate and differ by type of tourism sector and by a country’s level of development. Moreover, multiplier effects tend to v ary
over time as local factors (e.g. propensity to consume/save additional income, revenue leakage, etc.) vary with the overall macro-
economic context. The sources mentioned are the geographically closest analysis/figures (on Jordan) that the model found to the
case in West Bank and Gaza; however, these do not take account of the specific context of tourism spending in poor rural
communities where most labor in the “sector? is part-time. Sources within OECD countries estimate multiplier effects in tourism
to be much lower, closer to 1.2-1.5. Further (field) research would be required to gather more robust estimates on indirect effects
in the case of experiential tourism in the West Bank.
Masar Ibrahim al-Khalil, its local partner NGOs, tour operators, community organizations,
guides and host families.

The 2 years and 4 month project period is relatively short and considered a pilot phase to be
complemented with additional financing at a later stage, if results are satisfactory and funds are
available through SPF6 or additional sources. Sustainability beyond this period is assured, since
Abraham Path/Masar Ibrahim is already a sustainable venture that runs tours for groups of
travelers, communities benefit from hosting tourists, and costs are being recovered. The material
difference the project expects to make is developing and scaling up operations to increase the
impact from the path in terms of the number of travelers, jobs, and income generated.

The activities of the project will fall under four main components:

(a) Investment in People and Institutions
This component invests in the capacity and institutional sustainability of all local actors across
the value chain of the path:
        a. The training of current and new guides (wilderness guides) in guiding techniques,
           trekking and interpretation (i.e. natural, cultural, and historical), safety, leadership and
           intercultural skills;
        b. The outreach to current and new communities on the path;
        c. Orientation and training for new and existing homestays;
        d. Capacity building for local NGO partners on funding generation strategies (corporate
           fundraising/sponsorships), management systems, financial management and
           procurement;
        e. Local awareness trips for Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (MOTA) staff.

(b) Path Development
This component invests in the development of the path is required to raise the quality of visitors’
experience on the path and to empower local communities and guides to tap its full potential:
       a. GIS data collection and publication;
       b. Mapping the path online and in print (detailed cartography);
       c. Way-marking research & signage on the path;
       d. Route extension: adding new communities (north of Nablus; south of Hebron);
       e. GIS/hiking gear for wilderness guides.

Existing homes along the path of homeowners willing to participate will be utilized as
homestays. The project will not include any physical works.

(c) Marketing, Business Development, and Communication
This component invests in the expansion of private sector engagement on the path (tour guides,
tour operators) as a viable experience for multi-day and single day trips including support to:
       a. A virtual information hub that serves as a travel guide application for current and
           prospective travelers providing info, logistics, videos, photos, blogs, electronic maps,

6
  The current funding of SPF Trust Fund ends in March 2016. The project duration was adjusted to align with this timeframe. If
performance of the project is satisfactory, and additional funding is available, the team will submit a request for additional
financing to SPF secretariat before March 2016.
             GIS data, home-stay options, tour operator and guide options;
        b.   Profiles for archeological, heritage and cultural sites along the route;
        c.   Itinerary development for in- and outbound operators;
        d.   “Familiarization? trips for media specialists and local tour operators;
        e.   Development of marketing and logistical collateral such as the aforementioned online
             travel guide, a handbook for wilderness guides, and other promotional materials such
             as experiential tourism overview maps and billboards which promote the variety of
             experiences/initiatives across the area;
        f.   On-line social media presence and promotion to engage potential walkers as well as
             specific site information;
        g.   Participation of local operators and partners in international promotional activities
             such as trade fairs; and
        h.   Communication on the project itself and its impact on local communities (for use
             both by the World Bank and the implementing agency).

(d) Action Research (M&E and Knowledge Dissemination)
This component invests in monitoring and evaluation. As part of the process, capacities of local
stakeholders will be expanded, independent and external evaluation and audit will be
systematized, and dissemination of lessons and insights within and outside the World Bank shall
be enabled through:
        a. Qualification and collection of fundamental indicators (number of walkers, length of
           travel, facilities and services used, etc); and
b. Partners and beneficiaries’ assessment (survey work, data collection, and analysis) to
    measure trends that can be useful both for project monitoring purposes, and to capture
    lessons from piloting job creation through experiential tourism that could be applied in other
    FCS settings. Through the project timeframe, the task team will develop ten (10) research
    notes on experiential tourism in FCS.

API and local partners have been collecting data for jobs created, number of travelers, and
revenues since 2009. The task team has revisited the data collection process and qualified it as
the source for M&E data collection (e.g. baseline and performance over project timeframe). The
task team has cooperated with MNAOS in developing the M&E framework.

Female Participation
In the MENA region, there is a cultural preference for women to stay at home, and in some communities there is a
cultural wariness around working in tourism. 7 Although women’s participation in the Palestinian economy is a
priority, women’s participation in the labor force is low (16%) even compared with the MENA average (26%). 8 The
project can innovate around the concept of women’s employment within accepted bo undaries set by their societies.
In rural areas, women are the main hosts who manage and prepare lodging and food while staying in and around
the house. CSOs facilitate sales of female-made handcrafts that generate revenues to women in rural communities,
while showcasing inherited Palestinian arts and crafts. The wilderness guide training will ensure substantial
participation for female professionals, who can work within rural communities.




7
  World Bank Quick Note # 78, MENA Region: “Tourism in MENA: A Strategy to Promote Recovery, Economic
Diversification, and Job Creation?, January 2013
8
  Interim Strategy Note for West Bank and Gaza, 2012
Relevance to the Criteria of the State and Peace-Building Fund (SPF)
The project represents an innovative and experimental approach that would create unique
technical and operational knowledge for private sector development in fragile and conflict-
affected states. The project falls under the Peace-Building category, and supports the following
country-level results: (i) employment generation and private sector development; (ii) increased
social cohesion; and (iii) gender sensitive approaches for economic empowerment of women.

Social Cohesion
Rural villages in the West Bank face particular social cohesion challenges due to ongoing political conflict as well
as lack of economic and social development (education and culture) opportunities, which are concentrated in urban
hubs and away from the rural periphery. Social cohesion challenges exist both between and within rural
communities. Rural tourism addresses this challenge by bringing together various sub-groups across lines of
gender, age and religion, to cooperate economically and celebrate local heritage. The project incorporates various
activities that seek to strengthen the social cohesion impact of the Abraham Path: from outreach on the project with
village councils, women’s cooperatives and homestay hosts to meetings of leaders of youth groups such as scouts;
and from training activities for groups from different communities to field walks on the path on environmental
awareness, and a youth thru-walk of the entire West Bank trail at the end of the project. These activities unite people
from various villages and within villages to foster teamwork and camaraderie around a common goal.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will be implemented along Abraham’s Path in the West Bank, which currently
crosses 13 rural communities from Nablus in the north of the West Bank to Hebron in the south.
The social impacts are positive, and will support economic development in rural communities.
Existing homes along the path of homeowners willing to participate will be utilized as
homestays. Project activities will not include any physical works.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Ms. Banu Setlur, Senior Environmental Specialist
Mr. Chaogang Wang, Senior Social Development Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                        Yes              No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                   No
Project is not expected to result in any negative environmental impacts.
Activities will not include any physical/civil works to the existing homes
or to the existing heritage sites.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                           No
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                    No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                               No
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                No
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                   No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                             No
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                        No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                 No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

With local partners, the Abraham Path Initiative (API) is uncovering the footsteps of Abraham as
a walking route for local and international visitors, where walkers contribute to the local
economy by staying in villages with families in homestays, buying homemade meals, and
walking with local guides through attractive natural and archeological spots between rural
communities. The Abraham Path is a long-distance walking trail across the Middle East. The
Project will support the natural evolution of experiential tourism in West Bank and Gaza and
expects to improve the economic impact of this type of tourism in rural, economically
marginalized communities. The project will be implemented by Abraham Path Initiative (API, a
non-profit NGO based in Boston, USA) and includes capacity strengthening of the local partner,
the Masar Ibrahim Al-Khalil (NGO in the West Bank), as well as the capacity of tour operators,
community organizations, guides and host families. API's Regional Director and program staff,
who are based in Jerusalem, will manage the implementation of the project activities. The project
expects to develop and scale up operations to increase the impact from the path in terms of the
number of travelers, jobs, and income generated, as an innovative pilot approach to tackling rural
development, employment, and women’s empowerment in communities normally excluded from
mainstream economic development and investment and often disconnected from one another.

Project activities will not include any physical works to existing homes or to the existing heritage
sites and the project is not expected to result in potential large scale, significant and/or
irreversible environmental impacts. API has a good record of implementing projects and is able
to follow the financial management and oversight procedures required by third party
sponsorship. API holds a unique technical expertise in the area of long-distance walking trails in
the Middle East.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

Project activities are not expected to result in indirect and/or long term negative environmental
impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

During a World Bank identification mission to West Bank and Gaza in March 2013, the team
discussed project components with various stakeholders, including Ministry of Tourism and
Antiquities, home-stay owners, tourism NGOs, tour operators, relevant academic institutions,
village council, civil society associations, and project partners. Feedback from all stakeholders,
from officials to community members, was overwhelmingly positive and supportive of
investment in this sector with an emphasis on the benefits of producing income and jobs in
outlying Palestinian areas in the West Bank. The list of stakeholders is provided below:

   1. Mr. Raed Saadeh, Chairman, Network of Palestinian Experiential Tourism Organizations
       (NEPTO)
   2. Mr. David Lantis, Abraham’s Path Initiative
   3. Mr. George Rishmawi, Masar Ibrahim Al Khalil
   4. Mr. Osama Awwad, Holy Land Trust
   5. Ms. Ablah Mubarak, Hebron-France Organization
   6. Mr. Ra’fat Jamil, Rozana Association
   7. Mr. Imad Al Atrash, Palestine Wild Life Society
   8. Mr. Richard Elias, Vice chairman, Holy Land Incoming Tour Operators Association
       (Hiltoa)
   9. Mr. Hassan Moammar, Battir Trail
   10. Mr. Michele Sansour, Battir Trail
   11. Mr. Mousa Al-Rabadi, Manager, Institute of Community Partnership, Bethlehem
       University
   12. Nabil Al Moufti, Manager of Tourism and Hotel Management Institute, Bethlehem
       University
   13. Mr. Salim Qawareek, Home-stay owner, Awarta Village
   14. Mr. Habib Dawabsheh, Home-stay owner, Village of Doma
   15. Ms. Rula Maayaya, Minister, Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities
   16. Mr. Jiries Qumsiyya, Manager, Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities
   17. Mr. Mohammed Al Rashayda, Home-stay owner, Al Rashayda Village
   18. Meeting with Aqraba Women’s Association
   19. Meeting with Aqraba Village Council

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    No
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [x]     N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [x]     N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [x]     N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to           Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]    No [ ]       N/A [x]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]    No [x]       N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]    No [ ]       N/A [x]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project includes the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?

D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                        Name                                Date
 Task Team Leaders:              Ali H. Abukumail                                Dec. 16, 2013
 Environmental Specialist:       Ms. Banu Setlur                                 Dec. 16, 2013
 Social Development Specialist   Mr. Chaogang Wang                               Dec. 16, 2013
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development
 Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards                 Name: Delegated to Sector                   Dec. 23, 2014
 Coordinator:                        Manager/Acting: Hooman Dabidian
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Name: Hooman Dabidian (acting)              Dec. 23, 2014
   Comments:

                                                             (Template Version November 2007)
