                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/27/2014                                     Report No.: AC6999
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P074595                 Original Project Name: Northern Gaza
                                             Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST)
                                             Project
Country: West Bank and Gaza                  Project ID: P146065
Project Name: North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment Project - Third Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Richard W. Pollard
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28,       Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: MNSWA                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (90%);Irrigation and drainage (10%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (80%);City-wide Infrastructure
and Service Delivery (10%);Water resource management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         BELGIUM: MOFA-Directorate-General for Int. Coop.(DGIC) 2.57
         Partnership for Water and Urban Development in the West Bank 5.00
         Special Financing                                             3.00
                                                                      10.57
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment Project (NGEST) project development
objective is to: (i) Mitigate the immediate health and environmental safety threats to the
communities surrounding the effluent lake at Beit Lahia Waste Water Treatment Plant
(BLWWTP); and ii) Provide a satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment of
wastewater for the Northern Governorate in Gaza. The proposed additional financing
would support the original objectives for Part B of the NGEST project, which is to
provide a satisfactory solution to the treatment of wastewater for the Northern
Governorate of Gaza.
  The overall project design and components would remain unchanged. The additional
financing will be implemented using the same institutional framework, procurement, and
disbursement arrangements currently employed under the NGEST since these systems are
performing well, remain appropriate, and have the capacity to absorb the additional
funds.

3. Project Description
The additional financing will finance the cost overruns to complete the construction of
the North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Plant (NGWWTP) and provide technical
assistance for implementation under part B. These costs overruns are due to a number of
factors, in particular the continued restrictions on entry of goods and services to Gaza, the
ongoing periodic conflict with Israel, continued price inflation and a need to redesign
some parts of the NGWWTP.

 This additional financing will be used for the following activities under the original
project design and the first and second additional financing grants:

 Part B:
 (a) Completion of phase one of the NGWWTP with a capacity of 35,600 M3/day,
comprising three treatment modules for secondary biological treatment with nitrogen
removal, as well as sludge treatment, digestion, electricity generation, dewatering, drying
and storage, including: (i) implementation of remedial works; (ii) acquisition of
equipment and materials; and (iii) operation and maintenance of the NGWWTP and
related infrastructure after the commissioning of the wastewater treatment plant.
 (b) Implementation of risk management measures including an effluent recovery and
reuse scheme, comprising civil works and consulting services for operation and
maintenance.
 (c) Supervision of construction works as described in (a) and (b) above and
implementation of the environmental monitoring plan for the construction works,
including provision of necessary consulting services.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project area comprises the municipalities of Beit Lahia, Jabalia, Beit Hanoum, and
Um Nasser located in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Tracy Hart (MNSEE)
   Ms Nina Bhatt (MNSSU)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Per the requirement of OP 4.01 for Category A projects, a full Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
was completed that assessed the possible impacts of Part A and Part B of the project as it
was originally designed and provided a plan for mitigation. At that time, specific plans
for remediation of the effluent lake or for an effluent recovery and reuse scheme had not
yet been prepared. Thus a Supplemental ESIA/ESMP (SESIA/ESMP) was prepared to
include expanded effluent recovery and reuse, and to assess the impacts of the specific
plans for remediation of the land formerly covered by the Beit Lahia effluent lake, in
addition to the decommissioning of the BLWWTP after full operation of the NGWWTP.

  Significant potential negative impacts which will be mitigated include: (i) soil
contamination during decommissioning of BLWWTP; (ii) quality of remediated effluent
lake land for conversion to agricultural and/or residential use; (iii) water resource
contamination; and (iv) public health concerns related to using recovery water for
irrigation.

  Based on the results of the Bank approved Supplementary Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (April 2013), it was determined that a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) was required to address some adverse social impacts that have been identified as
per OP 4.12. The client has prepared a draft RAP which details who the affected persons
are (individuals and communities); the nature of specific adverse impacts as per OP 4.12;
level of harm; mitigation actions (cash compensation and other appropriate measures);
description of consultations with affected parties; budget for meeting RAP requirements;
grievance or complaints handling mechanism; as well as a description of how RAP
progress will be monitored. No temporary adverse impacts anticipated under this project.
Total project land requirement for construction of the recovery wells, tanks and booster
station is 17,753 m2of which 16,575 m2 were obtained through the Ministry of
Endowment (Waqf). Some of the adverse impacts which will be permanent include the
following:
 • Recovery Well Land Acquisition: 1,178 m2 lands will be from privately owned lands
that will be expropriated for the constructio of recovery wells and monitoring wells.
Total number of affected households/persons is 21 land owners.
 • Access Road Construction: Total area of 7,294 m2 of privately owned lands will be
expropriated in order to construct the access roads. Total number of affected HH from
access roads construction is 15 HHs. Another 3 HHs will be affected from both a well
and access road.
 • Impacts on existing well operators: 17 existing privately owned agricultural wells will
be closed.15 individuals are currently employed to operate these wells.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The completion of the first phase of the project (i.e., the pumping station, pressure line,
and infiltration basins) enabled the PMU and CMWU to evacuate the Beit Lahia sewage
lagoon and eliminating the flood risk to neighboring communities. However, extended
delays in the implementation of phase A, as well as any additional delays in the
implementation of Phase B (i.e., the treatment plant) will result in more pollution to the
groundwater aquifer in the vicinity of the infiltration basins. A timely implementation of
project activities will minimize those effects and the afterwards operation of the treatment
plant and recharging the aquifer with designed quality of treated wastewater will improve
the quality in the groundwater aquifer. No long term indirect or adverse social impacts
anticipated. Farmers will have a more secure source of irrigation water at lower costs.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Modeling of project alternatives with respect to with and without recovery scheme
revealed the following results: (i) if the quality of the pumped wastewater from the
existing BLWWTP is not improved, or worsens, then the allowable quantity of water to
be infiltrated would be 15,000 cubic meters per day up to the year 2025; and (ii) if
NGWWTP is commissioned starting in 2014, the quality of the pumped wastewater will
improve and the allowable quantity of water to be infiltrated will increase to 35, 600
cubic meters per day through the year 2025. The only available lands for the waste water
treatment plant that was available were used (waqf lands or those under the Ministry of
Religious Affairs).. Consideration of alternative lands for the wells could not be
considered because they have to be located proximate to the infiltration pond. The wells
are located optimally to ensure that treated effluent water can be captured.


  Selection of the optimal remediation option depended on a number of factors, two of
which are highly influential: (A) type and extent of the contamination, and (B) the future
planned land use. The five technical options explored were (i) doing nothing, and
limiting access to the site; (ii) phytoremediation; (iii) placement of clay cap; (iv)
placement of three-layer cap; and (v) encapsulation of the site. Based on the analysis of
alternatives, (ii) phytoremediation; and (iii) placement of the clay cap, are the least
expensive, with (iii) taking the least amount of time.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower (PWA) has undergone capacity building on safeguards and has hired a
Social Development Officer to focus on the project's social risks and also implementation
of the provisions of the Resettlement Action Plan. An ESMP was developed as an
integral part of the EA study, which included mitigation measures, monitoring plan and
capacity building activities. A qualified environmental specialist was hired with the
Project Management Unit (PMU) and is responsible for supervising the mitigation and
monitoring program, and for discussing any issue in coordination with the relevant local
governmental entities; the same environmental specialist will continue the same role
under the additional financing arrangement.
 An emergency operation plan was developed to optimize the operation of all existing
and emergency infrastructure, in cooperation with the Coastal Municipalities Water
Utility (CMWU). The institutional strengthening plan specific to environmental
safeguards compliance includes tailored training on (i) the Environmental Management
and Monitoring Plan (EMMP); (ii) environmental aspects of recovery water distribution
and networks; (iii) environmental auditing and inspection; and (iv) social assessment,
including communication skills, mass communications, social surveys, sampling, and
analysis and reporting. To supplement the EMMP and SMMP as the base documents for
safeguard compliance, there are additional guidances, such as Groundwater Monitoring
Plan, a Sludge Monitoring Plan, a Public Health Related Monitoring Plan for Using
Recovery Water, and an Emergency Response Plan for operation of overflow effluent
pond.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of the project include the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian Water
Authority (PWA), the Environmental Quality Authority, the Ministry of Local
Government, the municipalities and village councils, health centers, farmers, and the
communities living in the areas to be served by the project. A comprehensive public
participation program was conducted during the process of SESIA/SESMP preparation.
Governmental agencies, NGOs, community representatives, neighboring landowners, and
other stakeholders were involved in the process. The consultation process was performed
by direct interviews, questionnaires, and public meetings. The relevant environmental
issues, including wastewater reuse, sludge reuse, socioeconomics, and aquifer water
quality, were discussed in detail. The results and findings of the SESIA study and
SESMP were presented through a public hearing workshop that involved the different
stakeholders. All relevant comments and concerns were considered during the
preparation of the final report. The EA was disclosed in Country on May 30, 2013 and on
the World Bank's Infoshop on August 25, 2013. Specific consultations for the
preparation of the resettlement action plan (RAP) were carried out to ensure that the
views and interests of all project affected persons are taken into accounts, to ensure that
once the census was completed and correct adversely affected enumerated, that project
impacts were described to them as well as their entitlements The purpose was also to
elicit their views on all measures available to them and also to explain the available of a
complaints handling or a project level grievance redressal mechanism.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/15/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/30/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/21/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/05/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/27/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/27/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Richard W. Pollard                        02/06/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tracy Hart                                02/06/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Nina Bhatt                                02/06/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                       02/20/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Steven N. Schonberger                     02/21/2014
  Comments:
