                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                                Report No.: 95484
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:            March 3 1, 20 15


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                        WG&G                     Project ID:             P150494
 Project Name:                   Gaza Sustainable Water Supply Program : Associated Works
 Task Team Leader:               Alexander McPhail
 Estimated Date of               November 11, 2015
 Approval:
 Managing Unit:                  GW ADR (09087)           Lending Instrument:     Recipient Executed
                                                                                  Small Grant
 Sector(s):                      Water
 Theme(s):                       Water Supply & Sanitation
 Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [X ]
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       US$2.2 Million                 Total Bank Financing:    US$2.2 Million
 Total Co-financing:       -0-                             Financing Gap:          -0-
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount ($ Million)
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT: Palestinian Water Authority                                                    -0-
     World Bank                                                                                         2.2
 Total                                                                                                  2.2
 Environmental Category          A
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred           Yes
 project?

 B. Project Objectives

 To assist the Palestinian Water Authority to make the Gaza Sustainable Water Supply Program
 possible through the production of key studies, tender documents and institutional strengthening.


 C. Project Description
 This grant will finance the following activities under the overall Gaza Sustainable Water Supply
Program:

             1.   A Project Implementation Consultant (PIC) to prepare tender documents, design a
                  revised/updated non-revenue water reduction plan, and assist the PW A to tender and
                  award a contract for construction of potable water networks, storage and pumping
                  facilities in Gaza. This PIC could also optionally provide construction supervision;
            ii.   A consultant to prepare an independent Environmental and Social Assessment Study
                  for the Associated Works described above;
           111.   Key studies to better inform the Program, including a tariff study, a study to better
                  understand the burden of infrastructure service bills on households in Gaza, and a
                  stakeholder consultation plan;
           iv.    Stakeholder consultation meetings and related materials, the translation of materials
                  and studies; and
            v.    Measures to strengthen the technical capacity of the PWA and Coastal Municipalities
                  Water Utility.

The World Bank is not intending to use the grant to finance any goods or works for either the
desalination plant or the Associated Works.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Project location is Gaza, which is located on the Mediterranean coast. Gaza is about 42 kilometers
long and about 15 kilometers wide at its widest point. All planned infrastructure will be put in existing
utility easements or, in very limited cases, on government land given for the purpose. Utility
easements are well documented and known and there is adequate land available for all the planned
infrastructure to be studied under the Program.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
The implementation agency for this grant is the Palestinian Water Authority, which is an established
entity and that has experience with many World Bank grant financed water and sanitation projects.
Currently, the PW A has two water supply and sanitation infrastructure projects ongoing in Gaza: 1)
North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment Project (P117446); and 2) Gaza Water Supply & Sewage
System Improvement Project (PI 0 1289). There are also two T A projects underway: I) Gaza
Sustainable Water·Program Support Project (PI449I 5); and 2) Gaza Water Sector Capacity Building
Project (PI I 7443).

The PWA has good environmental and social safeguard knowledge and is both familiar and
experienced with World Bank safeguard policies and practices. It has an adequate number of
experienced environment and safeguard professionals on staff. The PW A has less experience with the
implementation of Resettlement Action Plans and Frameworks and for these, as well as for projects
with complex safeguard aspects, the PWA requires regular supervision and guidance from World Bank
safeguard specialists.

The Bank is continuing to increase safeguard capacity in the PW A, and mainly through the two
ongoing technical assistance projects cited above.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Environmental Safeguards: Tracy Hart
 Social Safeguards: John Butler

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP              X        TOR for the ESIA will be cleared by the RSA .
 4.01                                                 prior to CD approval of the Project Paper.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04
 Forests OP/BP 4.36
 Pest Management OP 4.09
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP
 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/B~ 4.12        tbd      It is not yet known if the land to be used for
                                                     planned infrastructure contains occupants. The
                                                     World Bank will not finance land acquisition.
                                                     In the event that a RAP needs to be prepared, ·
                                                     the TOR for the RAP will be cleared in
                                                     advance by the RSA.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37
 Projects on International Waterways
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP
 7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


    A. As this is a small grant for Gaza executed by the Client, there will be no Appraisal.
    However, at the time of approval of the Project Paper by the Country Director, an updated
    ISDS will be prepared and disclosed.

    B. The ESIA, to be financed under this small grant, is expected to be launched by July 1,
    2015. A TOR for the ESIA will be cleared by the RSA prior to approval of the Project
    Paper by the Country Director. If it is determined that a RAP is required, then the TOR
    for the RAP will be cleared in advance by the RSA.



IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:             Name: Alexander McPhail
 Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:
Practice Manager:




 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
