                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7774

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza               Project ID:      P148896
                            Project Name:      Local Governance and Services Improvement Program (P148896)
                            Task Team          Bjorn Philipp
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Oct-2014                      Estimated        12-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSU                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (30%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (25%),
                                               General water, sanitation and flood protection sector ( 20%), Sub-national
                                               government administration (15%), Central government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Participation and civic engagement (45%), Municipal governance and institution
                                               building (20%), Social Inclusion (20%), Decentralizat ion (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Special Financing                                                             5.00
                              Total                                                                         5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Development Objective of this first phase would be to strengthen the local government
                           financing mechanism and improve local service delivery in the target areas. Recipients are defined as
                           VCs and JSCs qualifying to participate in the Program. The target area will be defined during
                           program implementation, subject to qualifying recipients’ location.
                         Given the demand-driven nature of the program, the specific type of sub-projects and service
                         delivery improvements cannot be known ex-ante. However, local services to be improved are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expected to include basic infrastructure and services such as solid waste collection, water supply and
                         sanitation, local roads, but would also include community and social services. Beneficiaries would be
                         the communities of qualifying VCs and JSCs.

                         The proposed Local Governance and Service Delivery Improvement Program would be fully
                         embedded in the Bank’s programmatic sector approach to enhance local governments’ efficiency and
                         effectiveness to achieve fiscal stability, but specifically target VCs which are the LGUs that currently
                         do not have access to funds provided under MDP. The proposed program would complement MDP
                         by targeting the “bottom end of the LGU spectrum” in a comprehensive approach to improving local
                         service delivery performance. The program would support LGUs to improve and consolidate service
                         provision to reach performance levels comparable to municipalities. In the medium-to-long run,
                         targeted VCs would be expected to “graduate” and qualify to gain access to funding provided under
                         the MDP performance allocation formula.

                         The higher-level program objective would be to strengthen the governance and financing structure of
                         all LGUs to provide better coverage and improved quality of local services in a fiscally stable
                         manner. The proposed program would support VCs and JSCs to improve service delivery
                         performance in an incremental and gradual manner divided over programmatic phases, including
                         Phase I proposed in this Concept Note. However, achieving this higher-level objective would exceed
                         the scope and capacity of this first phase.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed program would provide (i) funding for locally planned small scale infrastructure
                         projects to improve service delivery; and (ii) support strengthening the governance and financing
                         structure for accountable and financially sustainable local services. The investment grant would be
                         embedded in a programmatic sector approach, establishing a systematic and transparent mechanism
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to allocate investment funding and provide institutional strengthening support to LGUs currently not
                         eligible to funding provided by the Municipal Development Program (MDP). LGUs would need to
                         meet eligibility criteria to access funding under the program. The criteria would be simple and easy
                         to measure, but would provide an indication of (i) LGUs basic functionality; and (ii) serve as a
                         threshold to quality for larger allocations to assure sustainability of infrastructure investments,
                         including operation and maintenance in the future.

                         The proposed program would comprise of three components. The first component would provide
                         funding and capacity building support to eligible LGUs for investments in small-scale infrastructure
                         and services based on a transparent allocation formula. The second component would finance larger-
                         scale investments for a group of LGUs collaborating through a JSC with an adopted legal and
                         financing framework agreement. In addition to funding for local infrastructure and service delivery
                         improvements, the proposed program would also provide support to strengthening the governance
                         and financing structure for accountable and financially sustainable local services through capacity
                         building and institutional strengthening. The third component would finance program management,
                         implementation support, and monitoring & evaluation.

                         Component 1: Transfers for local planning and basic service provision. This component would
                         support establishing a simple and transparent transfer mechanism to LGUs to ensure basic functions
                         for (a) local planning, in particular service delivery improvement plans; (b) basic service provision, i.
                         e., selected local and community services provided by VCs; and (c) related minimum administrative
                         functions. LGUs that meet basic eligibility criteria would qualify for a simple formula-based per-
                         capita transfers and capacity building support. The underlying assumption is that small LGUs need to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be strengthened in their representation and planning function to be in a position to delegate service
                         provision to a joint entity. Would be important to add here ways this component will incorporate a
                         strong citizen engagement. Lessons learned demonstrate that joint service provision for core
                         municipal infrastructure and services will be crucial to leverage economies of scale, but will require a
                         bottom-up community-driven approach to complement top-down activities. The recently closed
                         Bank-financed Village and Neighborhood Development Project (VNDP) has established an effective
                         Community Driven Development (CDD) approach in the West Bank and Gaza to finance crucial
                         community and social service needs, while building the social capital required for bottom-up
                         municipal consolidation and joint service delivery. The VNDP had promoted a gender-integrated
                         approach to community planning and prioritization, such as minimum requirements for
                         representation of women in project support groups. In addition, the VNDP had a requirement that
                         70% of the implemented community projects would benefit women and other marginalized groups,
                         such as youth. The MDLP has built in specific requirements for gender-integration in Investment
                         Planning and citizen engagement. Component 1 in the proposed operation will build on this
                         experience to ensure women are participants in the bottom-up schemes. Component 1 would build
                         on and further scale-up that approach, in particular to ensure women participate effectively in the
                         bottom-up planning schemes. While Institutional strengthening support to the LGUs will build on the
                         experience of MDP and VNDP, this new program will tailor capacity building packages to address
                         the specific needs of small LGUs and JSCs and in upgrading of both their technical capacity and
                         efficacy for citizen engagement and gender inclusion.

                         Component 2: Investments in local infrastructure and joint services. This component would provide
                         financing for larger-scale investments in crucial local infrastructure and services provided by
                         collaborative mechanisms of joint service provision, including but not limited to solid waste
                         collection and transport, extension and/ or rehabilitation of existing water supply and sewage
                         networks, and rehabilitation of inter-village roads. The component would provide a strong incentive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for inter-village cooperation by allocating significant funding for investments that would exceed the
                         capital expenditure and management capacity of qualifying individual LGUs, but be ass ociated with
                         significant service delivery improvements. LGUs would be eligible to access funding under this
                         component upon establishing a joint service provision entity with clear legal and financing
                         arrangements following a model template to be developed by the MoLG. VNDP has primarily
                         financed small-scale community infrastructure and social services. This approach has proven to be
                         effective in supporting social cohesion and building social capital in targeted communities and would
                         remain a focus area of component 1. However, in addition to that, this larger allocation window
                         under component 2 would address critical investment needs to fill gaps in basic service delivery that
                         VCs cannot achieve on an individual basis. Most VCs are member of a JSC and the proposed
                         program does not envision establishing new entities. However, the majority of existing JSCs does not
                         perform well, lacks sustainable recurrent funding sources and suffers from weak accountability.
                         Hence, the proposed program would put strong emphasis on strengthening existing entities by
                         making access to funds conditional to meeting minimum criteria. LGUs would be eligible to access
                         funding under this component upon (i) meeting the basic eligibility criteria of Component 1; and (ii)
                         joining or establishing an entity for joint service provision with clear governance and financing
                         arrangements meeting the program “graduation criteria”. In the case of JSCs comprised of both
                         municipalities and VCs, the funds would exclusively benefit communities in member VCs or
                         marginalized communities, i.e., investments would be geographically located in their jurisdictions, to
                         prevent distorting the MDP performance incentive mechanism targeting municipalities. In addition,
                         investments under this component need to adhere fully to existing line ministries’ sector strategies.

                         Component 3: Program management, implementation support, and monitoring & evaluation. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would finance costs associated with implementation of the program. It would also finance
                         capacity building activities to support institutional strengthening of the implementing agency.

                         Eligibility criteria. Two sets of eligibility criteria would be proposed. LGUs would need to meet
                         basic criteria to access funding under Component 1 (“entry criteria”). The entry criteria would aim at
                         assuring that basic mechanisms of LGU accountability and transparency are in place and are defined
                         as: (i) approved planned and actual annual budgets are publicly disclosed; (ii) regular council
                         meetings take place and minutes of meetings are publicly accessible; (iii) a Local Service Delivery
                         Plan exists and was endorsed by the community. Further to that, LGUs would need to meet
                         “graduation criteria” to become eligible for financing provided under Component 2. Main emphasis
                         would be given to supporting the establishment of Joint Service Councils with a clear governance
                         and financing structure, defined as: (i) member LGUs have adopted a joint service provision
                         arrangement with clear performance standards and accountability; (ii) transparent financing structure
                         and cost-recovery targets have been agreed (fees, transfers, subsidies); (iii) clear reporting and
                         decision making arrangements are in place.

                         Selectivity and targeting. In addition to a per-capita allocation to LGUs meeting the entry criteria, it
                         was proposed that the allocation formula should also include equalization elements to target lower
                         income and marginalized communities. Criteria are yet to be developed and agreed, but may include,
                         among others, household expenditure, LGU per capita revenues/ expenditure, or other income or
                         service level related indicators.

                         Financing per component. The specific amounts allocated to each component would be defined
                         during program preparation, once the overall funding envelope will be known, subject to available
                         co- and parallel financing from DPs. However, it is expected that the majority of project funds for the
                         first cycle would be allocated to Component 1 to reach a significant enough number of LGUs with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sufficient funds to provide an incentive to participate in the program. Investments funded under
                         Component 2 are expected to be larger in size, but are likely to target fewer locations. Specific
                         allocations under Component 2 would be subject to (i) identification of feasible sub-projects
                         proposed by qualifying LGUs; and (ii) funding availability. Both are to be defined during program
                         preparation. However, indicative fund distribution is expected to be around 70-75 percent for
                         Component 1; and around 25-30 percent for Component 2.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         While the project is expected to finance services deemed necessary to support community needs
                         including in areas such as (e.g., road rehabilitation, school rehabilitation, extension/ rehabilitation of
                         existing water networks,.), a sub-project level screening process will ensure that all activities will be
                         excluded that would cause direct economic and social impacts cause by the involuntary taking of
                         land resulting in: relocation or loss of shelter; loss of assets or access to assets; loss of income
                         sources or means of livelihoods, whether or not the affected persons must move another location. In
                         addition, the sub-project level screening will ensure there is no restriction of access to designated
                         parks or protected areas caused under the project. Therefore OP 4.12 will not be triggered. Land
                         requirements, if any, are expected to be very modest in scope and will be met through state owned
                         lands or in some instances land donated by communities. In cases where communities may agree to
                         voluntarily provide land in exchange for the desired community goods, OP 4.12 would not apply.
                           Land donations however, can only be voluntary if the infrastructure is not location specific (i.e.,
                           dams, reservoirs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Bank will ensure that LGUs have the genuine capacity to screen for, and exclude, subprojects for
                           financing that would trigger OP 4.12 as per impacts described above. Should any gap in capacity be
                           evident, these will be met through client training, and/or a combination of ensuring staff with the
                           appropriate skills are in place.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) will be the implementing agency for this
                           program. Although MDLF has experience managing social risk issues through its implementation of
                           the Bank-financed Municipal Development Project 1 (MDP1) and MDP2, the World Bank will
                           provide additional support as needed to ensure proper screening of sub-projects. In addition, given
                           that MDLF has limited work experience with small LGUs and marginalized communities, any gaps
                           in social risk monitoring will be met through client training, and/or a combination of ensuring staff
                           with the appropriate skills are in place.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hana Salah (MNSSU)
                           Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSWA)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project components are expected to finance
                           BP 4.01                                               physical infrastructure projects in the targeted
                                                                                 communities in different sectors such as water
                                                                                 supply, wastewater, solid waste management,
                                                                                 road rehabilitation, among others. Project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 assigned environmental category "B" and
                                                                                 according to OP 4.01, an environmental and
                                                                                 social management framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                                 prepared by the client prior to appraisal. The
                                                                                 ESMF will cater for screening all funded sub-
                                                                                 projects for potential environmental and social
                                                                                 impacts, will exclude any category "A" sub-
                                                                                 projects or sub-projects that may trigger
                                                                                 safeguards policies other than OP 4.01, and
                                                                                 ensure that specific sub-project EMPs are
                                                                                 prepared and included in the bidding documents.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               No natural habitats are expected to be impacted
                                                                                 by project activities.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               No forests are expected to be affected by project
                                                                                 activities
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               No pest management materials and/or
                                                                                 equipments are financed under the project.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            No physical and cultural resources are expected
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         to be impacted by project activities. A chance
                                                                                                                                 finds procedure will be included in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            No indigenous people are expected to be
                                                                                                                                 impacted by project activities.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            While the project is expected to finance services
                                 4.12                                                                                            deemed necessary to support community needs
                                                                                                                                 including in areas such as (e.g., road
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation, school rehabilitation, extension/
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of existing water networks,.), a
                                                                                                                                 sub-project level screening process will ensure
                                                                                                                                 that all activities will be excluded that would
                                                                                                                                 cause direct economic and social impacts cause
                                                                                                                                 by the involuntary taking of land resulting in:
                                                                                                                                 relocation or loss of shelter; loss of assets or
                                                                                                                                 access to assets; loss of income sources or
                                                                                                                                 means of livelihoods, whether or not the
                                                                                                                                 affected persons must move another location.
                                                                                                                                 In addition, the sub-project level screening will
                                                                                                                                 ensure there is no restriction of access to
                                                                                                                                 designated parks or protected areas caused
                                                                                                                                 under the project. Therefore OP 4.12 will not be
                                                                                                                                 triggered. Land requirements, if any, are
                                                                                                                                 expected to be very modest in scope and will be
                                                                                                                                 met through state owned lands or in some
                                                                                                                                 instances land donated by communities. The
                                                                                                                                 criteria or good practice principles for usage of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 donated lands will be followed.

                                                                                                                                 The Bank will ensure that LGUs have the
                                                                                                                                 genuine capacity to screen for, and exclude,
                                                                                                                                 subprojects for financing that would trigger OP
                                                                                                                                 4.12 as per impacts described above. Should
                                                                                                                                 any gap in capacity be evident, these will be met
                                                                                                                                 through client training, and/or a combination of
                                                                                                                                 ensuring staff with the appropriate skills are in
                                                                                                                                 place.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No dam construction or rehabilitation activities
                                                                                                                                 within the scope of project.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Sub-projects will not have any significant
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            impacts on any international waterways
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             not applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2014



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared by client, approved by
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the Bank, and disclosed locally and on infoshop prior to appraisal date.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Bjorn Philipp

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                    Date: 24-Jun-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                         Date: 24-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
