                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: 84795

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 8 February 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
  Country:                             West Bank and Gaza         Project ID:                      P121648
  Project Name:                        Gaza Solid Waste Management Project (P121648)
  Task Team Leader:                    Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
  Estimated Appraisal Date:            18 June 2012               Estimated Board Date:            31-March-2014
  Managing Unit:                       MNSSD                      Lending Instrument:              Investment Project Financing
  Sector:                              Solid waste management (92%), Sub-national government administration (8%)
  Theme:                               Pollution management and environmental health (69%), Municipal governance and
                                       institution building (21%), Other urban development (10%)
  Financing (in USD Million)
       Financing Source                                                                                                   Amount
  Borrower                                                                                                                     2.10
  France (French Agency for Development)                                                                                     13.64
  European Commission                                                                                                          6.48
  Special Financing                                                                                                          10.00
  Sweden, Government of                                                                                                        0.64
  UNDP-DEEP                                                                                                                    1.60
  Islamic Development Fund /UNRWA                                                                                              0.80
  Financing Gap                                                                                                                0.00
  Total                                                                                                                      35.26
  Environmental Category:              A - Full Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project?          No


  2. Project Objectives
  The objective of this Project is to improve solid waste management services in the Gaza Strip .

  3. Project Description
       A.      Project Components

  The project would consist of the following components:
  1.     Component 1: Solid Waste Transfer and Disposal Facilities. This component would finance: (a) construction of a
  new sanitary landfill; (b) construction of two transfer stations; (c) provision of operational equipment for the sanitary landfill
  and two transfer stations; (d) access roads to landfill and transfer stations; (e) sanitary closure of existing dump site; (f)
  Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) implementation; and (g) land acquisition for the first stage development of
  Al-Fukhari (Sofa) landfill and transfer stations.
  2.      Component 2: Institutional Strengthening. This component would finance: (a) capacity-building for the Joint
  Services Council for Khan Younis, Rafah and Middle Area Governorates and Technical Operations Unit (TOU); (b)
capacity-building for participating municipalities; and (c) public awareness campaigns. Capacity-building would include
infrastructure support (provision of essential office furniture and equipment), as well as capacity-building for board
members of the TOU.
3.      Component 3: Primary Collection and Resource Recovery. This component would finance: (a) studies to optimize
primary collection services in the Gaza Strip; (b) the supply of waste collection equipment; (c) studies for waste recovery;
and (d) pilot investments for recycling and composting.
4.       Component 4: Project Management. This component would finance: (a) MDLF’s administrative fees and
establishment of a Project Development and Safeguards Unit (PDSU) to manage project implementation; (b) consultants
for construction supervision and contract management; (c) operational and maintenance of the landfill and transfer
stations; and (d) other independent consultancies, including independent monitoring of the Environmental Management
Plan (EMP), Beneficiary Assessments, Landfill Design Review and Value Engineering, etc.


5.      A contingency fund of about US$4.41 million has been allocated from AFD, EU and the WB for project activities.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the middle and southern Gaza Strip. The specific location of the new sanitary landfill is
near Al-Fukhari (Sofa), Rafah Governorate. As for the transfer stations the locations are in Deir El-Balah and in Rafah
municipalities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Dariusz Kobus, Senior Environmental Consultant (MNSSU)
Nina Bhatt, Lead Social Development Specialist (MNSSU)

6.Last modified by
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes             The Project is classified Environmental Category "A" in
                                                                   accordance with World Bank Operational Policy 4.01,
                                                                   "Environmental Assessment," as it is likely to have
                                                                   significant adverse environmental impacts that can be
                                                                   adequately mitigated that are sensitive, diverse, or
                                                                   unprecedented.       A    full   environmental       impact
                                                                   assessment has been carried out as part of project
                                                                   preparation to ensure the design, construction,
                                                                   operation and decommissioning of the landfill cells take
                                                                   into account the mitigation measures and adequate
                                                                   budget is included in the capital and operational
                                                                   budgets. The Project will benefit from the experience in
                                                                   the West Bank where a Bank-financed project for the
                                                                   construction of a sanitary landfill facility and a transfer
                                                                   station to service the northern areas of the West Bank
                                                                   (commonly referred to as the Jenin project) which has
                                                                   proven to be a successful operation since project
                                                                   completion and start of operations in July of 2009. The
                                                                   proposed landfill facility would be located in the
                                                                   southern part of Gaza where there is more vacant land
                                                                   that would meet the Bank and EQA siting criteria of
                                                                   more than 500 meters from populated areas and, in the
                                                                   particular case of Gaza, located outside the security
                                                                   zone self-imposed by Israel along its border with the
                                                                   GS. The site is underlain by fresh water aquifers, but
                                                                   the nearest well field is more than 2,000 meters away
                                                                   and it is not under the direct influence of the Sofa
                                                                   aquifer. The ESIA reported that this aquifer is of low
                                                                   vulnerability to pollution. It should be noted, however,
                                                                   that the ground water aquifers constitute the main
                                                                   source of drinking and irrigation water for southern
                                                                   Gaza Strip. Therefore, the project, is being designed
                                                                   for "zero" leachate and drainage discharge into the
                                               ground and surface water resources. Environmental
                                               impact would also result in the vicinity to the proposed
                                               landfill site from the increased traffic of solid waste
                                               disposal trucks from the various communities in middle
                                               and southern GS. The feasibility study, however, did
                                               study and recommended improvements to the main
                                               access roads that would be used by all vehicular traffic
                                               to mitigate the impact on the roads users. The ESIA
                                               outlines the environmental impacts of closure and
                                               rehabilitation of disposal sites. These include impacts
                                               of landfill gas, leachate, and landscape. The ESIA also
                                               outlines the monitoring and mitigation procedures for
                                               these impacts. It describes a list of monitoring activities
                                               necessary for the closure of the sanitary landfill, which
                                               is beyond the scope of what is applicable for the
                                               closure of a dumpsite. The environmental impacts (also
                                               mitigation measures and monitoring) of pilot
                                               investments under C3 including physical works
                                               associated with recycling and composting are
                                               described in the ESIA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No    The ESIA reported that there are no natural habitats at
                                               and in the vicinity of project sites for LF and TS, and
                                               the LF site is devoid of any vegetation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No    The contracts will include provisions for chance find.
                                               However, during the feasibility study phase, efforts
                                               were made to gather information on sites of cultural
                                               heritage value and none were identified. A letter has
                                               been issued from the Ministry of Tourism and
                                               Antiquities confirming that the proposed site at
                                               Al-Fukhari (Sofa) has no apparent archaeological value
                                               therefore the Ministry has no objection to the proposed
                                               project being built on this site.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    Based on ESIA results and field site visits, there are no
                                               people living on the proposed project site. The Bank’s
                                               Indigenous Peoples Policy does not apply.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The Bank’s Operational Policy OP 4.12 applies to both
                                               the direct social impacts pertaining to the waste pickers
                                               at the Sofa landfill as well as to the families impacted
                                               through the land requirements of the project for Sofa.
                                               Specifically, OP 4.12 related impacts are as follows:

                                               Waste-Pickers
                                               Results from the ESIA and abbreviated resettlement
                                               action plan (ARAP) shows that the informal waste
                                               pickers identified as working at the Sofa dumpsite will
                                               experience significant negative impact on their income
                                               streams. Some of the anticipated risks include
                                               increased impoverishment, inability to transfer to
                                               alternative livelihood streams, and potential strife that
                                               could result among these project affected people if
                                               appropriate mitigation measures are not in place. The
                                               ESIA and ARAP census indicates a total of 18 waste
                                               pickers will be impacted of which 11 consider
                                               scavenging as their primary source of income.
                                               Consultations with the affected waste picker population
                                               based on the ESIA and ARAP indicates that the most
                                               sustainable and appropriate compensation measure is
                                                    the provision of an alternative and sustainable source
                                                    of income. Towards seeking tested and sustainable
                                                    solutions for maintaining, if not augmenting, the
                                                    livelihoods of the waste pickers, the Bank identified
                                                    collaboration with the UNDP sponsored Deprived
                                                    families Economic Empowerment Program (DEEP)
                                                    which has long standing experience with developing
                                                    livelihoods programs for vulnerable populations,
                                                    including in the Gaza Strip. The DEEP Program
                                                    would focus on the 18 waste pickers and their families
                                                    as their unit of analysis for developing livelihoods
                                                    approaches that benefit the household as a whole and
                                                    which draws on the skills mix of various household
                                                    members – beyond the individual waste pickers. A
                                                    commitment letter has been made available by the
                                                    UNDP Special Representative to support the waste
                                                    pickers at the Sofa dumpsite who have been identified
                                                    in the waste picker ARAP.

                                                    Sofa Land Acquisition
                                                    The second major impact under OP 4.12 pertains to
                                                    the land requirements for the Sofa landfill. The
                                                    current landfill area is approx. 26.64 dunums and is
                                                    owned by the Rafah municipality. The Feasibility Study
                                                    recommended an extension of 472 dunums to the
                                                    existing landfill but since some of the cells (4 and 5) will
                                                    not be implemented before year 2027, it is expected
                                                    that the land acquisition needs for this stage of the
                                                    project is 215 dunums.

                                                    ESIA and ARAP findings during early project
                                                    preparation indicate that the affected lands are not of
                                                    high value due to a number of factors including: a)
                                                    proximity of these lands to the Israeli border
                                                    (heightened security threat and restricted land use –
                                                    within the 1,000 meter security buffer zone unilaterally
                                                    declared by Israel); b) the land is not particularly
                                                    arable; c) a key source of income (olive groves) got
                                                    destroyed during the 2008 conflict; and d) the land is
                                                    adjacent to a 17 year old dumpsite owned and used by
                                                    the Rafah Municipality and is also adjacent to a
                                                    planned wastewater treatment site to be financed by
                                                    the Islamic Development Bank.           There are no
                                                    households, structures or any other form of asset on
                                                    site.

                                                    To address the impact of land acquisition, an ARAP
                                                    has been prepared covering a total of 70 landowners
                                                    belonging to five main families. ESIA and ARAP
                                                    consultations indicated that some of landowners would
                                                    voluntarily engage in a willing-buyer, willing-seller
                                                    transaction thus the preparation of the ARAP does not
                                                    preclude such transaction.

                                                    The mechanisms for addressing project level
                                                    grievances are defined in both the waste picker and
                                                    land owner ARAPs which were translated and
                                                    disclosed initially in February and March 2012 with
                                                    subsequent updates and re-disclosures.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 No
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  The main environmental safeguards issue would be the potential pollution of ground water resources from landfill
  leachate. However, the landfill is being designed for “zero? dis charge as the cells will be provided with sealing base and
  under drainage system for collection of leachate and disposal at an on-site evaporation pond also designed for “zero?
  discharge and leakage. Monitoring wells will also be built around land fill cells to enable periodic monitoring of the ground
  water quality and to verify whether there are any leaks from the cells for immediate location and repair. For impacts under
  OP 4.12, the proposed Sofa landfill will need to acquire lands using either the principle of eminent domain or through a
  willing-buyer, willing-seller transaction. An ARAP has been prepared to meet the requirements under the Bank’s policy.
  In addition, a total of 18 waste pickers have been identified as operating in the Sofa landfill site. A separate ARAP has
  been prepared to address the livelihoods’ impacts experienced by the waste pickers. While the magnitude of the social
  impacts are not large or irreversible, attention to potential sensitivities around land acquisition as well as ensuring waste
  pickers have sustainable livelihoods options have been issues that merited attention.
  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
  The ESIA identified indirect socio-economic impacts resulting from the proposed project because of the increased cost of
  managing disposal of municipal refuse, which may be above what most people in the GS may be able to afford due to the
  high incidence of poverty and unemployment.
  3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The feasibility study and the ESIA reported that there are no other viable alternatives to minimize adverse impacts.
  4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
  borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF), the project implementing agency, has experience in managing
  Bank and donor funded programs in the West Bank and Gaza and will also employ qualified staff for the Project
  Development Support Unit (PDSU) based in Gaza. Also, the JSC-KRM TOU that would assume ownership of the new
  facilities would be strengthened with qualified staff to manage safeguard policy issues associated with the operation and
  decommissioning of facilities constructed under the proposed project.
  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
  policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The ESIA identified community representatives, local and central governments representatives, NGOs, private sector
  enterprises, universities and professional associations, as well as land owners and waste pickers for public and focused
  groups and individual consultations to discuss the proposed project and the potential impacts. Consultations with directly
  affected parties (land owners and waste pickers) as well as the broader beneficiary population were carried out during the
  ESIA, ARAP preparation process. Consultations addressed issues of project benefits, land requirements, compensation
  amounts, and options for alternative livelihoods programs. There has been extensive dialogue between the JSC-KRM
  and landowners. JSC has made notable outreach to the affected population which has been documented and has also
  been attentive to wide outreach with CSOs including also meeting with human rights non-governmental organizations
  (NGOs) in the Gaza Strip to discuss project objectives.


  B. Disclosure Requirements
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                  19-Jan-2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                              19-Jan-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                               23-Jan-2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
  Executive Directors
  Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                  26-Feb-2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                              01-Mar-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                               22-Feb-2012
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues
  are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
  N/A

  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
  project decision meeting)
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review         Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework          Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager      Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's             Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form        Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
  and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been     Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project         Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring      Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower          Yes [ X ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
  and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

  Task Team Leader:                     Name: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
  Approved By:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name:                                               Date: January 16, 2014
  Sector Manager:                       Name: Franck Bousquet                               Date: February 13, 2014
