                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                Report No.: 92797

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         15-September-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    World               Project ID:              P128748
 Program Name:               FIP Grant Mechanism for Indigenous Peoples & Local Communities
                             (P128748)
 Task Team Leader:           Madhavi M. Pillai
 Estimated Board Date:       2/26/2015
 Managing Unit:              GCC PT
 Sector(s):                  Forestry (100%)
 Theme(s):                   Participation and civic engagement (45%), Other rural development
                             (30%), Indigenous peoples (25%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00          No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                             Program Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Program Cost:       50.0                   Total Bank Financing:    0.00
 Financing Gap:            50.0
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     Borrower                                                                                    0.00
     Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                50.0
     Total                                                                                   50.00
 Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       No
 project?


 2. Program Development Objective(s)

 The global Program Development Objective of the Dedicated Grant Mechanism For Indigenous Peoples
 and Local Communities (DGM) Program is to strengthen the capacity of Indigenous Peoples and Local
 Communities (IPLCs) to participate in the Forest Investment Program and other REDD+ programs at
 local, national and global levels.
3. Program Description
The Collaborative Design Process
The DGM design and preparation process has been highly collaborative, with the key
stakeholders -the IPLCs and the World Bank working as partners in the process. Consistent
with the mandate in the FIP Design Document the DGM is to provide Indigenous Peoples’ and
local communities in the FIP countries a financing and learning mechanism for demand-driven
initiatives. The concept of the DGM was discussed among the global Working Group of IPLCs
and FIP countries in four regional meetings in Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America and two
global meetings in Bangkok and Washington, D.C. during 2010-2011. These discussions
resulted in the DGM Design Proposal which presents the overarching principles, approach and
potential activities for the grant mechanism. Following the decisions of the FIP Sub-Committee
at its seventh session in November 2011 to operationalize the DGM, the global Transitional
Committee of the DGM met with FIP country Focal Points and MDBs in Istanbul, Turkey to
discuss and agree on the Framework Operational Guidelines that establish the framework to
guide the preparation and implementation of the DGM at national and global levels.

Following the Istanbul meeting and further revisions, the co-Chairs of the Transitional
Committee finally endorsed the DGM Framework Operational Guidelines in September 2013.
The Guidelines are the result of a collaborative effort between the MDBs, the Transitional
Committee and the FIP Pilot countries and describe the principles, programmatic focus and the
common governance, institutional and reporting arrangements to be followed by the program.
The Guidelines also describe the criteria for grant funding. Each country DGM project may use
these Guidelines and adapt them to their own circumstances, ensuring that the common
framework and spirit of the Program are conserved.

Program Structure
On the basis of the agreed Framework Operational Guidelines, the Program is structured in
two-parts to serve both, the localized objectives of IPLCs at the country level as well as the
training, alliance-building and knowledge exchange needs at regional and global levels.

   Part One of the DGM is a Country Project in each FIP pilot country (currently Brazil,
    Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Mexico and
    Peru) that supports on the ground activities and capacity building;

   Part Two of the DGM is a Global Learning and Knowledge Exchange Project- the Global
    Component - a platform for capacity building and strengthening networks and partnerships
    among and between IPLC organizations. This serves as a chapeau or umbrella promoting
    both, internal and external outreach, networking and knowledge exchange between DGM
    activities in the FIP countries as well as other REDD+ countries, monitoring and learning as
    well as reporting on the program.

This structure addresses the IPLCs’ objective to play a greater role in FIP and REDD+ at the
country as well as international levels by strengthening capacities at two levels: (i) the core
institutional capacities of IPLC organizations will be strengthened through management of
grant-financed initiatives of their choice and, (ii) IPLC ‘voice’ and participation in regional and
global forums will be strengthened by the global platform for learning and knowledge exchange
through cross-regional learning events and organization of IPLC networks and alliances. This
Component will also serve as a coordinating mechanism among the eight country projects for
learning, monitoring and reporting. At country level, grant-financed initiatives will lead to a
range of other benefits related to livelihoods, income, sustainable management of forests, wood
energy, etc., depending on the activities in the countries.

The World Bank proposes to operationalize this initiative through a series of projects under a
common Program framework which will be applicable to DGM projects in the FIP countries.
These DGM projects will be prepared in each FIP pilot country following World Bank
procedures for Investment Project Financing.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The World Bank will be the implementing agency for the eight FIP pilot countries: Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Mexico and Peru.
Within the countries, the specific geographical locations of sub-projects (grants) will be
determined during the preparation of each country DGM project. On the basis of the procedures
applied to all projects financed by the Strategic Climate Fund, which also finances the DGM,
the specific fiduciary and safeguards rules to be applied for the DGM country projects will be
those of the respective MDBs (in this case the World Bank) which will channel the DGM funds.
The specific institutions/entities which will execute the program in each pilot country have not
yet been selected at this stage. These institutions will act as executing agencies as the DGM
funds will be channeled through them to IPLCs. These responsibilities for implementation will
include the fiduciary and safeguards aspects as defined in the rules set forth in the Operational
Guidelines and Manual. There would be regular reporting of the progress with application of
the Bank’s safeguards policy frameworks in those countries where the Bank is the
implementing agency, and documentation of their compliant application to sub-projects
(grants) of the different activities during preparation as well as implementation. At the global
program level the Global Executing Agency will provide support to Country level Steering
committees and Executing agencies to ensure consistency and coherence across the whole
program.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Zarafshan H. Khawaja, Lead Social Development Specialist (AFTCS)
Hocine Chalal , Lead Environmental Specialist ( AFTN1 )

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                                                          The DGM program will have 8 country
                                                           projects prepared and implemented
                                                           separately under IPF procedures. The
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                        program has a global component for
                                           Yes             capacity building, knowledge and
                                                           learning activities and eight country
                                                           projects. The country projects will
finance      initiatives    selected     and
implemented by communities in
sustainable management of forest
landscapes, including wood, non-wood
products; and, for promotion of rural
livelihoods practices that enhance climate
change mitigation and adaptation.
Country projects will also finance
community capacity building activities
and trainings. As a sub-program of the
FIP, activities eligible for DGM funding
will be aligned with the FIP investment
criteria. The following are ineligible for
DGM funding:
 activities carried out in relation to
   adjudication of lands under dispute;
 activities        adversely       affecting
   Indigenous Peoples and/or local
   communities, or where communities
   have not provided their broad support.
   Evidence of such broad community
   support may be explained in the project
   proposal, or presented in the form of a
   letter with the proposal;
 removal or alteration of any physical
   cultural property (includes sites having
   archeological,           paleontological,
   historical, religious, or unique natural
   values);
 conversion,          deforestation       or
   degradation or any other alteration of
   natural forests or natural habitats
   including, inter alia, conversion to
   agriculture or tree plantations;
 financing of elections or election
   campaigning; and,
 purchase of arms or ammunition.

Considering the need to ensure
consistency between the different DGM
operations a Program level ESMF has
been prepared and used as a common
basis for the development of project
specific environmental and social
safeguards approach. The Program level
Environmental and Social Management
Framework is designed to be used as the
operating safeguards umbrella for each
DGM country project. Each DGM
country project will be guided by a Bank
                                    Task Team that will be involved in the
                                    design and appraisal of the project. The
                                    Task Team will apply the generic
                                    guidance in the PESMF to the specific
                                    country specific DGM project
                                    components. This PESMF is designed to
                                    allow for flexibility at the country level to
                                    determine how the safeguards will be
                                    applied and which safeguard instruments
                                    will be required to be developed. The
                                    PESMF lays out the safeguards
                                    requirements and procedures for the Bank
                                    Task Team, NEA and various
                                    stakeholders involved in the specific
                                    country DGM projects. The PESMF also
                                    includes checklists and other guidance to
                                    assist in the development of the ESMF.
                                    The DGM will not finance Category A
                                    sub-projects in the countries.

                                    This Program level ESMF is being
                                    disclosed before appraisal of the Program
                                    and has been discussed at the meeting of
                                    the global transitional committee and
                                    referenced in the program level
                                    Framework Operational Guidelines.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Activities under the proposed country
                                    projects should lead to positive impacts
                                    on natural habitats, such as their
                                    conservation         and      sustainable
                                    management. However, as project
                                    activities are likely to be undertaken in
                                    the vicinity of forests and/or protected
                                    areas or natural habitats this policy is
                                    triggered and during preparation of each
                                    country DGM project an assessment will
                                    be made as to how the requirements of
                                    this policy may be applied.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes   The country DGM projects and activities
                                               will have a positive impact on forest
                                               ecosystems through numerous activities
                                               such      as    avoiding      deforestation,
                                               regenerating degraded forest lands,
                                               protecting and enhancing ecosystem
                                               services and biodiversity. As project
                                               activities are likely to take place in or
                                               around forest lands this policy is triggered
                                               at the program level and each country
                                               DGM project will determine how the
                                               policy requirements might apply to the
                                               specific country circumstances, including,
                                               but not limited to, forest restoration,
                                               plantations, non-timber forest products
                                               collection/processing and agro-forestry
                                               activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes    The majority of country DGM activities
                                                will have no association with pesticides.
                                                Nevertheless, there is a possibility that
                                                small amounts of pesticides may be used
                                                in the short term for activities
                                                inside/outside forest areas associated
                                                with innovative or expanded agriculture.
                                                During preparation each country DGM
                                                project will decide based on the country
                                                specific circumstances whether the policy
                                                requirements apply or not.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes    This policy is triggered for the Program
                                                as project activities in Indigenous Peoples
                                                areas are likely to involve and each
                                                country DGM project will determine
                                                whether the policy requirements apply in
                                                that particular project’s context.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   Since the project specifically covers
                                                indigenous communities and will be
                                                implemented in known locations of
                                                Indigenous Peoples in forest lands,
                                                OP4.10 applies. The P-ESMF provides
                                                an over-arching framework and guidance
                                                for preparation of all national DGM
                                                projects. National DGM Projects will be
                                                considered as IPPF, provided it
                                                incorporates all aspects of the P-ESMF
                                                with regard to IPs including consultation
                                                and disclosure etc. with national IP
                                                representatives on the national approach
                                               Each community sub-project will be
                                                          considered an IPP provided they follow
                                                          the requirements defined in the national
                                                          DGM approach

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes            Indigenous Peoples’ claims and access to
                                                          and use of land resources through
                                                          traditional or customary systems entail
                                                          communal property rights. However, in
                                                          some cases it is possible that project
                                                          activities related to land tenure are
                                                          financed and entail land acquisition.
                                                          Therefore, OP4.12 needs to be triggered.
                                                          Each country project will make the
                                                          determination if the policy requirements
                                                          need to be applied in that country.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  Yes            The country DGM Projects will neither
                                                          support the construction nor
                                                          rehabilitation of dams nor will they
                                                          support other investments related with
                                                          services of existing dams. However, it is
                                                          possible that in some cases land
                                                          development activities could rely on
                                                          irrigation schemes fed from dams, and
                                                          therefore, this policy is triggered at the
                                                          Program level.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes             While DGM country projects are unlikely
7.50                                                      to be associated with international
                                                          waterways, this policy is triggered to take
                                                          into account the fact that exact locations
                                                          of country sub-projects are not known at
                                                          this time.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      Yes            This policy is triggered because the exact
                                                          location of activities in each country
                                                          DGM project is not known at this time.
                                                          During preparation country projects will
                                                          determine during whether this policy
                                                          requirements apply in that country.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed program. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The DGM has a Global Component and Country DGM Projects. Overall, the program is
unlikely to have significant safeguards issues or impacts as its objective is to provide capacity
building and funding for communities to

Activities under the Global Component are unlikely to generate any significant safeguards
impacts as they will essentially aim to provide a space and structure for better coordination,
knowledge sharing and overall collaboration between IPLCs within and also outside the
program. Each country level DGM operation will be subject to specific safeguards review and
oversight on the safeguards aspects on the basis of their specific activities and contexts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Given that this is a global program with a series of country projects working directly with communities,
an umbrella approach is being used to provide safeguards guidance to all Bank country DGM teams
through a programmatic environment and social management framework (PESMF). The PESMF is
designed to be used as the operating safeguards umbrella for each DGM country project and provides
overarching principles and guidance in line with the World Bank’s safeguard policies. Country task
teams may use the PESMF for the country DGM project or prepare a country-specific ESMF, based on
the need of the circumstances in the country.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Global Executing Agency as well as the National Executing Agencies are the entities which will
ensure, respectively, the coherence of the whole program and compliance with Bank Policies. The
World Bank teams (at program level and at country level) will ensure that the executing agencies have
the appropriate capacity and resources in order to carry their roles regarding safeguards aspects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principles contained in the Program Level ESMF have been discussed in the meeting of the
global transitional committee of the DGM which is the reference group for the preparation of
the overall Program. In addition all country level DGM operation will have their own set of
safeguards instruments (consisting in some cases in the PESMF with specific operational
procedures to be indicated in the safeguards section of the Operational Manual). The PESMF
will be posted in the Bank Infoshop as well as on the CIF website. It is to be noted that the
PESMF will be available in Portuguese, Spanish and French.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NA
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure N/A
World
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework NA
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
World
Comments:
Pest Management Plan NA
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
World
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
NA

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]           No [ ]       NA [ X ]
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [     ]   No [     ]   NA [X      ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [   ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes [    ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [    ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [    ]   No [     ]   NA [X      ]
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [       ]   No [     ]   NA [X      ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [    ]   No [     ]   NA [X      ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [       ]       No [   ]   NA [X      ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and   Yes [     ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome     Yes [     ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it    Yes [     ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]             No [   ]   NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X          ]   No [   ]   NA [ ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ ]           No [   ]   NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [      ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [ ]           No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [     ]       No [   ]   NA [X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Madhavi M. Pillai
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor, OPSOR: Glenn Morgan                                   Date:
Sector Manager                  Jane Olga Ebinger
