                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA8726

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jul-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jul-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Yemen, Republic of               Project ID:    P150129
                                                      Parent         P110733
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     RY Higher Education Quality Improvement Project - Additional Financing
                     (P150129)
   Parent Project    RY Higher Education Quality Improvement (P110733)
   Name:
   Task Team       Lianqin Wang
   Leader:
   Estimated       21-Jul-2014                        Estimated   15-Sep-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GEDDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (90%), Education for all (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:           3.00              Total Bank Financing:        3.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                              3.00
     Total                                                                                  3.00
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                            Page 1 of 5
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to create enabling conditions for the enhancement
   of quality of university programs and graduate employability.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
Component 1: Quality Improvement for University Programs. The goal of this largest component is
to facilitate the establishment of a fully sustainable mechanism that will channel financial resources
to higher education institutions in Yemen, in order to support program development initiatives
leading to significant qualitative improvement in teaching and learning, consonant with the social,
economic, and employment priorities of the country. A Quality Improve Fund (QIF) mechanism was
established under this component to support 12 undergraduate programs in 8 public universities.

The proposed AF of US$3,000,000 will be added to Component 1 to fill a financing gap for the
procurement of priority lab equipment and tools in the identified for the undergraduate programs.

Component 2: Quality Assurance. This component supports activities that will institutionalize QA
mechanisms and structures in higher education institutions and will foster enabling conditions
conducive to the enhancement of the quality of university programs and graduate competencies.

Component 3: Institutional Capacity Development.This component has a dual objective: (i) to
support the planning and monitoring capacity of the MOHESR; and (ii) to nurture the capacity of
Taiz University in terms of its fiduciary management, and to enhance accountability. Following the
project restructuring, the sub-component relating to the development of the institutional capacity of
the MOHESR has been refocused towards the core objective which is to build a planning and
monitoring capacity within the MOHESR.


Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management. This component will support the
Project coordination, implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The parent project has already identified three QIF Programs that could potentially have impacts on
the environment and health as follows:

Aden University - Medical Laboratories Program;
Taiz University - Industrial Chemistry Program;
Dhamar University - Biochemistry.

As per the Project design and implementation modality, lab equipment and chemicals used in the
above undergraduate programs are small quantities.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                             Page 2 of 5
  Chaogang Wang (GURDR)
  Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)

   6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/      No              Lab equipment and tools will be purchased for
   BP 4.01                                           existing laboratories at the three universities.
                                                     Meanwhile, under the original project, limited
                                                     amounts of chemicals to be used by
                                                     undergraduate students for lab work. There are
                                                     existing environment and safety measures at the
                                                     laboratories to mitigate for potential risks as
                                                     documented by the Project, as well training
                                                     planned by the Quality Improvement Teams to
                                                     improve the effectiveness of such measures.
                                                     Therefore, the category will remain as C. The
                                                     Safeguards specialist will review the existing
                                                     measures and provide recommendations to
                                                     strengthen those measures where needed, during
                                                     the project appraisal.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

   Pest Management OP 4.09           No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Not Applicable.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:


                                             Page 3 of 5
  Not Applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Not Applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  During the preparation of the proposed AF, the PMU has confirmed that three QIF programs that
  may potentially have impacts are committed to ensure safety of their laboratories, and do have
  environment and safety measures in place, including safe use, storage, handling, waste and
  emergency management of chemicals and security in the laboratory environment.

  The Task Team/ Safeguard specialist has already reviewed the existing measures and the
  recommendations to strengthen those measures will be communicated to the QIF programs, during
  the appraisal stage.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are the students, the faculty staff (academic and technicians), and the PMU.

  Capacity building activities in area of safety for Taiz University - Industrial Chemistry program
  are already included in the program's annual work plan.

  The revised manual would include additional measure related to specific precautions to be taken,
  as well as brochures and posters to alert faculty staff and students to ensure adequate risk
  mitigation measures are in place.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [       ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [       ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [       ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [       ]
 in the project cost?



                                            Page 4 of 5
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Lianqin Wang
   Approved By
   Practice Manager:      Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)             Date: 18-Jul-2014




                                             Page 5 of 5
