                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7237
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Yemen, Republic of                 Project ID:    P144522
                            Project Name:     Maternal and Newborn Voucher Project (P144522)
                            Task Team         Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Jan-2014                        Estimated   31-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSHH                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Population and reproductive health (70%), Child health (15%), Health system
                                              performance (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                 10.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               10.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                            10.00
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase the utilization of maternal and newborn health
                           services in the project target areas.



                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         The MNVP will contribute to the reduction of maternal and child mortality. It will contribute to
                         meeting the unmet need for family planning, allowing families to plan and space births. This will
                         also contribute to a reduction in population growth and alleviate pressure on Yemen's scarce natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resources.
                         3. Project Description
                         This is a five year project with a proposed cost of US$10.0 million equivalent to be implemented
                         using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) instrument. The overall approach is to have a community-
                         based maternal and newborn health program using demand-side financing, including a voucher for
                         safe delivery services and neonatal care, together with a cash benefit for women living in rural areas
                         to cover transport, food and possibly other opportunity costs. The supply side will be supported by
                         the ongoing World Bank financed Health and Population Project (HPP, Cr.H640) in the same project
                         target governorates, i.e., Ibb and Sana’a Governorates. The HPP, with a Closing Date of September
                         30, 2017, will be operating in parallel with the proposed project.

                         This is a five year project, which will be financed through a US$10 million equivalent IDA Grant
                         and US$10 million equivalent from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) using an
                         Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument.
                         The Project will support the establishment of a community-based maternal and newborn health and
                         family planning program using demand-side financing, and will use a voucher system to provide
                         women with access to safe motherhood services, neonatal care, and family planning services together
                         with a cash benefit for pregnant women living in rural areas to be used for the cost of transport, food
                         and possibly other opportunity costs. Project activities are organized in the following two
                         components:

                         Component 1: Improving Access to Maternal and Newborn Health Services (US$ 17.0 million
                         equivalent total) which would support results-based payments for the marketing, distribution and
                         reimbursement of vouchers and cash benefits for maternal and newborn health services for target
                         beneficiaries. The voucher service package will include Ante-Natal Care (ANC) visits, Normal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         delivery with a community midwife or in a health facility, Caesarean Section, Management of any
                         complications related to pregnancy, delivery or post-delivery for the mother or the newborn, Post-
                         Natal Care (PNC) visits, Comprehensive Family planningn counseling, Pregnancy tests, and more.
                         Cash benefits will include reimbursement of transport and accommodation/food costs associated with
                         hospitalization.
                         Services will be provided by contracted for-profit, non-profit, and public providers. Tertiary services
                         that require hospitalization are expected to be provided mainly by public service providers. In remote
                         rural areas, the entry point to the voucher scheme will primarily be the private midwife, with or
                         without a delivery room (but preferably with a delivery room). In rural areas where a functional
                         health facility is available with 24/7 services, this center will be the point of entry for woman. These
                         providers will also be the principal conduit for distributing the cash contribution for transport, food
                         and possibly other opportunity costs for delivery or management of complications at an appropriate
                         health facility.

                         Component 2: Results-Based Monitoring, Voucher Management, Quality Verification, Technical
                         Audit, and Project Management (US$ 3.0 million equivalent total). This component would include
                         support for: (i) capacity building activities for the SFD; (ii) independent technical audit; (iii) quality
                         verification and approval of providers; (iv) communications strategies; (v) monitoring and
                         evaluation; (vi) project management operating costs for SFD; and (vii) external audit. The SFD will
                         establish a special unit to undertake the functions of the Voucher Management Agency (VMA), the


                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         proposed payer of the voucher scheme. Fiduciary management, including procurement and financial
                         management, as well as monitoring and evaluation will be carried by the respective departments
                         within the SFD. While capacity is being built at the VMA, an interim strategy may include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contracting of a third party for claims processing. The VMA will develop a Management Information
                         System, which will collect data on different components of the program.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Taiz, Hadramout, Sana’a City, Aden, Hodaida and Ibb
                         governorates
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Ayala Peled Ben Ari (MNSHH)

                          6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/     No               The project’s impact on the environment is
                          BP 4.01                                           expected to be minor and indirect, given that it
                                                                            will not finance inputs for service providers in the
                                                                            form of goods or works, but rather will pay for
                                                                            services already provided using vouchers.
                                                                            Therefore, the project is classified as an
                                                                            environmental Category C (not requiring
                                                                            assessment).

                                                                            Indirect increased in soil and groundwater
                                                                            contamination from hazardous health care waste
                                                                            (HCW) will be managed by the heath care
                                                                            providers in accordance with mitigation measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            agreed on under the SFD IV HCW Management
                                                                            Plan. The providers will also be required to have
                                                                            valid quality certification from the GIZ-managed
                                                                            Quality Improvement Program (QIP),
                                                                            demonstrating their capacity for HCW
                                                                            management. Monitoring will be carried out
                                                                            under Component 2.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No               The project will not damage natural habitats (land
                                                                            and water areas where most of the native plant
                                                                            and animal species are still present), and will not
                                                                            result in loss or degradation of any Critical
                                                                            Natural Habitats as defined by the Policy.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36               No               The project will not have an impact on the health
                                                                            and quality of forests; will not affect the rights
                                                                            and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                            dependence upon or interaction with forests; and
                                                                            will not bring about changes in the management,
                                                                            protection, or utilization of natural forests or



                                                                    Page 3 of 6
                                                                                 plantations, whether they are publicly, privately,
                                                                                 or communally owned.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project will not require the purchase,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 application or storage of pesticides and will not
                                                                                 lead to an increased use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project will not involve excavations,
                            BP 4.11                                              demolition, movement of earth, flooding, or other
                                                                                 environmental changes; and will not be located
                                                                                 in, or in the vicinity of, a physical cultural
                                                                                 resources site recognized by the borrower.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               Indigenous Peoples are not present in, or have
                                                                                 collective attachment to, the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The project will not finance any civil works
                            4.12                                                 therefore the project will not involve in any land
                                                                                 acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project does not involve the construction of
                                                                                 new dams and and/or existing dams in the
                                                                                 borrower's territory.
                            Projects on International           No               The project does not involve any hydroelectric,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 irrigation, flood control, navigation, drainage,
                                                                                 water and sewerage, industrial, and similar
                                                                                 activities which involve the use or potential
                                                                                 pollution of international waterways as described
                                                                                 in para. 1 of the Policy; and does not include a
                                                                                 detailed design and engineering studies of
                                                                                 activities under para. 2(a) of the Policy, including
                                                                                 those to be carried out by the Bank as executing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 agency or in any other capacity.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project does not take place in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project does not trigger any World Bank safeguard policies. Project impact on the
                              environment is expected to be minor and indirect as a result of increased access to and utilization
                              of health services: while no on the ground interventions are funded, it is likely that more hazardous
                              health care waste will be generated, which could increase soil and groundwater contamination.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable (NA)
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable (NA)

                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower was not required to take measures to address the indirect effects of the project. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SFD IV healthcare waste management plan (approved by the World Bank in 2010) will be utilized
                           by all health care providers to mitigate the indirect project impact. Providers will also be required
                           to have valid quality certification from the GIZ-managed Quality Improvement Program (QIP),
                           proving adequate capacity for health care waste management.

                           As part of the project’s ongoing quality assurance procedures under component 2, potential
                           providers will be checked for their HCW management practices and certification prior to their
                           engagement in project activities. Annual reevaluations will be carried out by SFD as part of its
                           annual environmental audits, in collaboration with the QIP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key governmental stakeholders are the MOPHP–Population Sector and the Reproductive Health
                           Department. A number of development partners, including, inter alia, United Nations Population
                           Fund (UNFPA), WHO, United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF), the Dutch Development
                           Cooperation, Mary Stops International, KfW, and GIZ, have particular interest in reproductive
                           health. The target group of beneficiaries are poor women of reproductive age (15–49 yrs.) in rural
                           and urban areas in the targeted governorates. As no safeguard policies are triggered, safeguard-
                           related consultation was not carried out.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Firas Raad (SM)                             Date: 24-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
