                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6076
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:    P146312
                            Project Name:      Yemen Civil Society Organization Support Project (P146312)
                            Task Team          Najat Yamouri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Dec-2013                       Estimated   28-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSU                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (50%), Sub-national government administration (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          8.00                Total Bank Financing:        8.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  8.00
                              Total                                                                                      8.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project aims to strengthen transparency and governance in the CSO sector and,
                           enhance CSO capacity to support social accountability and development.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will consist of two mutually reinforcing components that will both strengthen the
                           enabling environment at the national level and build capacity of CSOs to engage effectively in

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         development.

                         a)       Component One – Increase transparency and ease of entry in the CSO sector (USD 3.3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Million). Under this component, the project will:

                         Streamline and digitalize the CSO registration process to improve ease of access into the CSO sector.
                         Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor (MoSAL) would be supported to develop standardized and
                         streamlined operating procedures relating to CSO registration and to develop an operating manual on
                         the reformed registration process. Further outreach support will be provided to mainstream the new
                         procedures among MoSAL offices and to disseminate information on the new registration process
                         among CSOs and the general public. The e-registration system will link MoSAL’s main offices with
                         five governorate-level offices. Additionally, a user-friendly online interface would be developed to
                         provide public access to the system.
                         Support MoSAL-CSO dialogue on reforming the legal and institutional framework. There will be an
                         exchange of best practices and comparative legal experiences at the regional and global level, as well
                         as independent reviews of the current laws, bylaws and implementing arrangements will feed the
                         public debate on the reform as well as which will help inform MoSAL on reform options of the Law
                         of Association. Further, the project will also support the consultation of civil society in the reform
                         process and formulation of new the law.
                         This component will also support MoSAL in terms of building sustainable channels of outreach and
                         consultations with CSOs. An outreach program will be developed on improved registration and a
                         series of sequenced consultations with CSOs around reform options of the Law of Association
                         following the dissemination of the analytical and comparative Law of Association Study. In
                         particular, the project will include training MoSAL staff on how to provide customer service,
                         outreach, and consultations (which would seek qualitative feedback) and providing support to
                         formulate annual outreach and communication plans. Further, a stakeholder mapping and analysis
                         will be included as part of the proposed communications plan.

                         MoSAL will publish a Manual of CSO Registration Procedures and make these widely available in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         order to ensure that interested CSOs are aware of the steps in the registration process. Additionally,
                         these registration procedures will be simplified, translated into easy-to-understand brochures/posters
                         and made widely available online and offline at all Helpdesk locations and MoSAL offices in
                         Governorates. These steps are expected to improve transparency in the CSO sector. User feedback
                         surveys at the helpdesk locations and three CSO surveys during the project duration will help track
                         and monitor the ease of use of the e-registration process and provide feedback on improving
                         transparency further.

                         b) Component Two - CSOs Capacity Building: Classroom-based training and Small Grants for
                         Action Learning (USD 3.6 Million)

                         This component will deliver training for CSOs building on the basic capacity-building opportunities
                         offered by other USAID and SFD programs. Proposed activities under this component will consist of
                         (a) classroom-based training on social accountability approaches and tools, (b) a competitive small
                         grants program for action learning and field-based mentoring for integrating social accountability
                         mechanisms into CSO’s work.

                         The component will utilize and help enhance the existing CSO capacity-building capacities within
                         the universities of Sana’a and Aden. Administrative staffing and support for the universities of
                         Sana’a and Aden will be funded as well as Training of Trainers, curriculum development, office

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         equipment for both training facilities, CSO classroom based training and CSO and Trainer support
                         costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The University of Sana’a CBA and the University of Aden CSO Management Unit (CSO/MU) will
                         administer a course that will deliver classroom-based learning, awarding CSOs who have
                         successfully completed this portion of the capacity-building program a certificate. These ‘certified’
                         CSOs will be eligible to apply for a small grant up to USD 20,000 to integrate social accountability
                         tools into their development projects . The CSOs that receive small grants (85 in total, or
                         approximately 25 percent of each graduating cohort from the classroom-based curriculum) will also
                         receive on-site mentoring support to facilitate and monitor implementation of social accountability
                         tools into their activities. Grant awards are expected to fund all proposed expenses associated with
                         the CSO’s proposed social accountability activity.

                         Eligibility for the capacity building program will be based on criteria that assess whether CSOs
                         applying for proposed class-room based training have requisite basic skills such to enter the World
                         Bank-supported capacity building program built around social accountability. Intake will target
                         CSOs that have completed either the Social Fund for Development basic skills training program or
                         basic skills and capacity-building training currently offered by the University of Sana’a and
                         University of Aden. Under this component, the capacities of approximately 300 CSOs will be
                         strengthened.

                         Small Grants for Action Learning on social accountability will complement the classroom-based
                         training, and is expected to create a cadre of CSOs with both classroom and field training on
                         integrating social accountability mechanisms in their development initiatives. Through these grants,
                         CSOs will be able to implement various citizen engagement and social accountability tools such as
                         citizen report cards, community scorecards and social audits. The Small Grants for Action learning
                         will be competitively awarded on an ongoing basis to CSOs completing classroom-based training. A
                         multi-stakeholder Grant Making Committee (GMC) (See Annex for further details of the GMC) will
                         be responsible for managing the grantees selection process (The Operations Manual will detail
Public Disclosure Copy




                         membership and selection criteria- which have already been agreed upon (see detailed project
                         description). The small grants will be provided to approximately 85 CSOs during the four year
                         duration of the proposed project. The grant making scheme will be structured through a competitive
                         and transparent process. The grants will build on new/planned CSO projects and ongoing ones being
                         implemented by grantee CSOs.

                         This component will also fund support for consultants and mentors to provide guidance and oversight
                         of Small Grants for Action Learning activities, providing on-field support for recipient of the Small
                         Grants for Action Learning.

                         c) Component Three – Project Management

                         This component will facilitate project implementation by providing effective and efficient
                         management support including auditing, monitoring and evaluation, and safeguard compliance.
                         Supporting transparency in the CSO environment as well as strengthening the CSO sector are key
                         objectives of the project, both of which necessitate effective citizen engagement mechanisms. CSO
                         and Citizen feedback mechanisms are integrated in both Components One and Two. A CSO
                         satisfaction survey, funded under component One, will be conducted on the registration process at
                         the beginning, mid-term and end of the project in order to collect CSO feedback. The satisfaction
                         survey and online feedback mechanisms mentioned above as part of the e-registration process will

                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         disaggregate and analyze data by location (rural/urban), sector/subsectors and gender. User feedback
                         from CSOs will also be received through user feedback surveys through the e-registration website
                         and at all helpdesks. This feedback will be collected, analyzed, and acted upon to the extent possible
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on a quarterly basis. For Component Two, feedback from the participants in the classroom-based
                         training part of the capacity building program will be continuously collected, analyzed and integrated
                         into the modules as the curriculum is revised and updated. Moreover, the Small Grants for Action
                         Learning, which will engage field mentors who will provide technical expertise and collect feedback
                         from grantee CSOs and citizens engaged in social accountability interventions. This will encourage
                         greater downward accountability of governments and service providers. Further, a three-stage
                         grievance redress/complaints mechanism will be integrated to ensure that grievances relating to
                         grantee selection, grant disbursement, inadequacy of mentoring support, etc. are taken cognizance of
                         and promptly resolved.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project falls under World Bank category C classification as none of the Bank's ten
                         safeguards policies are triggered, and the proposed project activities are likely to have minimal or no
                         adverse environmental and social impacts. The proposed projectwill help with enhancing the
                         institutional capacity of CSOs in Yemen. Specific criteria detailing how CSOs will be selected to
                         attend the training and certification program will be integrated into the design. A Small Grants for
                         Action Learning managed by the Universities of Sana'a and Aden is the only sub-component that
                         entails any potential safeguards risk. The main objective of the small grants is to incentivize the
                         CSOs to apply their learning in an action-oriented way. A positive list of eligible small grant
                         proposals will reflect that project will not support any activity that involves involuntary resettlement
                         impacts or has any adverse impacts on people’s livelihood, which includes any small-scale
                         construction works. A safeguards screening checklist will be included in the operational manual to
                         ensure that funded sub-projects are within the scope of technical assistance, institutional
                         development, and training. If the possibility of funding small-scale construction works arises as the
                         project develops, the team will assess the need to modify the project category and develop sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project mitigation measures.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Tracy Hart (MNSEE)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               Although the small grant ($5,000-$10,000) will
                            4.12                                                 support delivery of small scale services and
                                                                                 infrastructures at community level, the project
                                                                                 will not support any activity which involves
                                                                                 involuntary taking of land and have any adverse
                                                                                 impacts on people’s livelihood. A project
                                                                                 negative list will be included in the PAD and the
                                                                                 small grant operational manual. A safeguards
                                                                                 screening guideline will also be included in the
                                                                                 operational manual to eliminate any activities
                                                                                 which involve involuntary resettlement impacts.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Subprojects implemented by grantee CSOs will not be designed or executed in a manner that will
                              trigger Bank safeguards policies. A positive list of eligible small grant proposals will reflect that
Public Disclosure Copy




                              project will not support any activity that involves involuntary resettlement impacts or has any
                              adverse impacts on people’s livelihood, which includes any small-scale construction works.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project aim to strengthen transparency and governance in the CSO sector and enhance CSO
                              capacity to support social accountability and development. The project implementation is
                              anticipated to have no adverse impacts.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The project implementation agency is going to be determined. A safeguards screening guideline
                              will be included in the operational manual to eliminate any activities which have potential adverse
                              environmental and social impacts, including involuntary resettlement impacts.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The key stakeholders of the project will be the CSO community, Ministry of Social Affairs and


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                             Labor (MOSAL), as well as the Universities of Sana’a and Aden. New and emergent youth and
                             women's CSO are expected to a target for support. Broader stakeholder engagement will also
                             include donors and INGOs engaged in development programs across sectors in Yemen. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project is not expected to trigger any safeguards policies and affect any people negatively. But
                             consultations with various stakeholders have been carried out through focused group discussion
                             and individual interviews with government officials, representatives from CSOs. Consultation will
                             continue along with the project preparation and implementation. Project documents will be made
                             available to the public in Infoshop and in country.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Najat Yamouri


                                                                         Page 6 of 7
                         Approved By
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)    Date: 15-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 7 of 7
