                                                                                               92757

                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
.




.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           17-Nov-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Zambia               Project ID:                P144254
    Project Name:                Zambia COMACO Landscape Management (P144254)
    Task Team Leader:            Juvenal Nzambimana
    Estimated Board Date:        12-Jan-2015
    Managing Unit:               GFADR
    Sector(s):                   Forestry (28%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%),
                                 Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (24%), Animal production (13%)
    Theme(s):                    Other environment and natural resources management (13%),
                                 Biodiversity (15%), Land administration and management (25%), Rural
                                 non-fa rm income generation (35%), Rural markets (12%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       1.33                     Total Bank Financing:      0.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
        Financing Source                                                                         Amount
        Borrower                                                                                      0.00
        Carbon Fund                                                                                   1.33
        Total                                                                                         1.33
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?
.


.




    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    1.       The development objective of the COMACO Landscape Project is to reduce emissions of
    Greenhouse Gases (GHG) through the sustainable management of 270,698 ha of land traditionally
    devoted to community led agricultural and non-agricultural activities. The delivery of the ERs
    according to the delivery schedule to be agreed upon in ERPA will be the results indicator that is
    going to be monitored by the World Bank over the ERPA duration.
    2.        The project has the following specific technical objectives: (a) Agriculture Land Management
    including Agroforestry: to increase food production and household income by expanding
    legume-based agroforestry systems with demonstrated higher sustainable crop yields, and production
    of important firewood, materials and tradable carbon compared to the baseline of traditional
    smallholder agriculture; (b) Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD): To
    protect and expand areas under natural forest and conserve biodiversity through the intensification of
    food production on existing farm plots by adoption of legume-based agroforestry with in-built
    firewood production and avoidance of fallows, which will replace the need for further forest clearing
    as part of slash and burn agriculture, firewood and charcoal production. The decisions on land
    delineation for specific management purposes rest with the chiefs in consultation with the
    communities. Currently the challenge is one where allocation of forest areas for agricultural purposes
    to communities is made by the chief, and as a result the forested areas within the chiefdom are
    shrinking over time. Several chiefdoms have recognized the problem and are willing to set aside
    forest areas within chiefdoms for conservation use known as community conservation areas (CCAs).
    The interventions in CCAs will include land use planning, and preparation forest management plans
    by communities for managing conservation areas through implementing practices that will ensure that
    the forest areas are sustained. Agreements between chiefdoms and COMACO will include provisions
    for implementation. The agreement also requires the Chiefs to submit a benefit sharing plan that will
    ensure fair distribution or usage of revenue channeled through the sale of Emission Reductions
    generated from the Project.
.




    3. Project Description
    The Community Markets for Conservation (COMACO) Landscape Management project will increase
    smallholder farmer crop yield from sustainable climate-smart agriculture, increase farmer income and
    welfare, reduce uncontrolled forest loss and degradation and increase net forest cover of the Luangwa
    Valley while being supported by carbon revenues from a significant increase bio-carbon sequestration
    across the project area. The project comprises an array of specific interventions as part of an
    integrated landscape management strategy to conserve biodiversity, improve food production per unit
    area of cropland, and increase resilience to climate change in a landscape with a carefully designed,
    ecologically sensitive mosaic of production and conservation functions.

    As a bio-carbon project, COMACO and its partners intend to pioneer a unique approach to the
    landscape-wide carbon asset management that combines several approved CDM and Verified Carbon
    Standard (VCS) methodologies under an umbrella of grouped projects, equivalent to CDM Program of
    Activities (PoA) to monitor, verify, and monetize carbon increments in the most biologically and
    economically important carbon pools across the management landscape. Conceptually, the project
    represents a bridge to a comprehensive landscape management methodology that would eventually
    achieve the same economic purpose of capturing for trade incremental carbon in a more economically
    efficient manner.

    COMACO is dedicated to using economic incentives that promote small-holder adoption of improved
    farming and land use practices on landscapes sensitive to biodiversity loss and wildlife
    habitat/watershed degradation. The project area is approximately 1,219,888 hectares; 30,000 ha is for
    reforestation and improved cropland management, and 1,192,464 ha is for REDD.

    The shift from expansive to intensive farming practices, coupled with the a new availability of fuel
    resources, will help to alleviate the pressure on forest, reducing forest loss and supporting natural
    forest regeneration in conservation areas. Moreover, new management practices to be rewarded by
    COMACO will include cessation of post-harvest crop residue burning and collateral forest fire
damage, the full suite of no-till and residue retention agriculture practices, dedicated woodlots and
border plantings, and the switch to improved cook stoves using firewood from chopping agroforestry
and conservation from traditional charcoal braziers to efficient wood stoves in the surrounding area.
Supporting these efforts will be the promotion of incentives for sustainably harvested non-traditional
forest products (apiaries for honey and wild mushrooms) as alternatives to destructive charcoal
production, and the establishment of fire-breaks to protect forest products harvest.

The project will expand on the following technologies which have been piloted by COMACO in the
project area:
(i)       Conservation Farming: The project will expand on COMACO’s current initiatives in
conservation farming. COMACO has been exploring and promoting techniques to increase yield and
decrease the rate of deforestation and forest degradation from expansive low-yield agriculture in the
face of the burgeoning population growth for the past ten years in the Luangwa Valley. These
innovations cover the full range of conservation farming techniques from no-till to agro-forestry,
which entails alley-cropping of maize between rows of actively coppiced agro-forestry species such as
Gliricidia sepium (GS) and Faidherbia albida (FA). These are both nitrogen fixing and micronutrient
cycling species which are also good for accumulating a humus layer in the alleys. Coppicing provides
ideal firewood for modern efficient cook stoves and has resulted in the parallel 60,000 efficient cook
stove project for COMACO farmers.

(ii)    Reduced Till Agriculture: Compliance to low tillage practices is a major determinant of
COMACO’s incentive payment to farmers when purchasing their surplus crops. These practices
include pot-holing of individual planting stations, provision of compost fertilizer in these pot-holes,
and mulching of the area around the pot-holes with crop residues from the previous harvest. Through
these practices farmers are able to produce maize yields above 2000kgs per hectare without fertilizer
which in turn reduces associated carbon costs from increasing farmer dependency on fertilizer.

(iii)   Other Sustainable Agriculture: Other measures to increase yield and recover degraded
agricultural land include crop rotation with legumes and use of deep-rooted crops such as sunflower to
help pull up soil nutrients, and fallow field recovery with velvet beans.

(iv)     Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD): The project will scale up on
existing initiatives that have resulted in a burgeoning honey market and potentially large wild
mushrooms market with added premium pricing when producers demonstrate commitment to forest
protection through the cessation of expansive slash-and-burn and rotational fallow agricultural
practices. Small holder farmers will gain increased premium prices for their farm commodities when
their community effectively implements a community-regulated and enforced land use zoning plan or
establishes community conservation areas that exclude land use practices that are destructive to
forests. The project will utilize one of the existing REDD methodologies approved under the Verified
Carbon Standard.

(v)     Improved Fire Management: Non-burning of post-harvest farm plots to promote mulching of
next season’s crop is an important part of a farmer’s compliance score. No-burning of designated
woodland sites used as apiaries is another basis for allocating points for compliance by participating
farmers. Their respective points contribute to a community’s overall scoring for market pricing of the
commodities COMACO buys from small holder farmers. A comparison between a COMACO and a
non-COMACO area using MODIS imagery data has shown a reduced fire history in the COMACO
area and the importance of the measures applied by COMACO.

(vi)    Alternatives to fuel wood for forest protection: Adoption of GS coppice agroforestry has the
potential of becoming a large scale alternative for firewood, both to farmer household use and for sale
to urban/peri-urban non-farm households. Coppicing results in annual stem regrowth of long narrow
stems of 1-3inch diameter which grows during the dry season. This regrowth makes the stem easy to
bundle, store and finally use for cooking. The firewood bundles are suitable for sale to current
charcoal users and reduce forest degradation.

The project comprises two components as follows:

Component 1: Agricultural Land Management (Integrated Crop Management) /Afforestation,
Reforestation and Re-vegetation

Component 1 will ensure : a) an increase in food production and farm-gate income per unit area by
expanding legume-based agro-forestry systems with demonstrated improvements in sustainable crop
yields, and b) the shift from expansive to intensive farming practices, coupled with a new availability
of fuel sources, will help to alleviate the pressure on forests by decreasing the need for agriculture and
charcoal production encroachment as compared to the baseline of traditional smallholder agriculture
methods called “slash and burn. More specifically, the activities will include:
•        Cessation of post-harvest crop residue burning and collateral; forest fire damage;
•        The full suite of no-till and residue retention agricultural practices;
•        Non-burning of designated woodland sites used as apiaries;
•        Establishment of firebreaks to protect forest products harvests, and
•        Bio-sequestration of fast-growing coppicing leguminous trees Gliricidia sepium (GS) and
potentially Faidherbia albida (FA) in agroforestry systems with demonstrated higher sustainable crop
yields.

Supply side support for the COMACO market-based incentive system will come in the form of inputs,
training, and extension delivered through COMSCO’s lead farmers to smallholders from COMACO’s
technical specialists and drawing on technical capacity and experience of COMACO partners and
advisors.

Component 2: Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) + (Avoided
Unplanned Deforestation and Avoided Degradation)

Component 2 will protect and expand areas under natural forest cover on traditional land by
prioritizing conservation agriculture practices, alternative livelihoods, and traditional governance
frameworks through the following activities:

1)       In cooperation with traditional leaders and local government authorities (including District
Forestry and Agriculture officials and ZAWA), COMACO is piloting approaches to land-use zoning
and community-based participatory forest management planning for COMACO farmers. These
activities lay out a potential model for traditional authorities to zone customary land and use
market-based incentives to implement a conservation vision for sustainable agricultural and land use
practices in consultation with community members, COMACO cooperative leaders, and local
government.
2)       The Project will build on existing pilot initiatives that have resulted in a burgeoning honey
market and potentially large wild mushroom market with added premium pricing when producers
demonstrate commitment to forest protection.
3)       Fast-growing coppicing leguminous trees (Gliricidia sepium (GS) and potentially Faidherbia
albida (FA)) in agroforestry systems represent a significant increases in firewood alternatives from
renewable sources as well as increases in materials suitable for tradable carbon production can also
    make household energy supply sustainable through:
    (i)      the establishment of firewood woodlots and border plantings;
    (ii)     reducing destructive charcoal production in natural forests; and
    (iii)    introducing (in a parallel COMACO CDM project) the use of clean and efficient wood-stoves
    for COMACO farmers and associated communities to replace open fire cooking and switch charcoal
    users to superior wood stoves. This could eventually lead to a regional market for surplus sustainably
    produced firewood.

    Small holder farmers will gain increased premium prices for their farm commodities when their
    community effectively implements a community-regulated and enforced land use zoning plan or
    establishes community conservation areas that exclude land use practices destructive to forests, as part
    of broader Community Conservation Plans (CCPs).
    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    The project will be implemented in the Luangwa Valley, which covers in Eastern Province and parts
    of Muchinga district, Lusaka and Central Provinces in Zambia. The Luangwa Valley is a mixed
    woodland landscape dotted with smallholder farms. The soils are depleted of nutrients due to
    monoculture crops planting by subsistence farmers, and the local practice of burning crop residues,
    which also contributes to soil erosion. The valley is predominantly flat bottomed and bounded by steep
    escarpments.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba ( GFADR )
    Marialena Vyzaki ( GFADR )
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes             The policy is triggered because Aas an
                                                                  agriculture land management /
                                                                  afforestation, reforestation and
                                                                  re-vegetation project, the proposed
                                                                  landscape project (also see project
                                                                  description) is expected to have both
                                                                  positive and negative impacts. Positive
                                                                  project impact on the environment will
                                                                  be large and significant. Potential
                                                                  negative impacts, on the other hand,
                                                                  could arise from components 1 and 2
                                                                  activities which include expanding
                                                                  legume-based agro-forestry systems,
                                                                  climate smart agriculture, and promotion
                                                                  of the use of fast growing coppicing
                                                                  leguminous trees in agro-forestry. and
                                                                  therefore the Bank safeguards policy on
                                                                  Environmental assessment (OP/BP4.01)
                                                                  is triggered. Positive project impact on
                                                                  the environment will be large and
                                                                  significant. Consequently, an
                                                                  Environmental and Social management
                                    Plan (ESMP) has been prepared to guide
                                    the screening and mitigation of any
                                    negative impact of the project. In
                                    addition an Environmental Project Brief
                                    is being drafted to encompass all project
                                    target areas as per Zambia
                                    Environmental Management Authority's
                                    (ZEMA) guidance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   TMost of the project area is a natural
                                    habitat comprising miombo woodlands,
                                    mopane woodlands and grasslands. The
                                    Bank policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP
                                    4.04) is triggered by the project given the
                                    potential conversion of natural habitats
                                    either directly or indirectly, through both
                                    climate smart agriculture or REDD+
                                    activities as proposed under this project.
                                    The expanded agricultural activities
                                    would largely be undertaken in the
                                    already degraded land areas and with the
                                    scaling up of project proposed
                                    technologies including soil conservation
                                    practices are expected to result in
                                    landscape improvements. The
                                    establishment of green zones in the
                                    participating chiefdoms would lead to a
                                    change in the natural habitats but the
                                    expected impact is positive. The
                                    expected changes in the livelihoods
                                    could have an impact on natural habitats
                                    and therefore the project ESMP includes
                                    proposed measures for mitigating such
                                    impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The safeguards policy OP/BP 4.36 on
                                    forests is triggered by this project as its
                                    activities will reduce uncontrolled forest
                                    loss and degradation and increase the net
                                    forest cover in the project areas within
                                    the Luangwa Valley. The project is
                                    largely expected to bring positive results
                                    under this policy through the
                                    demarcation and management of green
                                    zones in the valley. In addition to the
                                    expected potential positive benefits, the
                                    activities related to expected increase in
                                    small-holder farmer crop production and
                                    scaling up of sustainable climate-smart
                                    agriculture may have marginal negative
                                    effects on total forest cover and forest
                                               tree species and their distribution. The
                                               project ESMP includes proposed
                                               measures for potential mitigating of
                                               potential negative impacts.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   The safeguards policy OP/BP4.09 on
                                               Pest management is triggered.
                                               Technology dissemination and scaling
                                               up on adoption of climate smart
                                               agricultural technologies to be supported
                                               by the project could result in the
                                               increased usage of agrochemicals by
                                               farmer beneficiaries, although the project
                                               does not directly advocate the use of
                                               pesticides or other chemical fertilizers,
                                               but while the use of organic and/ or
                                               conservation practices are encouraged.
                                               Given the potential risk of use of
                                               harmful chemicals (to man and
                                               environment), a Pest Management Plan
                                               (PMP) has been prepardrafted by the
                                               project and is being currently reviewed
                                               by the Bank. Once approved the PMP
                                               will be adopted for use under the project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   The policy is triggered as the Project
                                               area may harbor structures of cultural or
                                               archeological importance. If during
                                               implementation, archaeological relics,
                                               fossils, or human remains would be
                                               unearthed, mitigation measures would
                                               include chance finds procedure
                                               implementation as part of the generic
                                               environmental rules for contractors and
                                               construction workers.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    The Bank policy OP/BP 4.10
                                               (Indigenous peoples) is not triggered by
                                               this project as the project activities and
                                               target area in the Luangwa valley of the
                                               Eastern Province does not include any
                                               Indigenous Peoples according to the
                                               policy definition.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The Bank safeguards policy OP/BP4.12
                                               (Involuntary Resettlement) is triggered.
                                               The project is not expected to involve
                                               any large scale land acquisitions or
                                               denial restriction of access to normal
                                               means of livelihood across the target
                                               areas. However, in one of the targeted
                                               chiefdoms under the project it may
                                               involve some potential beneficiaries
                                                     being resettled for green zone
                                                     establishment. It may also include
                                                     small-scale land acquisition, resident
                                                     relocation and access limitation to some
                                                     of the natural resources which constitute
                                                     local communities’ livelihoods such as
                                                     wildlife hunting/poaching, tree-cutting
                                                     for charcoal production, etc.. The project
                                                     has already drafted the Resettlement
                                                     Policy framework (RPF). The detailed
                                                     social impact assessment (SIA) will be
                                                     completed once the affected land and
                                                     residents are identified and where these
                                                     require resettlement, cause impact on
                                                     assets, and / or negatively impact
                                                     income, these mitigation procedures will
                                                     be further defined, in detail, , in a
                                                     Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) specific
                                                     to that chiefdom.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No      The Bank policy OP/BP4.37 on the
                                                     safety of dams is not triggered as the
                                                     project would not involve any
                                                     construction of water retention structures
                                                     in relation to the component 1 and 2 that
                                                     would pose potential hazards to both
                                                     human or animal health and safety. The
                                                     project will not fund any large dams, as
                                                     defined by OP 4.37, or small dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No     The Bank policy OP/BP 7.50 (Projects
    7.50                                             on International Waterways) is not
                                                     triggered by this project as the proposed
                                                     project activities in relation to REDD+
                                                     and agriculture in the Luangwa
                                                     watershed will not potentially impact
                                                     any of the riparian countries of Zambia.
                                                     Increased water use or direct abstraction
                                                     from the project activities are not
                                                     expected and as such are also not
                                                     expected to negatively affect the
                                                     Luangwa watershed.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No      The Bank policy OP/BP7.6 (projects in
                                                     Disputed Areas) is not triggered by the
                                                     proposed Carbon finance project as the
                                                     project area is not geographically located
                                                     in any disputed territories of the country.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to have positive impacts on both the communities living in the project area and
on conservation and biodiversity in the landscape. Communities will benefit from the integrated
landscape management which will result in increase in food production and farm-gate income per unit
area as well as from increased farmer resistance to climate change, while conservation and biodiversity
benefits will accrue from improved agricultural land management practices and afforestation,
reforestation, and re-vegetation activities. The project further seeks to enhance the conservation of the
miombo and mopane woodlands habitats occurring the project area.

Potential ecosystem disturbance that may arise from project activities during early implementation
phase would be mitigated through measures provides in the ESMP. There are no potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts foreseen from the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The entire Luangwa Valley landscape will remain under conservation, managed by the communities
with assistance from the Zambia Wildlife Authority (ZAWA) in the longer term. No activities, arising
from the project, are foreseen that could bring any negative impacts to the area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No project alternatives are applicable as activities involved aim to introduce a comprehensive
integrated landscape management for the Luangwa Valley.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing agency, COMACO, has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan,
Resettlement Policy Framework and a Pest Management Plan for the project. The safeguards
instruments have been Bank reviewed by the Project safeguards specialist and have been submitted to
the Zambia Environmental Management Authority (ZEMA) in accordance with the Country laws.
Environmental project brief encompassing all project areas is being drafted as per ZEMA guidance
and once cleared by ZEMA would be submitted to the Bank for further review, and approval for
disclosure.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
COMACO works in partnership with government ministries at district, provincial and national levels.
The project will coordinate with various government bodies to advance mutually beneficial goals
including information and knowledge sharing, promoting climate resilience, advancing conservation
agriculture and sustainable land use practices, and improving local livelihoods. Other stakeholders,
therefore, include Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAL), Ministry of Lands, Natural
Resources and environmental Protection (MLNREP), Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR),
ZAWA, a chief and/or headmen and a Community Resource Board Representative for the
communities concerned. The project is prepared using a participatory approach for the affected
communities.

All safeguards documents prepared for the project and submitted to the Zambia Environmental
Management Agency (ZEMA) for review and clearance were publicly disclosed for access to all
affected and interested parties through newspaper advertisement and is currently uploaded and
    displayed in the project web site. Refer to WBDocs for those safeguards related documentation.
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  23-Jun-2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-NOV-2014
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    Zambia                                                                       20-Jun-2014
    Comments: In-country discloure of the draft final documents have been made in each of the
              chiefdoms where project will be implemented. Drafts will be further processed after
              review by ZEMA.
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  16-Jun-2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-Nov-2014
    "In country" Disclosure
    Zambia                                                                       20-Jun-2014
    Comments: See above.
    Pest Management Plan
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  15-Sep-2014
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-Nov-2014
    "In country" Disclosure
    Zambia                                                                       22-Sep-2014
    Comments: In country disclosure of safeguards related documents included web posting in the
              COMACo project web site, Publication in Local Newspaper and community level
              consultation meetings (refer to CFAM documents for a detailed consultation and
              disclosure process.
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    The in-country disclosure process included the two policies.
.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [        ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]

Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:                Name: Juvenal Nzambimana
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                        Date:
    Practice Manager/Manager:        Name:                                    Date:
