INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 16-Feb-2015                         Report No.:
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Zambia                        Project ID: P146636
Project Name: Zambia-Global Partnership on Output Based Aid (GPOBA)-Electricity
Access for Low-income Households
Task Team Leader: Raihan Elahi
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A          Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: GEEDR                   Lending Instrument: Grant from the
Global Partnership for Output-Based Aid
(GPOBA), a Bank managed multi-donor
trust fund.
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (70%); Other rural development (3 0%)
SPF Amount (US$m):          0
GEF Amount (US$m.):         0
PCF Amount (US$m.):         0
Other financing amounts by source:
Borrower                                                 0.00
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid (US$m)            4.95
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                  Simple [X]        Repeater
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes [ ]  No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
2. Project Objectives
The objective of this grant-supported project is to increase access to grid-based electricity
services in urban and peri-urban areas of Zambia through the use of an Output-Based Aid
(OBA) approach. The project builds upon the Connection Fee Subsidy Program under the
on-going Increased Access to Electricity Services (IAES) project.
3. Project Description
The project grant will support the provision of subsidies to facilitate new electricity
connections and support installation of Ready-Boards including wiring and other
ancillary activities to approximately 22,000 low-income households and 5,000 Micro and
Small Enterprises (MSEs) in urban and peri-urban areas of Zambia. The subsidies will be
disbursed against two outputs, (i) connecting a household or a MSE to the national power
grid, and (ii) provision of Ready-Boards. Two types of connections will be supported for
each household or MSE, including installation of three compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs)
for each eligible household and MSE as follows:


﻿*     'Standard Connection and three CFLs: This type of connection will include
provision of drop-wire from a supply line to the meter box, a single-phase pre-payment
meter, circuit breaker and lightening arrester. The total charge for this type of connection
is estimated at US$203 for connecting households and MSEs located up to 30 meters
from an existing electricity pole. The GPOBA subsidy will finance US$175 (or about 86
percent of the costs) for each standard connection. Additional costs for connections
beyond 30 meters will be borne by households.
*     Enhanced Connection and three CFLs: This type of connection includes the
Standard Connection package described above plus installation of a Ready Board at an
estimated cost of US$256 for connecting households and MSEs located up to 30 meters
from an existing electricity pole. The GPOBA subsidy will finance US$210 (or about 82
percent of the costs) for each enhanced connection. Additional costs for connections
beyond 30 meters are borne by the households.
The project will be implemented by the Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation Limited
(ZESCO).
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will focus on households in low-income settlements in urban and peri-urban
areas throughout Zambia, locally known as "compounds" or "townships". The subsidy
will be offered to all residents of the target areas that meet the following criteria: low-income
area, high population density, and local distribution network capacity. This approach offers
clear benefits in reducing political and intra-community tensions as well as risk of
favoritism in selecting beneficiaries. The grant will support subsidies for single phase
connections and installation of a Ready-Board for enhanced connections, which are of
interest to households without electricity and in need of basic electricity services.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kisa Mfalila (GENDR)
Kristine Schwebach (GURDR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01               X
The project grant will partially subsidize the cost of connecting low-income households
and MSEs to the national grid and will entail minor civil works. The potential negative
environmental and social impacts are predicted to be minor, typically related to minor
construction work such as generation of dust, noise, minimal construction related waste,
and safety and health of construction workers. The anticipated impacts will be site-
specific, minimal, and can mitigated through the use of good engineering and
construction practices (good housekeeping) set out in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and in line with ZESCO's standard operating
principles.


﻿Overall, the increased number of households and MSEs connections to the national grid,
will likely lead to significant positive environmental and social impacts particularly in
meeting the energy needs of the poor in the urban and peri-urban areas of Zambia. By
reducing demand on forest wood for fuel, the project activities will directly contribute to
the conservation of local environmental resources and improved indoor air quality.
Additional positive social impacts will likely include increased access to reliable social
services such as improved health and education facilities, agriculture processing,
employment creation opportunities, and overall increased well-being of the poor.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
The project will be implemented within urban and peri-urban areas which are presently
inhabited by communities and where electrical grid already exists. The project will,
therefore, have no impacts on critical natural habitats
Forests (OPJBP 4.36)
The project will be implemented in the urban and peri-urban areas which are presently
inhabited by communities and where the electrical grid already exists. The project will,
therefore, not be implemented in forested areas, nor does the project involve forestry.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
The project will not involve the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
The project is not expected to impede on any known physical cultural resources, and does
not involve any significant excavations or movement of earth.
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)
There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
The project will not involve any land acquisition or restriction of access to legally
designated parks and protected areas.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
The project does not involve or rely on the construction of dams or reconstruction of
existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
The project does not involve the use or pollution of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
The roqect is not located in a disputed area.


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identif and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project grant will partially subsidize the cost of new connections to the national grid
for low-income households and MSEs, and therefore will not generate large-scale,
adverse or irreversible environmental impacts. The impacts likely to occur are typical
construction related such as dust, noise, minimal construction related waste, and safety
and health of construction workers, which will be minimal and managed through good
engineering and construction practices set out in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF)
Overall, the increased number of households and MSEs connections to the national grid,
will likely lead to positive environmental and social impacts toward meeting the energy
needs of the poor in the urban and peri-urban areas of Zambia. By reducing demand on
forest wood for fuel, the project activities will directly contribute to the conservation of
local natural resources such as forests. In addition, the project investments are expected
to have overall positive social impacts. The increased access to reliable power services
will potentially facilitate improvements in social services such as health and education
facilities, agriculture processing, employment creation opportunities, etc.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for this project has been
prepared and will be disclosed prior to appraisal.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The possibility of households and MSEs connecting to electricity may potentially lead to
improved environmental outcomes over time on indicators such as reduced deforestation
due to less use of charcoal for fuel. Indirectly, the project would in a long term reduce the
amount of time that Zambian families spend on gathering firewood for cooking, thus
leading to a time savings of as much as 2-3 hours/day during the working hours of
households which can be invested in other income generating or social activities, and also
in reducing the health impacts emanating from burning firewood for cooking.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives are not considered for this project as the project will be connecting
low-income households in urban and peri-urban areas of Zambia through the use of
targeted subsidies.


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment ofborrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared.
Capacity for implementing the mitigation measures proposed in the instruments currently
exists within ZESCO including a well-established environmental and social management
unit which is staffed with experienced environmental and social personnel already exists
within ZESCO. The team has a track record of implementing World Bank projects and is
familiar with the provisions of the Bank's safeguards policies to ensure effective
implementation and monitoring of the ESMF.
5. Identif the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include project beneficiaries, government agencies Ministry of
Mines, Energy and Water Development, ZESCO, as well as commercial and industrial
enterprises within the target areas that will be connected to the national grid.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                           12/11/2014
Date of "in-country" disclosure                       12/11/2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                        02/16/2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank                              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                           N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank                              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                           N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank                              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                           N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.


﻿If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?   No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the  Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the  Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                     Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:             Raihan Elahi                            02/16/2015
Environmental Specialist:     Kisa Mfalila                            02/16/2015
Social Development Specialist  Kristine Schwebach                     02/16/2015
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Alexandra C.ezeredi
Comments:
Sector Manager:               Lucio Monari                            02/16/2015 C
Comments:


