                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC9778

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Poland                            Project ID:      P147460
                            Project Name:       ODRA-VISTULA FLOOD MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P147460)
                            Task Team           Guy J. Alaerts
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           24-Mar-2015                       Estimated        02-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWADR                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1300.00                 Total Bank Financing:       260.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        65.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          260.00
                              EC European Commission                                                         130.00
                              EC Council of Europe's Social Development Fund                                 390.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                    390.00
                              POLAND Polish ECOFUND                                                           65.00
                              Total                                                                         1300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project’s objectives are to strengthen the institutional administrative capacity and technical
                         expertise of the government to address summer, winter and flash-floods more effectively; and
                         develop such flood protection to selected areas of the Odra and the Upper Vistula river basins.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project would provide three distinct areas with flood management infrastructure and related
                         measures: (i) the Lower Odra; (ii) the Nysa-Klodska valley, a large sub-basin of the Upper Odra; and
                         (iii) the Upper Vistula. The project would further strengthen the national flood forecasting and
                         operational capability of south Poland, through more advanced equipment and mathematical
                         simulation models that would be able to inform decision-makers faster and more reliably about the
                         need to evacuate and take precautionary measures. The Components, with their specific sub-
                         objectives are proposed as follows:
                         Component 1: Lower Odra. To protect Szczecin, Słubice, Gryfino, and other towns. Revitalize the
                         Miendzeodrze wetland upstream of Sczcecin harbor.
                         Component 2: Nysa-Klodska valley. To protect Klodsko town and other valley towns, as well as
                         Bardo at outlet of valley. Protect the downstream Wocław conurbation as the Nysa is the main
                         tributary to the Upper Odra.
                         Component 3: Upper Vistula. To protect the Craców conurbation, the Sandomierz-Tarnobrzeg
                         industrial and agricultural area, and selected towns on tributaries.
                         Component 4: Forecasting and operational water management capacity. To improve the protection
                         level of South Poland by enhancing the preparedness along the main rivers and their tributaries.
                         Improve early-warning for flash-floods.
                         Component 5: Project management and studies. The studies will notably cover the preparation of
                         flood risk management plans (i.a. for the Cracow area), and the strategic plans to manage flood risks
                         by creating more "space for the river", simultaneously enhancing the natural values.

                         The range of activities that will be funded under the Project broadly encompass the following: (i)
                         within the Component 1: dyke rehabilitation and protection; bank stabilization and rehabilitation of
                         revetments; rehabilitation of groins; restoration of partially silted flood plane; minor dredging to
                         ensure continuing navigability into Donbie lake. (ii) within Component 2: dyke rehabilitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modernization; construction of 4 overflow dry polders to retain high water wave. (iii) within
                         Component 3: construction of up to 5 dry polders to retain high water wave; dyke rehabilitation;
                         embankment stabilization; modernization of the pumping stations for drainage. The greatest majority
                         of the activities within components 1, 2 and 3 will include rehabilitation of the already existing
                         infrastructure, which would have neutral to beneficial impact on environmental conditions,
                         particularly those related to restoration of the flood plains, bank stabilization and dredging. Existing
                         level of information indicates that these works are to be executed in areas that are not under any
                         regime of nature protection, and are not physically connected to known cultural heritage sites.
                         Additional information are shown in section D, and part II of this document.

                         The PCU of the Odra Flood Project will initiate and coordinate the preparation activities. It will work
                         with the prospective Implementing Agencies, that will need to appoint their PIUs. For all the
                         activities in the Components 2 and 4, and for some of those in Component 1, the PIUs will be the
                         same as under the on-going Odra project, providing continuity, and ensuring that lessons from the
                         current project will be used in the new project. The PCU and the prospective PIUs have prepared
                         preliminary Concept Notes for the above Components. The nature of the activities to be financed
                         was determined based on these Concept Notes and the discussions and field visits during the mission,
                         where additional technical documentation was reviewed. A Table is attached outlining, for each
                         Component, and for each main type of flood, the types of activities, the likely Implementing
                         Agencies, and the estimate of cost.
                         The identification of overflow areas and dry polders that are capable of absorbing a significant part
                         of the floodwave in a cost-effective manner is complex and requires ample study. The Upper Odra
                         basin has benefited from such studies over the past century and a reasonably complete assessment is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         available of suitable sites, of which some are in use (such as the Bukow dry polder upstream of
                         Raciborz, the Olawa polder upstream of Wocław, and the Wilkanow and Ladek Zdroj dry polders
                         built before WWII in the Nysa-Kłodzka Valley), while others are under construction (the large
                         Raciborz dry polder) or planned (four medium-sized dry polders in the Nysa-Kłodzka Valley). In the
                         Middle and Lower Odra, several natural areas alongside the river still give the river space to expand;
                         immediately upstream of Szczecin the vast Miendzyodrze wetland, situated between the two parallel
                         Odra Channels, fulfills the same function. On the other hand, the studies on the Vistula, being a
                         larger and more complex hydrological system, will need to be continued to identify all required and
                         cost-effective options. The project would fund investments in medium-scale overflow polders that
                         are located in strategic locations, but will not yet provide the final required space for flood wave
                         absorption; thus, the project will also support further in-depth studies to identify and prepare
                         additional overflow areas.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would provide three distinct areas with flood management infrastructure and related
                         measures: (i) the Lower Odra; (ii) the Nysa-Klodska valley, a large sub-basin of the Upper Odra; and
                         (iii) the Upper Vistula. The project areas are partly in hilly regions (Nysa-Klodska, and most of the
                         Upper Vistula), and partly in flat landscapes, with meandering rivers (Lower Odra). The landscapes
                         have a low to moderate population density featuring, however, a few large cities and industrial
                         centers (Wroclaw, Szczecin, Cracow). While the basins feature numerous Natura2000 sites and
                         protected nature areas and forests, none of the proposed works are in the proximity of such sites or
                         would otherwise affect such sites. (This is substantively different from the situation in the on-going
                         Odra Flood Project where several of the works are located inside Natura2000 sites or will affect
                         protected forests).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The activities and measures that would be funded under the project comprise notably the following:
                         •        “Passive” infrastructure, such as dikes and river bank stabilization works (revetments,
                         foundations, parapets, etc.), through rehabilitation, modernization or expansion of existing structures.
                         •        “Active” infrastructure, such as dry polders and overflow areas (wetlands, agricultural lands)
                         to allow absorption and temporary retention of the peak of flood waves.
                         •        River training, such as the rehabilitation or re-construction of groynes and breakwaters in the
                         river to create and maintain specified water depths to allow floodwater to discharge rapidly, and
                         icebreakers to navigate; dredging (to allow floodwater to discharge rapidly); and related measures
                         such as increasing the vertical clearance under bridges (to allow modern-class icebreakers to pass
                         underneath).
                         •        Improvement of the forewarning time and accuracy in the forecasting capability for high
                         waters, and enhanced remotely controlled operation of infrastructure (weirs, locks, reservoirs, dry
                         polders, etc.) in such ways as to mitigate high water levels.

                         The identification of overflow areas and dry polders that are capable of absorbing a significant part
                         of the floodwave in a cost-effective manner is complex and requires ample study. The project would
                         fund investments in medium-scale overflow polders that are located in strategic locations, but will
                         not yet provide the final required space for flood wave absorption; thus, the project will also support
                         further in-depth studies to identify and prepare additional overflow areas.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Bank conducted an assessment of the country systems in 2011-2012 and found the country
                           systems largely acceptable, but expressed some reservations. However, use of the country system for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Poland has not been approved (in accordance with OP 4.0), so the Project preparation activities will
                           be governed in full by application of relevant World Bank safeguards policies. The Bank team has
                           good experience with the safeguards application and enforcement in the on-going Odra Flood Project
                           and will use these experiences, skills and procedures to develop a training, monitoring and
                           continuous support system to become mainstreamed across all IAs, and, from there, across the
                           national system. The PCU will collaborate in this effort, during preparation and implementation.
                           Importantly, the safeguards complexities in the new project are less challenging than those in the on-
                           going Odra Flood Project. In reference to safeguard-related documentation, a project-specific ESMF
                           will be prepared and disclosed before Appraisal, as by that time all the specific investments will not
                           be identified yet.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jorge E. Villegas (GURDR)
                           Nikola Ille (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              In order to adequately asses the possible
                           BP 4.01                                              environmental impacts of the proposed project
                                                                                and plan to mitigate possible negative
                                                                                environmental impacts of proposed investments,
                                                                                the Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                (EMF) will need to be prepared and disclosed.
                                                                                Beside the project-scale EMF, separate site-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                specific Environmental Management Plans
                                                                                (EMPs) would need to be prepared for all
                                                                                identified investments. It is likely that material
                                                                                to be dredged from the river bed, notably in the
                                                                                Dąbie Lake near Szczecin, is suitable for further
                                                                                use and is not contaminated, but this would need
                                                                                to be reconfirmed during the preparation of
                                                                                EMF.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              Based on the available information, the project
                                                                                is expected to have significant positive
                                                                                environmental impacts in terms of protection of
                                                                                floodplains, aquatic ecosystems and surrounding
                                                                                areas. At the same time, the main potential
                                                                                threats are related to change of water regime and
                                                                                consequently impact on flora and fauna in the
                                                                                periodically-flooded areas, which, if not
                                                                                properly managed could create significant
                                                                                changes to local habitats. According to the
                                                                                available information, most of the investments
                                                                 which include rehabilitation of the already
                                                                 existing structures would have a neutral to
                                                                 beneficial impact on environmental conditions,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 particularly those related to restoration of the
                                                                 flood plains and bank stabilization/dredging.
                                                                 However, activities related to the construction
                                                                 of dry polders would need to be carefully
                                                                 evaluated in both positioning, sizing and
                                                                 impacts, to ensure that possible adverse effects
                                                                 are minimized and adequately mitigated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   Impact on forests is unlikely, but will be
                                                                 assessed more closely based on further concept
                                                                 design information during preparation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Physical cultural resources are not expected to
                         BP 4.11                                 be encountered as nearly all works would be
                                                                 within the confines of the river bed and banks.
                                                                 However, near old cities such as Cracow, it
                                                                 cannot be confirmed as yet that no physical
                                                                 cultural resources could be encountered; this
                                                                 will be ascertained based on more complete
                                                                 survey and design during the preparation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project’s key potential adverse social
                         4.12                                    impact would likely relate to land acquisition
                                                                 and resettlement. Some of the works under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 consideration would involve the rehabilitation
                                                                 of existing infrastructure in mostly government-
                                                                 owned lands located in sparsely populated peri-
                                                                 urban and rural areas (e.g., rehabilitation of
                                                                 existing dikes and groynes). In these cases the
                                                                 impacts related to land acquisition would be
                                                                 limited. However, other interventions under
                                                                 consideration, such as construction of new
                                                                 structures and dry polders, particularly in the
                                                                 Nysa-Kłodzka Valley and some locations in the
                                                                 Upper Vistula, would require land acquisition
                                                                 involving economic displacement (e.g., from
                                                                 agricultural lands) and resettlement of a number
                                                                 of households that likely will be small. In order
                                                                 to adequately plan and manage this impact the
                                                                 Borrower will prepare a Land Acquisition &
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (LA&RPF) for
                                                                 the whole project, and, once they are identified,
                                                                 site-specific Land Acquisition & Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Action Plans (LA&RAPs) for sub-projects. The
                                                                                                                                 LA&RPF will be based on Polish regulations,
                                                                                                                                 the WB’s policy on Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 (OP 4.12) and lessons learned from the Odra
                                                                                                                                 Flood Protection Project. For those sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 that are defined, and for which land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 is required, the GoP will prepare Land
                                                                                                                                 Acquisition & Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                                                                 (LA&RAPs) following the parameters defined
                                                                                                                                 in the LA&RPF and in line with Polish
                                                                                                                                 regulations and WB’s OP 4.12 and will included
                                                                                                                                 comprehensive consultations with project-
                                                                                                                                 affected people.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           About 160km of the Odra’s 854km of total
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            length is the so-called Border Odra (a sparsely
                                                                                                                                 populated part of the Lower Odra) which is
                                                                                                                                 shared by Poland and Germany. The Odra river
                                                                                                                                 basin measures 122,000km2, of which 90% lies
                                                                                                                                 on Polish territory, and 5% each on German and
                                                                                                                                 Czech territory. A Polish-German Government
                                                                                                                                 Commission for Cross-Border Cooperation is
                                                                                                                                 active at Ministerial level, with involvement of,
                                                                                                                                 on the Polish side the Vojevodes, and on the
                                                                                                                                 German side, the Länder representatives. In
                                                                                                                                 parallel, the trilateral Odra River Commission
                                                                                                                                 addresses the technical aspects of the river
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 issues of common interest. The Odra
                                                                                                                                 Commission has agreed on the technical
                                                                                                                                 specifications of flood protection along the
                                                                                                                                 Border Odra. For the project’s purposes, the
                                                                                                                                 Polish government would soonest initiate the
                                                                                                                                 procedure of Notification of the riparians to
                                                                                                                                 inform them of the project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      -Environmental Management Framework, due by December 2014
                                      -Environmental Management Plans of works for implementation starting in 2016, due by
                                      September 2015
                                      -Environmental Management Plans of works for implementation after 2016, due by (TBD) as sub-
                                      projects are detailed and designs completed.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             -Resettlement Policy Framework, due by (TBD)
                             -Pre-Appraisal Resettlement Action Plans by (TBD)
                             -Post-Appraisal RAPs to be prepared as sub-projects are identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Guy J. Alaerts

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 29-Jul-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager:   Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)                Date: 31-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
