ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Frce of Povorty
*T4foShop
Thi Wortil HMknk
Report No AC76
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NEPAL                                    Project ID: P0433 1 1
Project: Nepal Power Development Project          Task Team Leader: Mudassar Imran
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 14, 1997    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 22, 2003                       IDA Amount ($m): 50.40
IDA GRANT FOR POOREST COUNTRY 25 2
Managing Unit: SASEI                              Sector: Power (80%); Other industry (10%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Sub-national government administration (10%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Other environment and natural resources
management (P); Other public sector governance (P);
Other financial and private sector development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project objectives are to: (a) develop Nepal's hydropower potential in an environimlentally and
socially sustainable manner so as to help meet domestic electricity demand; (b) improve access of rural
areas to electricity services; and (c) promote private participation in the power sector as a way to improve
sector efficiency and to mobilize financing for the sector's investment requirements.
The KoN has identified the development of its hydro-recourse potential as a key priority to serve the
energy needs of a vast majority of its population who have little or no access to electricity, and to reduce
poverty. The objectives of this project are therefore consistent with the developmental and poverty
reduction objectives of the KoN.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Project consists of three components, namely: (a) establishment of a Power Development Fund
(PDF) to finance private development of small and medium-sized hydro schemes; (b) community-based
village electrification through construction of micro-hydro systems (sizes of up to 100 kW); and (c)
transmission and distribution improvements. Total project cost including interest during construction
(IDC) is estimated at US$ 133.4 million, equivalent, of which IDA financing is US$ 75.6 million
comprising an IDA credit of US$50.4 million and an IDA Grant of US$25.2 million.
Part A.      The PDF Component



2
ISDS
The Power Development Fund will be a financing facility to be established by the Government under this
project, within the Department for Electricity Development (DOED). The Fund will provide long-term
financing for private-sector small and medium-sized hydropower developments in Nepal to overcome: (a)
the lack of sufficient debt financing for private-sector hydropower projects; (b) inadequate maturity of
available debt financing; and (c) the need to provide comfort to private investors wishing to become
involved in "first time" projects. The fund will be wholly owned and operated by the Government, but
with administrative management contracted out to a commercial bank. Initial financing of sub-loans for
investment projects through the PDF will be provided by IDA. Over time, it is envisaged that resources
from other international and domestic financial institutions will be mobilized, which together with
reflows of debt service payments from the borrowers, will augment the corpus of investment funds
accessible through the PDF. Under this credit operation, the PDF will finance small hydro schemes with
an aggregate capacity of about 10 MW and one medium-sized scheme of about 30 MW  The US$ 35
million from IDA Credit is expected to leverage financing from other sources, i.e., developers' equity and
commercial banks, of about US$40 million. There has been significant interest in participation in the
fund already expressed by developers and bankers.
The PDF will be managed by a Fund Administrator, which will be a private commercial bank operating
in Nepal and selected by the Government through a competitive bidding process agreed with the Bank.
Following an evaluation process satisfactory to the Bank the Government has approved selection of a
local well established commercial bank, and the Bank has provided its no-objection to this selection. An
PDF Board formed by the Government will be responsible for approving sub-loans in accordance with
the recommendations of the Fund Administrator. Technical assistance from IDA grant of about $2.5
million (in addition to the credit noted above) will finance the Administrator's fees, as well as the
operating expenses associated with the PDF Board during initial years of operation of the PDF. Once
this capacity is developed the fund is expected to become self-sustaining.
In parallel with the PDF project there are several technical assistance activities which were not all
designed solely to support the PDF initiative but which will facilitate the implementation: (a) technical
assistance is  being provided by GTZ, under its Small Hydro Promotion Project to assist local
entrepreneurs in ensuring that their investment proposals are bankable; (b) the Government of Norway
is  extending technical assistance to the Ministry of Population and Environment (MOPE) for
institutional building, with special emphasis on strengthening MOPE's functional capabilities, in the
exercise of its regulatory mandate of monitoring environmental conditionalities of the license for
development of hydropower schemes to be financed under the PDF; (c) technical assistance to the
Department of Electricity Development (DOED) is being provided by USAID through consultants under
its Private Sector Hydropower Development Project, to develop DOED's capability in managilg the
private power solicitation and award processes for medium- and larger-sized hydro schemes; and (d)
USAID is also supporting the strengthening of DOED's capacity to review the environmental and social
impact assessments of the investment schemes. Technical assistance provided by USAID is in its second
phase. It was renewed in 2001, for an additional period of five years to 2006, after which the need for
further assistance will be reviewed.
Part B.     Micro-Hydro Village Electrification
This component will support the scaling-up of community-based micro-hydro village electrification by
developing about 2.5 to 3.0 MW of new micro hydropower systems to serve sonnv30,000
consumers. The project will be build on the successes achieved under the UNDP-financed Rural Energy
Development Program (REDP) and will extend electrification activities from the 15 districts currently
served to another ten more districts. Program implementation will be decentralized through local



3
ISDS
government, i.e., District Development Committees (DDC) and the Village Development Committees
(VDC), and involves formation of a micro-hydro functional group (MHFG) at each participating
community. The Alternative Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC), which is the agency responsible for
promotion and development of alternative and renewable energy technologies in Nepal, will assume
overall management of this project component. Further, through UNDP co-financing, the existing REDP
project support unit will be strengthened to support the increased level of micro hydro system
development envisaged.
The total cost of this project component is estimated at US$ 8.9 million. Of this, the Bank would provide
IDA funding of about US$ 5.5 million to finance the HMGN subsidies for the construction of micro
hydro schemes, and support the community mobilization, training/capacity building, productive end-use
and conservation efforts. The remainder of the costs will be financed by UNDP (US$ 0.8 million for
program support/management), community contributions (US$ 1.1 million) DDC/VDC contributions
(US$ 0.7 million), and the balance from loans to the community from local banks, e.g., the Agricultural
Development Bank of Nepal.
Part C.     NEA Component
This component involves investment support for the construction of a 220 kV double circuit transmission
line (with one circuit strung initially) from Khirnti Power station to the existing 132 kV Dhalkebar
substation. Further transmission and sub-transmission investments would be selected based on NEA's
priority least cost investment plan and the project eligibility criteria set out in Annex 12, part C. This
may include the financing of a 132 kV transmission line from Dhalkebar substation to Bhittamod on the
Nepalese side of the border with India (joining the Indian grid at Sitamarhi substation in Bihar about 40
km from the Nepalese border) to facilitate cross border power trade, and the extension of 132 kV line
bays at the associated substations. But financing of the Dhalkebar to Bittamod transmission line, and the
associated sub-station is contingent on the appropriate institutional, administrative, legal, social and
environmental arrangements being in place and salisfactory to IDA.
The IDA financing will likewise finance supply and installation of equipment and materials, and civil
works for the extension of NEA's sub-transmission and distribution systems to rural areas and towns not
electrified, and rehabilitation and reinforcement of NEA's existing distribution systems in urban and
semi-industrial centers.
The transmission lines will enhance grid reliability and stability reduce system losses. Sub-transmission
and distribution schemes will improve access, quality, reliability and operational efficiency of power
supply to consumers. Acquisition of spare parts and protection equipment is also included.  IDA
financing for these investments is estimated at US$ 31.0 million, comprising an IDA credit of US$ 15.4
million and an IDA grant of US$ 15.6 million.
Technical assistance (TA) activities will involve several institutional building initiatives at NEA. These
include strengthening of NEA's financial management, audit and accounting systems. The TA will also
support the conduct of marketing studies to review opportunities for productive use of surplus energy,
extension of service to rural areas, power wheeling, and associated pricing studies that would enhanice
opportunities for private sector participation in the power sector. Also to be financed is the engagement
of engineering consultants to assist NEA in undertaking the 220 kV transmission scheme. IDA financing
for TA is estimated at US$ 1.60 million.
Components:



4
ISDS
Part Al. PDF Investment Funds
Part A2. Technical Assistance for PDF Administration
Part B 1. Micro-hydro Village Electrification Investments
Part B2.1 UNDP-financed TA
Part Cl. NEA Transmission and Distribution Investments
Part C2. TA for NEA institutional strengthening
Part C3. NEA Project Administration and Engineering
l.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area essentially covers the Kingdom of Nepal and any rural household in Nepal is a potential
beneficiary. The screening and ranking process undertaken to identify potential sub-projects excluded
any sites that resulted in significant dewatering of rivers by major diversions of flow as well as sites that
interfered with protected biodiversity, natural and cultural heritage areas. Since all hydro power projects
are run of the river type, and transmission and distribution projects generally do not result in resettlement
of people, it is anticipated that there will be no segment of the population that will be adversely affected
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments
The project has been categorized as "A" considering the potential environmental impacts that may arise
due to the construction of a medium sized hydropower project, of approximately 30 MW, and mini hydro
projects to an aggregate of 10 MW. Although these projects are run of the river type projects, the larger
hydropower projects could result in weir heights of several meters which could result in reasonably large
impoundments, which may result in adverse environmental impacts, which should, however, be
reversible if requisite mitigatory measures are taken. Transmission lines financed under the project will
make every effort to avoid interference with protected biodiversity, natural and cultural areas. Full
environmental assessments will be undertaken for each subproject based on the Environmental Policy
Framework and the Operations Manual agreed with HMGN and IDA as well as be reviewed and cleared
by IDA prior to disbursement of funds for sub-projects.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        * Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                * Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 * Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  * Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          * Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas



5
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The use of renewable energy technology such small and medium hydropower and village hydro projects
will yield net positive environmental impacts. Approximately 30,000 new consumers will benefit from
the micro hydro village electrification component. These consumers, who currently use kerosene and
other fuels for lighting, will benefit from reduced indoor air pollution levels. The expansion of grid
connected small and medium hydropower projects would result in expanding the grid connected
electricity consumer base and likewise reduce the demand for kerosene and other fuels for lighting, with
associated environmental benefits. The supply of Nepal's power generation demands with run of the
river hydropower projects, will replace the need for fossil fuel based power generation plants with its
associated adverse environmental impacts due to emissions and large scale storage hydropower projects,
which are known to create serious social and environmental problems. The replacement of fossil fuel
based plants is of particular significance to large urban areas such as the Katmandu valley, which is
currently facing serious air pollution problems.
Potential adverse environmental impacts due to hydropower projects of the scale proposed under the
project, would be associated with partial dewatering of a section of the river bed from the intake until
water is returned to the river downstream of the power house and consequent impacts on aquatic life in
the dewatered section, potential soil erosion caused by flushing flows discharged from sedimentation
basins and by overflows at the forebays, potential ground instability caused by canal/pipe construction,
cutting of trees for use as power poles for village hydro projects and impacts on aquatic life and
surrounding vegetation caused as a result of submergence due high weirs in the larger run of the river
hydropower projects (-.10 MW and above).
The end use activities to be financed under the micro hydro village electrification component will be
restricted to agro processing ( cereal milling, rice husking and oil processing) where electrical power will
replace the current use of manual or water power as well as small scale carpentry workshops. These
micro enterprises cater to local community needs. The agro processing schemes to be financed will
largely reduce the drudgery by replacing manual milling by machine grinding, reduce cereal losses and
increase yield in the case of oil expellers. These plants will be small with plant capacities in the range of
8 kW.
With regard to the small scale carpentry workshops, the project will result in replacement of manual
implements that are being presently used in existing carpentry workshops by electrical machines or tools.
The source of timber will be from community forests The timber required for the carpentry workshops
will be brought by prospective clients, who are members of community forestry user groups. These
groups provide each member with a specified timber allocation based on domestic needs such as
building/repairing houses and personal furniture requirements. The community forestry user groups
closely monitor the use of timber by its membership. This monitoring mechanism, which is currently in
existence, has proved to be very effective in ensuring sustainable timber use. The enforcement of the
"timber quota's" by the community forestry user group will be used under this sub-component to ensure
sustainable use of forestry resources. Nevertheless, in order to ensure that excess quantities of timber
will not be used, it has been agreed with AEPC that the carpentry workshops will use only the authorized
allocation of wood provided to the community by the respective community forest user group. It has also
been agreed that their project finances cannot be used for funding saw mills.



6
ISDS
Transmission lines and associated facilities impact on natural and socio cultural environments primarily
within or in immediate vicinity of corridor rights of way and at the substations. The NEA will identify
the trace for the transmission corridors for transmission lines financed under the project in consultation
with respective Local Authorities so that every effort can be made to avoid interfering with protected
biodiversity, natural and cultural areas. Once suitable traces are identified to minimize impacts to the
natural environment, the main adverse impacts will be during construction of the transmission lines.
Issues of concern are due to temporary or permanent clearing of crops or natural vegetation in the rights
of way for the transmission lines. Longer term impacts are due to permanent clearing of land for access
roads, tower foundations and substations. River crossings are common practice and pose engineering
challenges, but have more limited adverse environmental impact except for aesthetics.
Distribution networks have very limited adverse environmental impacts. Distribution lines generally
follow existing way-leave along roads or streams, therefore, there is virtually no adverse environmental
impacts. Minor and temporary land disturbances may arise out of laying new distribution lines where
there is no possibility to follow roads or streams. Minor impacts could also arise out of clearing
vegetation from sites. Distribution lines will not go through forest or wildlife reserves as well as other
ecologically sensitive areas.  Substations will be the primary source of construction related impacts
under the project, but site specific EAs will address the potential impacts and the required mitigatory
measures.
Potential negative social impacts associated with the PDF and NEA Components, including resettlement
and land acquisition, will be minimized as much as possible by selecting optimal locations and exploring
alternative projects. Where land acquisition is unavoidable the project will be designed to cause the least
amount of social, cultural and economic disruption.  Project affected families (PAFs) will be
compensated, relocated and rehabilitated, if required, so as to improve their standard of living, income
earning capacity or at least to restore them to a living standard they are likely to have achieved if the
project had not taken place. Special measures will be taken to protect socially and economically
vulnerable groups such as female headed families, ethnic and tribal groups and people living in extreme
poverty.
With respect to the Micro-hydro Village Electrification Component land acquired for the construction of
the canal, penstock, powerhouse and distribution line poles, is to be donated voluntarily by each
participating community. Micro-hydro schemes will be developed only in those communities where land
is voluntarily donated. All land required under the component will be on a voluntary basis. In addition if
any loss of income or physical displaced is envisaged the community based Micro-Hydro Functional
Groups (MHFGs) will verify the voluntary acceptance of community-devised mitigatory measures by
those impacted. The construction of micro-hydro schemes is not expected to result in the involuntary
relocation of any people or structures. Since the equipment required for these projects (<100 kW per
sub-project is small it is not anticipated that any new road construction will take place for transport of
equipment.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Considering the types of sub-projects eligible for financing under the project, and the stringent screening
and ranking process followed to identify the potential medium hydro sites and the screening criteria
(agreed with IDA) used to identify potential small hydropower projects, it is anticipated that there will be
no cumulative adverse impacts, since the screening process eliminates sites that may result into serious
adverse environmental and social impacts. Multiple safeguard policies have been triggered largely as a



7
ISDS
precautionary measure, to focus attention on potential safeguard issues during implementation
monitoring. To be eligible for financing, all sub-projects have to undertake an EIA in accordance with
the Policy Framework and Operations Manual, which require IDA concurrence prior to disbursements.
The EIA's will address any potential cumulative impacts and identify mitigation measures that are
needed as part of the EMP. Social Impact Assessments (SIA) will be undertaken for all sub-projects and
will provide the basis for determining the need to prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and/or a
Vulnerable Communities Development Plan (VCDP) in accordance with Policy Framework and
Operations Manual. For RAPs and/or VCDPs review and clearance by IDA will be required before
sub-project financing.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Since specific sites for hydro projects that will seek financing from the PDF and distribution and
transmission traces are yet to be finalized, it is difficult to make predictions about potential long tern
impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area. Considering that all hydropower projects
are run of the river type and transmission corridors will not interfere with protected biodiversity, natural
and cultural sites, potential long term adverse environmental impacts are not anticipated under the
project.  However, site/sub project specific EAs will be conducted for each sub project, thereby
identifying potential long term adverse impacts due to anticipated future activities. The EA would
identify remedial measures which will be incorporated into the project design, to minimize long term
impacts and will be part of the EMP which will be monitored by DOED and MOPE as well as IDA
during implementation.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
A Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) was conducted for the power sector in Nepal in April 1997.
The SEA included an analysis of alternative technology options for meeting short and medium term
power demands in Nepal. The SEA for the power sector was used to examine the cumulative impacts of
multiple projects planned in the same sector on the medium to long term. The SEA was to be the basis
for identification of development options in the power sector of Nepal. Accordingly, the SEA identified
that a small and medium scale hydropower development strategy was identified as the preferred option.
The SEA makes it clear that there is significant scope and potential for renewable sources to play a role
in Nepal's future power generation. The SEA emphasizes environmentally and socially sustainable
development of hydropower resources in the country and recognizes the need to optimize and prioritize
the uses of water resources while minimizing conflict. The Screening exercise conducted to identify
potential hydropower sites undertook an analysis of alternatives with regard to suitable project sites.
Therefore, alternatives with regard to power generation technology has been undertaken as part of the
SEA, while water bodies with potential for hydropower generation has also been identified, however,
exact locations along the waterbody will be identified as part of the sub-project specific EIA. Therefore,
the alternatives with regard to location will be addressed adequately during the EIA.
I1.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Overall environmental and social issues applicable to the power sector in Nepal have been identified in
the SEA. Since sub-projects to be financed under the project is not yet finalized, project specific EAs
cannot be conducted at this stage. A EIA/SIA Policy Framework and a Manual to operationalize the
EIA/SIA Framework has been prepared by HMGN and agreed with IDA. In accordance with the Policy
Framework, developers of medium and small hydropower sub-projects will prepare project specific ElAs
which will be reviewed by DOED for technical quality and compliance with the requirements of the
Policy Framework, and submitted to MOPE, through MOWR for formal environmental clearance.



8
ISDS
Environmental clearance will be a pre-requisite for disbursement of funds from the PDF. Although
HMGN Environmental Regulations do not require micro hydro village electrification projects below I
MW to seek environmental clearance, HMGN has decided that all such projects too will be required to
undertake a simple environmental assessment and prepare an Environmental Management Plan. This
will be reviewed, cleared and subsequently monitored by AEPC, on behalf of HMGN. In addition,
during sub-project approval and supervision, AEPC will ensure that carpentry workshops will use timber
only from entitled quotas from the respective community user groups. All transmission lines to be
financed under the project will be subject to EIA in accordance with the Policy Framework. The ElAs
will be prepared by NEA and reviewed and cleared by MOPE prior to permission being granted for
implementation.  Implementation of the EMPs will be the responsibility of the respective sub-project
developers, with the DOED (since implementation of the EMP will be a license condition) and MOPE
being responsible for monitoring the implementation of the EMP.
Social assessments will be carried out as an integral part of the feasibility studies for each sub-project
under the Project's PDF and NEA components.    Each sub-project will undergo a systematic
socio-economic baseline study consisting of the following:  (i) socio-economic survey of sample
households to determine asset ownership and pre-project incomes and living standards; (ii) land use
survey, including formal and informal tenure systems, ownership and use-rights and management of
common property resources; (iii) community studies describing social structures and social relations in
the project area, including inherent power relationships, caste and class structures, and access of groups
such as the poor, women and other vulnerable groups to resources and social services; (iv) institutional
analysis of formal and informal community organizations for resource management and of local
government institutions or local organizations established by other agencies for resource management or
development activities; (v) beneficiary consultations and focus group meetings to determine local
perceptions about the project and to ascertain local development needs; and (vi) rapid assessment of
project impacts to determine the extent and type of positive and negative impacts the sub-project is likely
to have on the project area and provide the basis of determining the need for the preparation of a
RAP/VCDP or other social development measures. Site-specific social impact studies will build upon
the socio-economic baseline data to quantify the type and extent of project impacts through: (i) site
specific entitlement matrix prepared by applying the generic policy of entitlements to specific conditions
of the sub-project clearly identifying expect impacts; (ii) detailed census of affected persons who will be
eligible for compensation or rehabilitation; and (iii) an inventory of land and other assets being acquired
under eminent domain under the Project.
Sub-projects that impact 25 or more families with the loss of over 25% of their total land holdings or
whose land holding is reduced to an uneconomic holding of less than 5.0 katha or who face relocation
will require the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) in accordance with the provisions of
O.D. 4.3.0. and the EIA/SIA Policy Framework. The project developer will be responsible for the
preparation of a RAP which will document implementation arrangements for resettlement including asset
acquisition, compensation, relocation and rehabilitation of persons affected by loss of dwelling, land and
other assets or livelihood.  The RAP will also clearly define institutional arrangements and
responsibilities for the implementation of resettlement activities, budget for resettlement expenditures
and detailed monitoring and evaluation arrangements. The presence of ethnic minorities or tribal
populations in the project affected area for any sub-project will require the preparation of a separate
Vulnerable Communities Development Plan (VCDP) to ensure that ethnic minorities/tribals are provided
with assistance in accordance with their own priorities. The VCDP will be prepared in accordance with
the provisions of O.D. 4.20 and the EIA/SIA Policy Framework. The VCDP replaces the Indigenous
Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) typically prepared to meet the requirements of O.D. 4.20 by extending
assistance to vulnerable groups living below the poverty line in the project area.



ISDS
Land acquired for the construction of the micro-hydro schemes, including for canal, penstock,
powerhouse, and distribution line poles, is to be donated voluntarily by each participating community.
Micro-hydro schemes will be developed only in those communities where land is voluntarily donated.
All land required under the component will be on a voluntary basis. Under the REDP, Memorandum of
Agreements have been established by community functional groups as a means of recording the location
and size of land being donated as well as the written consent and names of local witnesses for those
community members voluntarily donating land. In addition to the Memorandum of Agreements, which
will continue to record and verify the voluntary nature of land donations by each community member,
specific provisions will be added to current Memorandum of Agreements to record that the land being
donated is free of squatters, encroachers or other claims or encumbrances. In addition, if any loss of
income or physical displacement is envisaged, MHFGs will verify the voluntary acceptance of
community-devised mitigatory measures by those impacted. These will also be recorded in the revised
Memorandum of Agreements. MHFGs will identify the land required for the micro-hyrdo schemes,
however, project authorities will confirm whether land identified by MHFGs is suitable for the scheme.
The construction of micro-hydro schemes is not expected to result in the involuntarily relocation of any
people or structures.
Developers of project medium and small hydropower sub-project will prepare project specific SIAs
which will be reviewed by DOED to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Policy Framework.
RAPs and VCDPs will be submitted to MOPE, through MOWR for formal clearance. Review and
clearance by IDA will be required of RAPs and VCDPs for disbursement of funds from the PDF. NEA
will be responsible for undertaking SIAs for all transmissions lines. RAPs and/or VCPDs as required
will be prepared by NEA and reviewed and cleared by MOPE. Review and clearance by IDA will be
required of RAPs and VCPDs related to transmission lines.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EIA/SIA Framework and provides guidance on the development of a consultation strategy and public
information tools to ensure community awareness and involvement in the PDF and NEA components of
the project. Participatory monitoring will be undertaken by community members for those components
of the sub-projects that directly affect them. The micro-hydro village electricfication component is
community driven and the participation of local NGOs and civil society organizations to support the
mobilization and formation of community based organizations is fully integrated into its design. The
social mobilization strategy adopted for the program will include participatory monitoring involving the
community functional groups in assessing the results and impacts of the schemes. The monitoring and
evaluation program established at the community level will also be reflected in the monitoring and
evaluation programs being established by AEPC. For the grid connected small and medium hydropower
projects, and transmission and distribution lines, the stakeholders are the rural communities adjacent to
the project sites, the NEA and the beneficiaries of the added power to the national grid. All sub-projects
will undergo project/site specific EAs, where public consultation begins at the scooping stage, in
accordance with the National Environmental Protection Act 2053 (1996) and Environmental Protection
Rules 2054 (1997). Public consultations are mandatory during, scooping, EA report preparation, EA
approval and implementation and monitoring of EMPs.
The SEA which was completed in 1997 was subject to extensive in-country consultations prior to
finalization. The process involved an open consultation and an information-sharing process with public,
government, NGOs, and professional community stakeholders and resulted in a successfully completed
selection of the most acceptable hydro-projects for meeting Nepal's short and medium term power
demands. In addition, HMGN has mandatory rules for public consultation during scoping, IEE and EIA



10
ISDS
preparation processes. A 15 day period is provided to the public through a public notice to identify their
concerns about a proposed project so that these concerns can be included in the TORs for the IEE and/or
EIA, during scoping of a sub-project.  While it is strongly recommended that the project proponent
consult the public during the TEE process, it is mandatory that the IEE be subject to public review and
consultation for a period of 15 days, after completion of the IEE. The EIA preparation process involves a
mandatory public hearing during the preparation stage as well as a mandatory public review and
consultation period of 30 days once the EIA report is available in draft form. Since sub-projects to be
financed under this project and the prospective developers are yet to be identified, no sub-project specific
IEE/EIA's have been conducted as yet. However, a Policy Framework for Environmental Impact
Assessment which mandates public consultations has been prepared which will serve as a template for
undertaking IEE/EIA's for sub-projects once the prospective developers are identified. The Policy
Framework was subject to public disclosure and consultations. In May 2002, DOED translated the
Policy Framework into the local language and disclosed it to the public in all 75 districts in the country.
The public disclosure process commenced on September 11, 2002 and continued for a period of 21 days.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



11
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                4/25/1997
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            6/1/1997
Date of submission to InfoShop                                             6/23/1997
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED                 1/11/2002
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Mudassar Imran                               April 14, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Sumith Pilapitiya/Person/World Bank     April 1 6, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Afshan H. Khawaja/Person/World Bank     April 16, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                         April 23, 2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Penelope Brook; Vincent Gouarne              April 23, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
ISEARCH      l L  DE C_K_     EWii E IAMAPI | 0W    CASE_J



