                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3036
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                         Project ID:    P120583
                            Project Name:      Bangladesh Modern Food Storage Facilities Project (P120583)
                            Task Team          Masood Ahmad
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Mar-2013                        Estimated   23-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Crops (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Public administration-
                                               Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%)
                            Theme:             Nutrition and food security (50%), Natural disaster management (25%), Other
                                               public sector governance (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                       Total Bank Financing:       275.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   275.00
                              Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                                             25.00
                              Total                                                                         300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The overall Project development objective is to increase the grain reserve available to households to
                           meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of grain storage management.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will preliminarily comprise the following components:


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         Component A – Construction of Modern Grain Storage Silo Facilities (US$250 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component would support: (A1) construction of Public Storage Facilities with a capacity of
                         about 0.6 million tons in the form of modern grain storage silos; and (A2) provision of household
                         level storage facility or family silos particularly in the disaster prone areas of the coastal zone for
                         about 1.25 million households; and (A3) implementation of social and environmental management
                         plans.

                         Component A1: Construction of Modern Public Food Grain Storage Silos (US$210 million). This
                         component would finance an improved storage silo system to store milled rice with a tot1al capacity
                         of around 600,000 tons. The silos would be constructed on about 8 sites all over the country. All
                         sites have land currently owned by the DG-Food and vacant public land. No new sites would be
                         undertaken in this first phase project.

                         Component A2: Household (HH) Silos (US$25 million): Household level silos or grain storage bins
                         are specially designed for fiber glass cans that can take about 70 Liter (40 Kgs) of rice with a water
                         tight lid (for detailed specifications of the HH Silos see PAD). Once rice is stored, the seal tight lid
                         prevents the contents from damage due water from surges and floods. These silos are being provided
                         to people in Sidr-affected areas and they are extremely popular. People use them to store rice seeds
                         (which is more valuable than rice) for safekeeping of critical inputs for future planting seasons, in the
                         event of floods or storm surges, as well as for rice storage. The cost of such a Silo is about US$30.
                         The project would make this Silo available at a discounted price of US$10 per piece for households.
                         The manufacturers would be encouraged to produce such silos, and eligible households would be
                         able to purchase them at a discounted price through a voucher system, administered by project
                         consultants and contracted NGOs. Selected households would receive a voucher based on agreed
                         criteria (such as in coastal areas, with certain income levels, etc) and would ensure that only one silo
                         is purchased at half price per household. It is estimated that about 1.25 million household silos
                         would be provided under the project, creating about 125,000 tons of storage of rice seed (or rice) in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         surge-prone areas of the coastal zone. Though the cost per ton for such storage is higher than the
                         large public silos, the high transportation and distribution costs of grain to very remote areas
                         immediately following a disaster makes this strategy the most effective. In addition, it also reduces
                         the burden of the government to carry such stocks (which blocks a lot of funds that could be used for
                         development) and fairly distribute in remote areas. Finally, the ability to store rice seeds for the next
                         agricultural season provides an additional value to households.

                         Component A3: Implementation of Social and Environmental Management Plans (US$15 million):
                         The sites selected for public silos are already owned by the Government. Therefore, no major social
                         or resettlement issues are expected. However, in order to ensure that, if any such issues arise, they
                         could be addressed. These issues could be, for example, increased traffic congestion, or
                         environmental or social issues that could emerge during construction of silos. Also, the component
                         would support the enhancement of the environment, such as improved landscaping, plantation of
                         trees to improve the aesthetics of tall steel silos, etc..

                         Component B – Support for Food Planning and Monitoring Program (US$25 million)

                         Improvements are needed in the monitoring and management of food storage/stock and this system
                         needs to be modernized. This component would finance these improvements and introduce a
                         modernized system that would assist the Government of Bangladesh in better planning and

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         monitoring of food stocks. These investments would assist in significantly reducing losses, and
                         would ensure a timely distribution network for grain stocks in the event of an emergency. In general,
                         FPMU acts as a central coordinating authority and information clearing house for all food security
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related policy and program activities. FPMU could intervene more actively to improve the DG-
                         Food’s management information systems and reporting of rice and wheat distribution under all the
                         different schemes include those designated for disaster relief. Right now it is apparent that there is no
                         division level data generated for these programs. The information system would help in improve the
                         transparency and accountability of the entire food distribution system.

                         This component would also support carrying out studies and thus provide a framework for dialogue
                         on improving the food distribution and stock turn over policies. Currently, the food distribution
                         system suffers from several weakness and governance issue many of them arise from the quality of
                         rice that is released from the godowns. With improved quality of stock due to better storage facilities
                         the Government may be able to turn over the stock by auctioning the rice in the market that would
                         get high price and thus reduce the government cost of purchase and storage of rice. The component
                         would support various studies and preparation of policy notes that help answer key questions
                         regarding stock turn over and food distribution arrangements. This would also help in devising
                         policies and instruments for efficient management of the grain stocks in the country with reduced
                         burden on the Government’s budget.

                         This component would have two parts (B1) related to planning and coordination with other entities
                         and Ministries which will be implemented by the DG FPMU in close collaboration with the DG Food
                         and other relevant Ministries such as Agriculture; and (B2) related to food stock monitoring and
                         movement and release etc., which would be implemented by the DG Food in close coordination with
                         DG-FPMU.

                         Component C - Project management, construction supervision, technical assistance, training and
                         strategic Studies. (US$25 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component would finance costs associated with: (C1) project management of the task,
                         incremental staff and expenditures of the DG Food in implementation of the Project, the costs for
                         implementing the Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), including a panel of experts,
                         as needed, a procurement panel, audit and other such costs; (C2) cost of consultants for construction
                         supervision and designs required during the construction. This would include costs for construction
                         supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project impacts; (C3) provision of technical assistance,
                         training, institutional capacity building, preparation of future projects, and any strategic studies
                         needed during project implementation.

                         This component would build the capacity of DG-Food A to effectively implement the Project, O&M
                         of the food storages t manages, and fully carry out its mandated functions. These activities would
                         include, but not be limited to: (a) enhancing DG-Food’s capacity in planning and programming,
                         engineering and O&M of the storages, financial management, procurement, and management of
                         environmental and social issues; (b) technical assistance and training in such areas as designing of
                         silos and storages, detailed designs of structures, contract administration and construction
                         supervision, procurement, operations and management planning, asset management plans, financial
                         management, and legal issues (such support would include on-the-job training, post-graduate
                         programs, seminars, workshops, and study tours, etc.); (c) implementation of the governance and
                         accountability action plan (GAAP); and (d) an independent panel of experts (IPOE) for design and
                         construction quality, safety enhancement or any other issues that may have to be addressed during

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         Project implementation.

                         It would also support the strengthening of DG-Food’s capacity in devising strategies to minimize the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cost of grains storage, effective distribution policies and practices with strong technical expertise and
                         governance culture. Some of these activities will be carried out in conjunction with the work under
                         component B. This support would include, but not be limited to: (a) development of financing
                         strategies for grain storage, (b) review of the medium-term investment program, development of the
                         long-term investment program and identification of a financing strategy, including areas of potential
                         interest to the private sector; (d) review of the existing institutional, legal and administrative
                         framework for financing grain storages and development of proposals for upgrading based on
                         international best practices; (e) development of potential modalities for public private partnership
                         (PPP) taking into account possible support from the Government, donors etc. (f) asset ownership,
                         benefit-sharing alternatives, etc., and the definition of the public sector’s financing role to
                         complement/support potential private investments; (h) strengthening of DG-Food’s financial and
                         management capacity; and (i) support for improving governance and internal controls.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The possible 8 locations for the Modern Grain Silo under the project are Barisal, Narayanganj,
                         Dhaka, Ashuganj, Madhupur, Mymensing, Maheshwar Pasha and Chittagong. The sites already
                         possess conventional godowns. Most of the sites have enough extra space to fit the new silo cluster.
                         Although most of the sites are already developed, new technology construction and deployment may
                         require land filling and put pressure on utility supply like gas and electricity. Dhaka site will require
                         demolition of existing structures. Location for stacking of demolished debris and management should
                         be planned beforehand. The drainage and sewerage facility may also need to be enhanced. For the
                         Madhupur site, to the east of the plot, Government khas land under District Commissioner is
                         available for any construction. As the land was lying vacant for long, the local people are informally
                         using the land for banana and pineapple cultivation. The land can be vacated with a cease and desist
                         initiative by the local administration at the request of the DG-Food allowing the informal users such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         time to harvest from all matured banana plants. Any change of site boundaries, may involve social
                         safeguard compliance issues.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Modernizing the current food storage system in
                          BP 4.01                                              the country will result in improved storage
                                                                               capacity, and could mean an increase in traffic in
                                                                               the areas surrounding the silos, as more grain
                                                                               trucks move in and out of the storage facility.
                                                                               Land filling may be required at some sites during
                                                                               construction of the Silo. Gas and electricity
                                                                               consumption will increase during the construction
                                                                               and operational phase. The capacity of existing
                                                                               sewerage and drainage system may need to be
                                                                               enhanced or needs to be established. Since new



                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                                                                         technology will be introduced, adequate safety
                                                                         measures should be followed during construction
                                                                         and operation phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         An overall environmental assessment of possible
                                                                         sites is underway and Environmental
                                                                         Management Framework (EMF) for the project is
                                                                         already under preparation. The site specific
                                                                         Environmental Management Plan will be
                                                                         developed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The project will cover the entire country. The
                                                                         indigenous peoples and communities are
                                                                         dominating in number in the Chittagong hill
                                                                         districts but a small proportion of them are also
                                                                         present in most of the plain districts. The project
                                                                         will consider “impact on indigenous
                                                                         communities? as an exclusion criterion for
                                                                         financing. The sites reviewed for construction of
                                                                         silos are devoid of IPs and the first phase sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         have no social safeguard compliance issues. The
                                                                         exclusion criteria and social inclusion framework
                                                                         will be included in the project’s Social
                                                                         Management and Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (SMRPF).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             If any resettlement issue arises during detail
                         4.12                                            design OP 4.12 may trigger. The Environment
                                                                         and Social Assessment and Management
                                                                         Framework includes the Social Management and
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework to address the
                                                                         issue in future.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60




                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will involve civil work and demolition of structure. Occupational health and Safety is
                              the major concern for construction and operation of steel silo. The construction activities will
                              involve operation of heavy construction machinery, vehicular traffic, excavation, filling operations
                              and demolition of structures. These activities may pose some safety hazards to the local
                              population. The fuel storage at the camp sites may also pose safety hazards for the construction
                              staff as well as for surrounding population. Stockpiling of construction material in all sites and
                              debris from the demolished structure may cause serious accident to the construction worker and
                              people in the vicinity. Construction of steel silos may pose significant hazards related to the
                              potential fall of materials or tools. Although, chilling system will be introduced for storage to
                              mitigate infestation, the silos may need to use fumigants in emergency or for long term storage.
                              Although DG-food is using fumigants regularly and steel silo is expected to minimize or avoid the
                              use of fumigants, in case of use of fumigant should be according to the USEPA and WHO
                              guideline. Environmental Health and Safety measures should strictly be followed for O&M of
                              Silos.

                              During construction phase, around 450 trees will be cut from the 8 sites. To address this issue the
                              contractor should prepare a tree plantation plan. The project will create noise and vibration in the
                              surrounding due to a wide number of pile driving, at Dhaka and Mymensing, demolition of
                              structure will cause severe dust pollution. In addition Construction machinery and project vehicles
                              will release exhaust emissions. The high tech modern silo will require continuous power supply.

                              Key social issues relating to project implementation are: (i) avoiding adverse social impacts in site
                              selection, design and implementation; (ii) participation by project functionaries, business groups,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              NGOs, civil society and local communities; (iii) inclusion, particularly of the poor and vulnerable
                              sections including ethnic minorities; (iii) identification of unavoidable adverse social impacts and
                              mitigation; (iv) social conflicts and grievances during construction; (v) capacity building of key
                              local stakeholders; (vi) addressing gender issues and community needs; and (vii) communication
                              to address these issues.

                              None of the sites for civil works will be carried out in private land but within existing land reserve
                              of the DG-Food except in Tangail, where a new site has been selected for construction of the
                              public silo in Madhupur. Given that this land in Madhupur is a khas land (government owned
                              land) no private people will be impacted.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The project does not have any plan for installlation of any small scale power plant for ensuring
                              continuous power supply or any other back up plan for power supply. However, the project will
                              require identification of sources for continuous power supply beforehand for ensuring continuous
                              power supply to the silos. If any physical activity is considered for ensuring power supply during
                              project period, the implementing agency will require conducting separate Environmental and
                              Social Impact Assessment at the project sites.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                         Page 6 of 10
                           The alternative analysis for BMFSP has been conducted into the following points (a) "No
                          Action" alternative of the project. (b) Alternative Analysis for Selection of Sites and (c)
                          Alternative Analysis for Technology Options. It has been found the current storage capacity of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          country is 16 lakh tons. But it will be reduced to 13 lakh Tons by 2013 due to further deterioration
                          of the old godowns. It is estimated that the requirement of storage capacity for food grain will be
                          30.5 lakh tons by the end of 2020. If the storage facility is not increased immediately with the
                          increasing frequency of natural disaster, decreasing storage facility due to deteriorated existing
                          godowns, the country will face shortage of food during emergencies.

                          Fourteen sites were initially taken into account for review. Considering the above conditions, 8
                          sites have been selected for the project. The site selection criteria are as follows:

                          a.        Strategic value of the storage location for distribution of food grain stocks in emergency
                          relief situations or for the pre-positioning of such stocks

                          b.     Rationality of increased storage capacity at the site based on existing and anticipated food
                          grain movements by the client for all uses in order to ensure proper rotation of stocks

                          c.      Avoidance of land acquisition issues that could delay the start of construction and
                          therefore a focus on existing Food Department storage sites.

                           Based on the above listed criteria and environmental and social aspect Barishal CSD, Narayangan
                           CSD, Dhaka CSD, Mymensing CSD, Maheswarpasha CSD, Ashuganj silo, Chittagong Silo and
                           Madhupur site have been selected for modern food grain silo construction. Technological benefits
                           for Steel Silo, concrete silo and conventional godowns were also assessed in this report. It has
                           been found that Steel Silo provides the best scenario in terms of temperature and moisture control,
                           space requirement, dust control and rodent control. However, steel silo requires high skill set for
                           construction and operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Food (MoFood), which has the sole mandate
                           to manage food grain stocks in the country and ensure their availability according to National
                           Food Policy of 2006. MoFood will have the overall responsibility for the project implementation
                           (through its DG Food). MoFood will implement the Bank funded project for the first time in recent
                           years, they are not familiar with the Bank safeguard policies.

                          Given the nature of project interventions and the types of environmental and social impacts
                          captured in the environmental and social assessment, DG-Food has prepared a detailed
                          Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework (ESAMF) report including
                          environmental management framework (EMF), environmental management plan (EMP) and social
                          management framework (SMF). The ESAMF provides policy and institutional framework to guide
                          DG-Food in addressing environmental and any social safeguard compliance issues during
                          implementation. Although there is no social safeguard compliance issues with the eight sites
                          selected for the silo construction, the ESAMF is available with DG-Food to address any
                          unforeseen safeguard issues during implementation.

                          The PMU will have a dedicated Senior Environmental Specialist (SES) to ensure implementation
                          of EMP and other environmental management responsibilities. The SES will maintain liaison with


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           WB safeguards team, regulatory agencies, and other stakeholders during the Project
                           implementation. The Senior Environment Specialist has to be on Board as soon the PMU is set
                           up. S/He will be responsible for ensuring the adequacy of environmental component in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bidding Document (BOQ) and ensure the quality of Environmental Action Plan (EAP) submitted
                           by the contractor. The field level environmental specialist should be on board before
                           commencement of the field work. The PMU will also have a Senior Social Specialist (SSS) to
                           ensure application of the SMRPF for social safeguard compliance of the project interventions.

                           The construction contractors will have dedicated properly qualified and experienced, site-based
                           Environment Supervisors (ESs) at each construction site. The ESs will be responsible to
                           implement various aspects of the EMP particularly the mitigation measures to ensure that the
                           environmental impacts of the construction works remain within acceptable limits.

                           The Supervision Consultants will have dedicated, properly qualified and experienced, site-based
                           Environment and Social Monitor (ESM) at each construction site. The ESMs will monitor and
                           supervise implementation of EMP and SMP at the field level.

                           The (Health, Safety and Environment) HSE function will be a key element of the operation and
                           maintenance arrangements at each of the silo facility. Dedicated HSE personnel will be part of the
                           O&M staff and will be responsible to prepare and then implement the relevant parts of the
                           Operations Manual for ensuring health and safety during project operation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The population in the disaster prone areas of Bangladesh is the prime beneficiary of the project
                           and they are spread all over the country, in the coastal zone, in the flood prone areas, and in the
                           drought prone areas. Concentrated to the proposed silo sites, the residents attached to the 8
                           selected sites will be impacted during construction and operation of the silos facilities. Local
                           leaders, traders, millers, transporters and wage laborers have expressed their interest to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project stakeholders including women and vulnerable groups were consulted at two steps;
                           once during identification of the sites for public silo facilities and again after finalization of the
                           eight sites for construction. Community meetings and consultation with local peoples at the sites
                           were conducted. The consultants and the DG-Food staff at the local level organized and conducted
                           the community meetings and the consultant discussed various pertinent issues with the local
                           community representatives during site selection. Outside the silo sites, communities in two
                           villages in Patuakhali were also consulted on current practice of grain storage at the family level
                           and need for interventions for improved and safe storage facilities.

                           Consultation during site identification: Consultation with local communities and institutional
                           stakeholders were carried out at all potential sites in Barisal, Narayanganj, Dhaka, Ashuganj,
                           Madhupur, Mymensingh, Maheshwar Pasha, Chittagong, Mongla, Dinajpur, Naogaon,
                           Bhaghabari, Khulna, and Govindaganj. Key issues discussed in the community level during site
                           identification were (i) project objectives and intended benefits, (ii) project components related to
                           silo facilities, (iii) need for participation of the communities in site selection and project design,
                           (iv) criteria for site selection, (v) likely impacts on assets and income, (vi) provision of national
                           law and the Bank policy on social safeguards and (vii) possible mitigation measures The
                           consultations brought forth that despite some adverse impacts of the project, the communities were
                           very positive towards the project. They feel proud of having a project of national importance in
                           their area.


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           Consultation at eight sites: Site level consultation was carried out after final selection of sites for
                           eight silo facilities during January 2013 in Dhaka, Narayanganj, Comilla, Chittagong, Tangail,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mymensingh, Khulna and Barisal sites. A total of 387 men and women including traders, transport
                           workers, wage labors, farmers, unemployed youths, transport operators, farmers, millers, teachers,
                           religious leaders, elected representatives, dealers, service holders, students, mechanics, rickshaw
                           pullers, autorickshaw drivers, trade union leaders, and port traders participated in the discussion at
                           the eight sites. The communities at the eight selected sites understand that construction for civil
                           works may involve sudden increase of migrant labourers at the construction sites. The influx of the
                           non-local workers may pose a threat to the local public health environment if safe work
                           environment cannot be maintained. Employment of local labourers will be more safe on health
                           concerns.

                           Consultation at village level in Patuakhali: The coastal zone including Khulna, Barisal and
                           Patuakhali districts are prone to natural disasters like cyclones and tidal inundations. Communities
                           in two different villages in two unions in Patuakhali were consulted during January 2013 to
                           understand the current practice and problems with family level grain storage. The villages were
                           visited by the local DG-Food officials and consultants on 3 January 2013 and had meetings with
                           the communities there. A total 143 persons in two villages including local elected representatives,
                           farmers and women participated in the consultation meetings. The community practice on grain
                           storage at household level and their choice and expectation on the family silo bins were
                           understood during the consultation.

                           Disclosures: Detailed ESAMF reports, including stakeholder consultation deliberations, are
                           available with the PMU. Impact Assessment checklists and the simple social screening matrix,
                           prepared as a part of the project preparation, are also available with the PMU. The ESAMF on
                           policy issues and impact mitigation measures has been translated into Bengali language and
                           disseminated locally. In accordance with the Bank’s disclosure policy, the ESAMF is uploaded in
                           the DG-Food’s website and in the Ba nk InfoShop. Any subsequent EMP/SMP/RAP has been and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be discussed locally with the stakeholders and disseminated widely and made available on the
                           project’s portal and in the Bank InfoShop before award of civil works contract.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       31-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                           12-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       31-Mar-2013




                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Bangladesh                                                       12-Mar-2013
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                               Date: 02-Apr-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                            Date: 31-Mar-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
