                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA6673
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:         South Asia                        Project ID:    P145054
                            Project Name:    Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
                                             (CASA-1000) (P145054)
                            Task Team        Sunil Kumar Khosla
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       23-Jan-2014                        Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (60%), Climate change (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      1170.00                 Total Bank Financing: 526.50
                            Financing Gap:            173.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   134.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                          158.25
                              IDA Grant                                                                            368.25
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                 40.00
                              US, Govt. of                                                                          15.00
                              Islamic Development Bank                                                             250.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                     31.00
                              Total                                                                                997.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a        No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                    Page 1 of 15
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The objective of the project is to create the conditions for sustainable electricity trade between the
                         Central Asian countries of Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic and the South Asian countries of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Afghanistan and Pakistan.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project would be comprised of the following three components and costs in parenthesis are
                         inclusive of contingencies and exclusive of applicable taxes, Environmental and Social costs and
                         Interest During Construction (IDC).

                         Component A: Construction of High Voltage Transmission Infrastructure (US$945 million, of which
                         Bank financing is US$518.5 million). This component would include four subcomponents as follows:

                         Sub-component A1 – High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Transmission Line (US$295 million,
                         Bank financing- US$216.5 million). Construction of about 750 km of 500 kV HVDC overhead
                         transmission line to interconnect the electricity network of Tajikistan from the Sangtuda converter
                         station, to the Pakistan network at the Peshawar converter station, and the Afghanistan network at the
                         Kabul converter station.
                         Sub-Component A2 – HVDC Converter Stations (US$385 million, Bank financing- US$257
                         million). Engineering design, construction, and commissioning of three HVDC converter stations at
                         Sangtuda (1,300 MW) in Tajikistan, Kabul (300 MW) in Afghanistan and Peshawar (1,300 MW) in
                         Pakistan. The converter stations include specialized converter transformers, breakers, filtering
                         equipment, inverters, controls, ground electrodes, and static and dynamic compensation equipment.
                         Sub-component A3 – High Voltage AC Transmission (HVAC) Interconnection between the Kyrgyz
                         Republic and Tajikistan (US$200 million, Bank financing- US$45 million) – This sub-component
                         will finance the construction of about 475 km of kV HVAC overhead transmission line (about 450
                         km in the Kyrgyz Republic and 25 km in Tajikistan) to interconnect the network of the Kyrgyz
                         Republic, at Datka s/s, with the Tajikistan network, at the Khudjand s/s.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component A4 (US$65 million, Bank financing- US$0 million) – Tajikistan grid reinforcement.
                         This includes the construction of about 115 km of 500 kV line from Regar s/s to Sangtuda s/s and
                         other parts of the network necessary, along with associated substation equipment to ensure transfer of
                         Tajik and Kyrgyz export power to the Sangtuda converter station

                         Component B: Technical Assistance and Project Implementation Support (US$30 million, Bank
                         financing- US$8 million). This component will finance the support for project implementation and
                         technical assistance (TA) required to the four country-specific Project Implementing Agencies as
                         well as for the IGC and IGC Secretariat. The component will be financed by donors through a multi
                         donor trust fund (MDTF), which is being established specifically for CASA-1000.
                         Sub-component B1 – HVDC and HVAC Owner’s Engineers (US$12 million).
                         Sub-component B2 – Environment and Social Management Support (US$4 million).
                         Sub-component B3 – Audits and Revenue Management (US$4 million).
                         Sub-component B4 – Project Management Support (US$4 million).
                         Sub-component B5 – IGC Secretariat Support (US$4 million).
                         Sub-component B6 – Project Communications (US$2 million).
                         Sub-component B7 – Capacity Building (US$2 million).

                         Component C: Community Support Programs (US$70 million for construction phase, Bank
                         financing- US$0 million.)


                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                         This component will develop and implement CSPs in each of the CASA-1000 countries during the
                         project’s construction period to create a more supportive environment for project implementation by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving livelihoods among the approximately 670 (largely poor) communities living along the
                         CASA-1000 corridor. The CSPs will be predicated on a community driven approach – i.e.
                         community-led decision making for identification and implementation of the selected schemes is a
                         key principle for the programs. The IGC agreed to a mechanism to directly share the benefits of the
                         project with these communities during the operation phase through continued funding of some of
                         these activities.

                         The preparation and implementation of the CSPs will be phased, with the Afghanistan CSP activities
                         being prepared first. CSPs for the other three countries will be prepared over the course of CY14 in
                         readiness for implementation by mid-2015, to align with the construction phase of the transmission
                         line. Under Component C, the Afghanistan program will be prepared and processed as a free-
                         standing WB operation. The other country programs will be prepared and processed following
                         requirements of different financing arrangements. The CSPs will be designed independently for each
                         country to allow for tailoring to country-specific circumstances and to enable the incorporation of
                         lessons from similar Community-Driven Development (CDD) projects. The World Bank-managed
                         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) will finance the Afghanistan portion of the CSP
                         component at an estimated cost of US$40 million. The MDTF being set up for CASA-1000 with
                         donor support would be the main vehicle for funding of the planned CSP activities in the other three
                         countries. The estimated cost, to be firmed up after detailed designs are completed, is expected to be
                         US$10 million for each country. The scope of each country component may have to be adjusted
                         depending on the level of available funding. Specifically, in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan,
                         where the funding is limited, it is possible that commencement of the CSPs during construction may
                         not be completely aligned with the construction phase; however, this should not have a significant
                         impact on the project risks. The implementation and fiduciary arrangements would be finalized
                         during preparation of the country specific CSP projects. The experiences and lessons learned from
                         the construction phase CSP activities will be taken into account in designing the benefit-sharing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mechanisms for the operational period of the project. Detailed designs for the operations phase
                         benefit-sharing schemes will be finalized before project completion to avoid gaps in these
                         community programs, including arrangements for annual planning, implementation, monitoring and
                         evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The HVDC transmission line is expected to commence at Sangtuda in Tajikistan and pass through
                         Kunduz, Pul-e-Khumri, Kabul and Jalalabad in Afghanistan and terminate in Peshawar in Pakistan.
                         The total length of the transmission line is estimated to be 750 kilometers of which about 16 percent
                         passes through Tajikistan, 75 percent through Afghanistan and 9 percent through Pakistan. In
                         addition, a 477 kilometer 500 kV transmission line is expected to be financed under the project to
                         interconnect Kyrgyz Republic to Tajikistan. An Avian Risk Assessment study has identified five
                         important bird areas (IBAs) in Tajikistan and Afghanistan (Tigrovaya Balka Nature Reserve, Imam
                         Sahib, Salang Kotal, Kole Hashmat Khan and Jalalabad Valley) and one Ramsar site (lower part of
                         Pyandj River) in Tajikistan along the alignment that is under consideration. No IBA or Ramsar site
                         has been identified along the proposed alignment in Kyrgyz Republic and Pakistan. Security
                         concerns in Pakistan and Afghanistan and presence or absence of unexploded land mines/ordnances
                         in Afghanistan will be studied to assess potential safety concerns for communities/construction
                         workers. Suitable mitigation measures are being incorporated in the proposed Regional


                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         Environmental Assessment (REA) under preparation (see discussions under OP 4.01). There might
                         be a need to critically analyze the location of the relevant HVDC Converter stations and the right of
                         way in places passing through strategic areas, e.g., New Kabul City as well as the military
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installations in the vicinity of Kabul and coordinate with all relevant agencies in the country. Also,
                         identification of a suitable location for HVDC converter station near Peshawar will be critical as the
                         area is heavily populated.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         L. Panneer Selvam (SASDI)
                         Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                         Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
                         Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (ECSSO)
                         Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project is rated Category A because it
                         BP 4.01                                              involves greenfield construction of a long span of
                                                                              high voltage Overhead Transmission Lines
                                                                              (OTL), some of it through potentially sensitive
                                                                              areas.

                                                                              The Client prepared an original project-wide
                                                                              ESIA based on the prefeasibility study,
                                                                              summarizing potential impacts from construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              of transmission lines (TL) within a 2 kilometer-
                                                                              wide corridor. The detailed design, including final
                                                                              routing/alignment of TL within this corridor, the
                                                                              exact location of DC-AC converter stations and
                                                                              tower footings, etc. will be defined later by the
                                                                              engineering, procurement and construction (EPC)
                                                                              contractors, following detailed route surveys and
                                                                              considering the site-specific environmental and
                                                                              social aspects.

                                                                              Following the above, independent consultant
                                                                              firms were engaged: (1) to review and update the
                                                                              original ESIA, incorporating additional baseline
                                                                              data in the form of 6 m resolution satellite
                                                                              imagery for the entire CASA 1000 route to
                                                                              augment existing baseline information. This
                                                                              helped identify some sites along the route which
                                                                              present particular risks that will require further
                                                                              assessment; and (2) to carry out an Avian Risk



                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                 Study to assess presence of ecologically sensitive
                                 hot spots along the proposed 2 km wide corridor
                                 and potential Avian risks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Further to the above and considering the fact that
                                 the project design is still at a relatively early stage
                                 (only overall specifications and a broad corridor
                                 defined, with the final designs to be completed as
                                 part of the construction contracts), it was agreed
                                 that a form of Environmental and Social
                                 Management Framework (ESMF) would be the
                                 most appropriate EIA instrument for this project.
                                 Therefore, another independent consultant was
                                 commissioned to prepare a Regional
                                 Environmental Assessment (REA) based upon the
                                 extensive information available from the above
                                 stated reports and other relevant documents. The
                                 REA covers all four countries and will serve as
                                 the basis for preparation of future country-
                                 specific ESIAs and site-specific plans (by
                                 independent consultants) during the
                                 implementation phase of the proposed project.

                                 Because the broad corridor of the TL is known
                                 and considerable site information is already
                                 available, the REA goes beyond the typical
                                 “Framework” type of document and includes
                                 detailed discussions on both substantive and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 process elements. On the substance side, REA
                                 elaborates elements such as: baseline data drawn
                                 from the original ESIA, the satellite images from
                                 2011 and other relevant sources; identification of
                                 environmentally or socially sensitive areas
                                 (“hotspots”) based on the available information
                                 and analyses (e.g. the Avian Risk Assessment,
                                 social assessments); analysis of alternatives; and
                                 general mitigation measures including applicable
                                 Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOPs)
                                 relating to construction/operation/ maintenance of
                                 high voltage TL.

                                 On the process side, the REA provides an outline
                                 (for each country) of implementation
                                 arrangements and the roles and responsibilities of
                                 all parties (e.g. construction contractors;
                                 independent monitoring/supervision consultants;
                                 environment and social development specialists/



                         Page 5 of 15
                                                                     consultants); measures to strengthen institutional
                                                                     capacities in each participating country to manage
                                                                     the environmental and social issues, procedures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     and processes for preparation of country and site-
                                                                     specific ESIAs & EMPs.
                                                                     In summary, the final package of documents
                                                                     includes: (i) REA giving general information on
                                                                     the whole project area, guidance framework for
                                                                     preparing country specific ESIAs and site-specific
                                                                     management plans; and (ii) four country-specific
                                                                     ESIAs, site-specific management plans to be
                                                                     prepared by independent consultants in close
                                                                     coordination with EPC contractors. These
                                                                     country-specific ESIAs will be prepared during
                                                                     implementation and approved by the respective
                                                                     national Governments, NTCs and the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           This project is not expected to cause significant
                                                                     impact to critical and natural habitats based on the
                                                                     nature of the project investments and the results
                                                                     of the original ESIA and the REA. However, the
                                                                     Avian Risk Assessment and Management study
                                                                     identified several Important Birds Areas and
                                                                     Ramsar sites within the project area that need to
                                                                     be considered during the detailed design phase
                                                                     and as part of country-specific environmental and
                                                                     social assessments to be prepared. Furthermore,
                                                                     during the construction phase (and potentially
                                                                     during the operations stage), there will be some
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     cutting of vegetation for right-of-way
                                                                     maintenance and for access roads and other
                                                                     associated facilities. The construction and
                                                                     operation may also cause disturbance or increased
                                                                     pressures to fauna. All these would require
                                                                     developing relevant mitigation and monitoring
                                                                     activities as an integral part of the proposed
                                                                     country specific ESIAs. Specific measures may
                                                                     include alternative alignments to avoid natural
                                                                     habitats, avian protection measures on cables and
                                                                     towers, prohibiting wildlife hunting, and
                                                                     minimizing impacts to habitats from operation
                                                                     and maintenance of lines, among other potential
                                                                     measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            Forest Policy is not triggered because the
                                                                     proposed project is not expected to impact on the
                                                                     health and quality of forests or affect the rights
                                                                     and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                     dependence upon or interaction with forests or


                                                             Page 6 of 15
                                                                        aim to bring about changes in the management,
                                                                        protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                                        plantations. Also, the REA and satellite images of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the proposed alignment corridor confirm that
                                                                        there will be no significant impacts on natural or
                                                                        critical forests. However, the proposed project
                                                                        might require tree cutting during construction and
                                                                        maintenance of the right of way. The proposed
                                                                        country-specific ESIAs will assess any potential
                                                                        impacts from tree cutting on NH at a more local
                                                                        scale and suitable measures would be included in
                                                                        the country-specific EMP's to avoid or minimize
                                                                        impacts on NH, if any are identified in the project
                                                                        area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will
                                                                        neither finance the procurement of fertilizers/
                                                                        pesticides nor create conditions which may lead
                                                                        to increased use of pesticides. The current
                                                                        practices for maintenance of the right of way of
                                                                        the transmission line and facilities have been
                                                                        reviewed for each country with respect to the use
                                                                        of pesticide or chemicals. The four countries have
                                                                        confirmed that no chemicals or pesticide would
                                                                        be used for that purpose.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The initial screening of the route has not revealed
                         BP 4.11                                        any important Physical Cultural Resource (PCR)
                                                                        from a national and global perspective. The final
                                                                        routing and alignment of the transmission line
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        will be detailed in the country-specific ESIAs and
                                                                        will avoid damaging PCR if any, or restricting
                                                                        access to them.
                                                                        Special precautions will be detailed in the
                                                                        country-specific EMPs as part of OP 4.01 (see
                                                                        above) with specific mitigation measures and
                                                                        provisions for the use of chance find procedures,
                                                                        if encountered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           Communities in the project area in the four
                                                                        project countries, both within and along the
                                                                        transmission lines corridors, do not fall under the
                                                                        definition of indigenous people as stated under
                                                                        OP 4.10 (paragraph 4 in defining indigenous
                                                                        peoples). Therefore, OP 4.10 is not considered
                                                                        triggered under this project. However,
                                                                        considering the unique characteristics of the
                                                                        ethnic groups in the project areas, particularly the
                                                                        tribal communities in Afghanistan and Pakistan,
                                                                        the project has carried out desk research as well


                                                                Page 7 of 15
                                                                        as some field surveys to identify these
                                                                        communities and understand their socioeconomic
                                                                        conditions, unique cultural and institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        systems. These are summarized in the various
                                                                        field reports and the Social Impact Assessment.
                                                                        The client will ensure effective consultations with
                                                                        these communities of different ethnicities, and
                                                                        ensure culturally appropriate benefits for these
                                                                        communities. Necessary mechanisms and
                                                                        measures will be incorporated into the project
                                                                        design to ensure their participation, mitigation of
                                                                        any possible adverse impacts upon them and
                                                                        benefit-sharing arrangements under the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential need for
                         4.12                                           land acquisition related to the various components
                                                                        of the transmission system; the existence of
                                                                        physical structures that might have to be
                                                                        removed; and the possibility that affected
                                                                        settlements might have to be physically relocated.

                                                                        Because the precise locations of the tower
                                                                        footings and alignment of the transmission lines
                                                                        are not yet determined, the exact scope of the
                                                                        impacts cannot be determined until the technical
                                                                        designs are finalized. Also, since the relevant
                                                                        national policies, laws, institutions and conditions
                                                                        differ in each country, separate Land Acquisition
                                                                        and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (LARPF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        have been prepared as a condition of World Bank
                                                                        appraisal to guide the land acquisition/
                                                                        resettlement planning process. Based on the
                                                                        LARPFs for each of the four countries, specific
                                                                        Resettlement Plans and/or Land Acquisition Plans
                                                                        will be prepared as required when precise details
                                                                        of transmission line locations (alignment,
                                                                        locations for pylons, substations and other
                                                                        structures) are available.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            The project will not be financing any new dam
                                                                        construction or making any modifications to
                                                                        existing dams. The assets financed under the
                                                                        project are not expected to be at risk for extensive
                                                                        damage in case of dam failure.
                         Projects on International        No            Only existing summer surplus will be utilized
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           under the CASA-1000 project. No additional
                                                                        generation capacity will be required or built for
                                                                        the project. The existing operation modes of the
                                                                        hydropower plants and/or quantity of water being


                                                                Page 8 of 15
                                                                                released are not expected to change from the
                                                                                current practices. The legal documents to be
                                                                                agreed upon with the clients may incorporate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                covenants to address this aspect as appropriate.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 None of the project components will be located in
                            7.60                                                a disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project involves green-field construction of about 1,200 Km of high voltage Overhead
                              Transmission Lines (OTL), crossing four countries with potential adverse environmental and
                              social impacts that in some cases might be significant due to the fact that proposed civil works will
                              be implemented in/or in the vicinity of environmentally sensitive areas. The environment and
                              social assessment work conducted during the Feasibility Study screened and selected a corridor
                              within which the OTL will be constructed. The subsequent ESIA supplemented this work by the
                              inclusion of country-specific assessment work that sought to identify if there were any site-specific
                              ‘show stoppers’ due to sensitivities. This subsequent work also developed a range of measures to
                              mitigate potentially adverse effects and manage project implementation, as part of an ESMP that
                              was developed. A special (independent) Avian Risk Assessment and Management study focusing
                              on avifauna revealed that there were some inherent risks to birds, generally considered to be at a
                              local level, but which required further evaluation through field study. This work also discovered
                              that there were several sites in proximity to the TL routing that were of strategic importance to
                              seasonal migration of birds due to the habitat type. Consequently, further detailed field work will
                              be undertaken as part of the individual, country-specific ESIAs that are scheduled to be undertaken
                              by the national ESIA Consultants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Construction related impacts are likely to be short term and site specific and can be mitigated by
                              applying internationally recognized best construction practices. Typically such impacts are related
                              to aspects such as: (a) location, establishment and operation of the construction camps; (b)
                              construction of about 3000 towers required to support the OTL in four countries; (c) routing and
                              construction of the many access roadways required throughout the length of the project; (d) soil
                              resource management and the need for erosion control; (e) presence of physical cultural resources
                              in the project area of influence; and (f) a range of security issues (including unexploded ordnance
                              and land mines), particularly associated with the on-going conflict in Afghanistan and associated
                              security issues in parts of Pakistan’ tribal regions.

                              The REA presents an analysis of potential downstream hydrological impacts from the project and
                              concludes that the proposed CASA 1000 project does not envision any change to the current
                              operational regimes of the Nurek and Toktogul dams, which would result in changes in
                              downstream flows. This analysis is based on information available from the feasibility study and
                              other studies in the region, as well as from the public domain. The basic premise for the
                              CASA-1000 project is that the Central Asia countries have existing (in the Kyrgyz Republic) or
                              potential (in Tajikistan) surplus of clean energy in summer from their existing hydropower plants
                              without new generation, which is supported by the analysis of past exports and spillage of water,
                              that could be used to offset shortages in South Asian countries, particularly Afghanistan and


                                                                        Page 9 of 15
                           Pakistan. The summer surplus is primarily linked to the operation of the Nurek and Toktogul
                           reservoirs, which regulate the releases in the Vaksh River (Tajikistan) and the Naryn River
                           (Kyrgyz Republic) respectively.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Also, the project is not expected to cause significant impact to critical and natural forests as it will
                           not include any plantation activity, commercial harvesting or harvesting conducted by small-scale
                           landholders or local communities. Furthermore, during the construction phase (and potentially
                           during the operations stage), there will be some removal of vegetation for right-of-way
                           maintenance and for access roads and other associated facilities, impacts of which will be studied
                           by the proposed country-specific ESIAs.

                           Social surveys were carried out among representative samples of the communities along the
                           proposed transmission line corridor in the four project countries. The surveys provided an ethnic
                           and socioeconomic profile of the communities, reviewed the overall status of development in the
                           project areas. As part of the surveys community consultations were conducted on general
                           development priorities as well as potential and perceived adverse social impacts of the project. The
                           surveys showed that the potential project area, in all countries, is mostly rural with a low
                           population density. Other characteristics of the communities include high agricultural dependency,
                           limited access to energy during the winter time, and mixed access to basic social services. It is
                           anticipated that the project will finance investments such as towers, sub-stations, and access roads,
                           which will require the involuntary acquisition of land, restrictions to use of land both temporarily
                           and permanently, possible loss of crops and assets. It is not expected that land taking will be
                           significant as the broad project area is mostly rural and sparsely populated. Impacts on economic
                           crops are expected due to height restrictions under the Transmission Line. There may be some
                           impacts on community infrastructure.

                           Considering that the alignment of the corridor is yet to be finalized, country-specific Resettlement
                           Policy Frameworks (RPFs) have been developed in line with the relevant legal policies in the
                           respective countries and the World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement to guide future
Public Disclosure Copy




                           detailed resettlement planning and implementation. The frameworks describe the overall possible
                           impacts, project policies including its entitlement policies, resettlement planning, institutional and
                           implementation arrangements, including grievance redress and monitoring mechanisms. The draft
                           RPFs have been disclosed in local languages. Field surveys also reflect that the ethnic
                           communities in the project areas do not fall under the definition of indigenous peoples as per
                           World Bank OP 4.10 and therefore this policy is not triggered under this project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The broad conclusion of the REA and previously conducted ESIA studies is that overall E&S
                           adverse impacts are considered to be limited and of low to moderate nature, due to the lack of
                           protected areas and the general avoidance of heavily populated communities as well as there being
                           sufficient flexibility to adjust the TL and infrastructure to avoid any ‘local’ sensitive features that
                           might be encountered. Potential indirect long term impacts are likely to be positive as the proposed
                           project would help Pakistan and Afghanistan to meet their electricity demands from a hydro
                           source which otherwise to have been met from other fossil fuel based thermal power sources or
                           several back-up diesel generation sets.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The REA includes analysis of several alternatives for their potential environmental and social

                                                                       Page 10 of 15
                           impacts, results of which guided the initial selection of alignment and location of towers and other
                           key infrastructure facilities. These include: No Project option; Alternative Projects; Different
                           alignments or sections of alignment for the OTL; different locations of towers and other key
Public Disclosure Copy




                           infrastructure, within operational constraints; and different construction methods, timings and
                           other construction-related modifications, including those needed for minimizing potential avian
                           risks. In short, the environmental and social impacts are not expected to be significantly adverse,
                           given the flexibility to adjust infrastructure siting and align the OTL to avoid sensitive features.
                           Further, detailed field work will be undertaken as part of the individual, country-specific ESIAs
                           that are to be carried out by the independent ESIA Consultants in close coordination with the EPC
                           contractors.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Potential project environmental impacts will be addressed by applying REA which summarizes
                           potential primary impacts from construction of transmission lines within a broader corridor of two
                           km width, and follows a framework approach with detailed guidance for preparing country
                           specific ESIAs and several specific Management Plans by independent EA consultants that would
                           meet the requirements of respective national laws and applicable Safeguards Policies of the World
                           Bank. These Plans and the country–specific RAPs will form the basis for the borrower to address
                           safeguards policy issues and potential environmental and social impacts.

                          The NTCs in the four countries have varying capacity for the implementation and planning of
                          activities described above. Where these capacities will become challenge in effectively carrying
                          out safeguards implementation, the country specific ESIAs will recommend capacity enhancement
                          measures both in terms of providing human resource and training to effectively implement
                          environmental and social safeguards. Besides, Management approach recommends: Project
                          Environmental Officer – for each NTC; Environmental Supervisor/Officer – for each EPC (main
                          contractor); Independent Environmental Monitoring Consultant (IEMC) – for 3rd party
                          independent monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          As envisaged in the REA, the NTCs have overall responsibility for environmental and social
                          performance of the Project and specifically responsible for: (a) supervising and managing all
                          aspects of Project preparation and construction; (b) coordination with local authorities to facilitate
                          the participation of local communities and projected affected persons during Project preparation
                          and implementation; (c) ensuring that the requirements of World Bank safeguards policies (and
                          other IFI lender requirements) as well as national environmental laws and regulations are met and
                          that all measures set out in the respective country-specific ESIA/EMPs/Site-specific Plans; (d)
                          ensuring that Project commitments of the construction contractors are fulfilled, including the
                          detailed development of Project level specific environmental and social management plans; (e)
                          reporting on-going status of EMP implementation to the World Bank and other lenders as
                          appropriate. Furthermore, the NTCs are in charge of coordinating the design activities that will be
                          done by the EPC contractor for selecting the exact location of TL and its components, as well as of
                          hiring and supervising the independent Consultants to conduct detailed ESIA studies.

                          The NTC’s Environmental Officer will be responsible for overall coordination of EMP
                          implementation in each country and will have the authority to monitor and stop construction works
                          if in his/her opinion there is/may be a serious threat or impact to the environment or local
                          communities caused directly or indirectly by the construction operations and will be in regular
                          liaison with the wider Project team, including the World Bank Task Team.


                                                                     Page 11 of 15
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A variety of consultations have occurred to date, commencing at the project identification stage
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and through into the Feasibility Studies, which included preliminary environmental studies and
                           social screening. Following this phase, a round of consultations were initiated when IEL were
                           commissioned to undertake the ESIA. The NTCs/ Ministries in each of the four countries were
                           invited and assisted to conduct consultations on the ToRs for the ESIA. A web site has been
                           established for the Project http://www.casa-1000.org, making the project available for web users
                           across the participating countries.

                           The draft safeguard instruments have been disclosed in all four countries in English and in Russian
                           (in Tajikistan and in Kyrgyz Republic) and local languages in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The
                           instruments have also been made available in hard copies in public locations in relevant capital
                           cities, regional/provincial/district headquarters in the proposed project area. Section B below
                           summarizes the disclosure for each document per country and appropriate language. The
                           documents have been also disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop at the time they have been
                           disclosed in-country. The draft REA Summary has been distributed to SECPO on November 15,
                           2013. In December 2013 and early January 2014 consultations have been undertaken in capital
                           cities and in regional centers in the proposed project areas. The objective was to undertake
                           inclusive consultations and engage with the relevant Government Ministries and Departments,
                           local and regional authorities, the NGO sector, Project Affected Communities (PACs) and Project
                           Affected People (PAPs) and interested parties. Overall the safeguards documents have been
                           accepted by participants. Following the consultations on the draft REA and RPFs, the documents
                           have been revised. The lessons learned and made recommendations will be incorporated into the
                           individual country-specific ESIAs and RPFs and the country-specific ESIA Consultants would
                           build on them to address the site specific aspects, including land take, potential resettlement,
                           socio-economic impacts, access to work sites, employment aspects and the like.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Nov-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     13-Nov-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        20-Nov-2013
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 12 of 15
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                         25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: English, Dari and Pashtu
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Place of disclosure: Ministry of Energy and Water website <http://mew.gov.af/en>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: January 7, 2014 in Kabul;
                                         January 8, 2014 in Jalalabad; January 11, 2014 in Kunduz.
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                     15-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: Kyrgyz, Russian
                                         Place of disclosure: Ministry of Energy and Industry website <http://www.energo.
                                         gov.kg/site/index.php?act=view_cat&id=28>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 18 in Bishkek;
                                         December 20 in Batken.
                           Pakistan                                                            11-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: English, Urdu
                                         Place of disclosure: NTDC website <http://www.ntdc.com.pk/CASA_1000.php> and
                                         Ministry of Water and Power website <www.mowp.gov.pk>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 23 in Peshawar;
                                         December 24 in Islamabad
                           Tajikistan                                                          13-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents:
                                         Place of disclosure:
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 4 in Dushanbe;
                                         December 6 in Khudjand; December 9 in Kurgan Tyube
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      13-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  Page 13 of 15
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                         25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: English, Dari and Pashtu
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Place of disclosure: Ministry of Energy and Water website <http://mew.gov.af/en>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: January 7, 2014 in Kabul;
                                         January 8, 2014 in Jalalabad; January 11, 2014 in Kunduz.
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                     15-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: Kyrgyz, Russian
                                         Place of disclosure: Ministry of Energy and Industry website <http://www.energo.
                                         gov.kg/site/index.php?act=view_cat&id=28>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 18 in Bishkek;
                                         December 20 in Batken.
                           Pakistan                                                            11-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents: English, Urdu
                                         Place of disclosure: NTDC website <http://www.ntdc.com.pk/CASA_1000.php> and
                                         Ministry of Water and Power website <www.mowp.gov.pk>
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 23 in Peshawar;
                                         December 24 in Islamabad
                           Tajikistan                                                          13-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Language of documents:
                                         Place of disclosure:
                                         Date and location of consultations/public hearings: December 4 in Dushanbe;
                                         December 6 in Khudjand; December 9 in Kurgan Tyube
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement


                                                                   Page 14 of 15
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sunil Kumar Khosla
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 06-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                             Date: 07-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 15 of 15
