Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/13/2010 
Report No.:  AC4673
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P111479 
Project Name:  Rio Bogota Environmental Recuperation and Flood Control Project 
Task Team Leader:  Greg J. Browder 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2010 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (70%);Flood protection (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (50%);Water resource 
management (25%);Other urban development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
237.00
237.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is the transform the Rio Bogota into an environmental 
asset for the Bogota metropolitan region by improving water quality, reducing flood risk, 
and creating multi-functional areas along the river.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Salitre WWTP ($335 million): This component includes the upgrading and 
expansion of the existing 4 m3/d primary plant to an 8 m3/s secondary plant. Although 
the Salitre WWTP is currently operated by EAAB, in accordance with Convenio 171 
signed in 2007, the CAR will finance the expansion of the plant and jointly manage the 
design and construction with EAAB. The existing plant site is sufficient to accommodate 
the proposed expansion.  
 
Component 2: Flood Control and River Restoration Works ($140 million): This 
component includes traditional flood control works such as river dredging and 
embankment construction with environmental improvements such as restoration of 
meanders and wetlands, landscape design, and parks to create multifunctional zones 
along the Rio Bogota.  
Page  2
Component 3: Environmental and Water Studies ($7  million) This component includes 
a
number of technical assistance activities to help ensure the sustainability of the overall 
Rio Bogota program, including: i) integrated water management plan for the Rio Bogota 
Basin; ii) biosolids master plan for Bogota; and iii)  Rio Bogota river management plan.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Administration ($5 million): This includes 
activities related to overall CAR management of the project, including  oversight of the 
works design and construction,  supervision of the resettlement action plan and 
environmental management plan, and public outreach.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located along the banks and flood affected zones of the Rio Bogota in its 
middle reaches.  The wastewater treatment plant is located at Salitre which is situated in a 
complex of mixed urban, residential, recreational and industraial land uses. The 
proximity of the plant to residential areas could cause problems related to odor control 
and visual aesethics at the site. Also there could be increased risk of public safety in the 
unlikely event of an industrial accident or emergency at the Salitre plant.  
 
The flood control works will be located near the banks of the Rio Bogota at variable 
distances.  Since the new dykes will replace existing dykes there will be issues associated 
with land acquisition and possibly site access and construction staging.  The majority of 
the area are rural properties dedicated to livestock.  Only one urbanized area will be 
affected. Most project works will be in the vicinity of remaining and important wetland 
areas.  Care will be taken at all phases of construction and operations to avoid any 
damage to these wetland areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (LCSEN) 
Ms Elena Correa (SDV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits through the 
improvement of water quality in the Rio Bogota and the improvement of riparian and 
wetland habitats.  The project is seen as an important step in the direction of recovering 
many of the eco-systems functions of the river that has been lost in the past.  The project 
is classified as a Category A due to the large scale wastewater treatment plant and flood 
control construction activities.  There are some possible adverse impacts associated with 
both the construction and operation phases of the project.  Impacts associated with the 
Salitre treatment plant include odor control, visual impacts, risk of industrial accidents 
and risks associated with the management and disposal of biosolids.  Adverse impacts of 
the river flood control works are associated with large scale earthworks, needs for access 
to the construction sites, public safety around construction sites, and chance archeological 
finds given the long history of human settlement in the project area.  All project adverse 
impacts are expected to be manageable with known technology or management solutions.  
 
The project will require the acquisition of land and the physical resettlement of some 
land holders to accommodate the construction of flood protection works. Approximately 
202 properties (159 private and 43 state owned) will be affected. For the most part 
resettlement under the project should be straight forward however the community of 
Porvenir presents particularly difficult challenges due to the relatively large numbers of 
poor and vulnerable people and their proximity to the Rio Bogota.  There are about 193 
families living in this area that could be affected by the project.  Special attention will be 
focused on this site during project preparation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential impacts of this investment project are substantially positive and will be 
derived from improved water quality, reduced flood risk and imporved quality of wetland 
habitat.  The long term environmental risks are primarily associated with the operations 
of the Salitre treatment plant.  Future risks will, to a great extent, depend on how well the 
entire wastewater treatment system works at the basin level.  Inadequate operations of the 
system as a whole could undermine the long-term viability of specific investments.  In 
addition future land use changes, urban and industrial growth could change the nature and 
scale of contamination in the Rio Bogota which might also affect the success of the 
project.  Such developments are well beyond the scope and reach of the project but have 
been taken into account in the strategic and regional planning initiatives undertaken by 
government and CAR.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to the project were considered at both the strategic level as well as at the 
specific investment or plant level.  To support their case for the proposed project CAR 
has undertaken water quality studies and modeling to evaluate the likely pros and cons of 
Page  4
different collection, treatment and effluent management strategies.  At the project level 
alternatives analysis was somehwat constrained because the project will support the 
expansion of an existing treatment at Salitre. Thus it was not possible to evaluate options 
such as locating the plant at a different site.  Nevertheless, technical alternatives such as 
volume of treated wastewater, management of biosolids, treatment technologies were 
considered.  
 
Through the engineering designs, CAR made an important effort to diminish 
involuntary displacement and the number of affected properties.  From 463 properties 
initially affected, to 202 after revision of the engineering designs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has undertaken a detailed environmental impact assessment to evaluate the 
project's strategic context, benefits, risks and management options.  The EIA has been 
prepared in three volumes.  Volume I provides a strategic overview of water quality 
challenges, constraints and opportunities at the Rio Bogota river basin level.  It addresses 
the main strategic vision of government including summary of key planning documents, 
policies, and legal framework which applies to the basin as a whole. Volume I also 
provides baseline data on the state of the basin including water quality, but also key 
parameters such as land use, sensitive habitat areas, settlement trends, threats and risks.  
 
Volume II addresses the specific environmental impacts of the project components.  
Volume II describes the project area of influence, the baseline conditions at each project 
site, the main risks and benefits.  It also provides detailed assessment and prioritization of 
adverse impacts for both the treatment plant and the flood protection works.  
 
Volume III of the EIA presents the environmental management plan for the project.  
The EMP covers 5 thematic programs which are envisioned for the management and 
control of potential environmental impacts.  Volume III includes a description of the 
institutional arrangements for each program and provides budget and human resources as 
well as capacity building initiatives.  
 
The project proponents have prepared a "Social Management Plan for Land Acquisition 
and Resettlement" (SMP) to address the land acquisition and physical resettlement 
required for the construction of project works which will partially affect 202 properties. 
Of them, 159 are private properties and 43 (21.3%) are owned by governmental 
institutions such as the Bogota District and the EAAB. In three of the private properties 
there is an illegal urbanization with 123 houses and 193 families who will be affected. 
Based on the characteristics of affected properties, they are divided into three categories: 
(i) State land (owned by governmental institutions);  (ii) rural properties; and (iii) 
families without legal titles. Because each category entails a different legal framework 
and strategy, the SMP is comprised of three sections in order to incorporate the adequate 
measures for each category properly. The SMP describes the range of affected properties 
and the results of teh census and socioeconomic characteristics of affected people, the 
legal framework for each category, method of valuation, and eligibility criteria.  It also 
Page  5
includes specific programs for information, communication, land acquisition, hosing 
replacement and restoration of socioeconomic conditions of those physically displaced.  
It also describes procedures for compensation as well as dispute resolution mechanisms 
available to project affected people.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include all the directly affected people living along or near the river, 
local and national government who have direct responsibility or accountability for 
implementing government's vision for the area.  The Rio Bogota is an issue of great 
importance and interest to local NGOs and academics and has been the subject of media 
attention in recent months.  
 
The project has carried out consultations at various times through the planning and 
preparation phase of the project and will continue to solicit feedback from affected 
people and concerned stakeholders.  Specifically for the EIA the CAR has sponsored two 
national level workshops (March and September 2009) to solicit feedback and input on 
the scope of the EIA as well as on the findings and recommendations of the EIA.  
Comments and feedback received during those meetings have been taken into account 
and reflected both in revisions to the EIA as well as integration into project activities.  
 
Additionally, several meetings with people affected by land acquisition and 
displacement were held to inform them about the project and the process for land 
acquisition and resettlement.  Given the different characteristics of affected people, the 
meetings were carried out with each of the different groups.  In the case of people to be 
resettled, the Mayor and local authorities of the Municipality of Mosquera have been 
informed and a committee was set up with member of the Municipality and CAR to 
coordinate activities in implementing the SMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/18/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/11/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/11/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/09/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/18/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/28/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Greg J. Browder 
12/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
11/26/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
01/06/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
01/07/2010 
Comments:   
