                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/13/2011                                     Report No.: AC6311
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P095050
Project Name: Kenya - Natural Resource Management Project
Task Team Leader: Christian Albert Peter
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11,        Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007
2007
Managing Unit: AFTEN                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (58%);Forestry (31%);General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (6%);Central government administration (5%)
Theme: Water resource management (40%);Other rural development (40%);Rural
services and infrastructure (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             68.50
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             7.40
         Local Communities                                              2.10
                                                                        9.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective, as provided in the original (PAD 2006), was "to
enhance the institutional capacity to manage water and forest resources, reduce the
incidence and severity of water shocks, such as drought, floods and water shortage in
river catchments and improve the livelihoods of communities in the co-management of
water and forest resources" Since the project will not finance activities to actively reduce
water shocks in river catchments, and to simplify the objectives and outcome, the revised
project development objective (PDO) is "to improve management of water and forest
resources in selected districts." Consequently, the Results Framework has been adjusted
to better measure the revised PDO, as follows: (i) replacing indicators for which baselines
could not be established within the first two years of implementation (e.g. reduction of
sediment load); and (ii) changing some indicators to improve their alignment to the
revised PDO. As per the request of the GoK, the restructured project agreements will
cover: (i) the revision and simplification of the PDO; (ii) a revision of the results
framework (which includes changes to outcome indicators); (iii) reallocation of about
21% of project funds to allow coverage of financing gaps in irrigation investments and
underestimated costs in technical consultancies, and to carry out sedimentation control
and water flow regulation infrastructure investments; and (iv) deletion of two dated
covenants.

3. Project Description
The proposed restructured project will retain four components: (i) Water Resource
Management and Irrigation; (ii) Management of Forest Resources; (iii) Livelihood
Investments in the Upper Tana Catchment; and (iv) Management and Monitoring and
Evaluation. The first two components support the legal and institutional reforms
contained in recent legislation, as well as investments in catchment areas. The third
component provides assistance to communities participating in management of natural
resources. The fourth component provides managerial oversight and monitoring and
evaluation for the project. Changes in components or sub-components are intended to
address implementation delays while retaining the general project design. The
adjustments focus on: (i) modifying expenditure categories within components/sub-
components, either by reducing scope or enabling Implementing Agencies to implement
activities directly rather than through community driven development (CDD) approaches
only, thereby speeding up project implementation on the ground; and (ii) shifting
resources to better align the project to institutional priorities (e.g. water allocation/quality
monitoring and control, climate change). In addition, and in acknowledgment of the need
to engage with indigenous peoples (IPs) in the Cherangany Hills, changes in project
intervention will cover this area.

 The following section describes the project activities by component.

 Component 1 - Water Resource Management and Irrigation (USD44.5 m). Water is one
of Kenya’s key natural resources upon which it depends for development and growth.
Over the past several years the Government of Kenya (GOK) undertook a far-reaching
program of reform in the water sector which resulted in the promulgation of the 2002
Water Act. This has substantially improved the country#s potential to manage its water
resources but the effectiveness of the reform program depends on the ability to
implement the principles of the new Act. The key areas of implementation which this
project supports are the following: (i) Strengthening the capacity of the Water Resource
Management Authority (WRMA), with direct investments in the Upper Tana Catchment,
such as erosion control and terracing, small to medium water storage investments as well
as improvement of on-farm agronomic practices; and (ii) Consolidation of irrigation
reforms and investments, including the development of a new irrigation infrastructure in
the Lower Nzoia and rehabilitation of existing structures in the Mwea irrigation scheme.

 Component 2 - Management of Forest Resources (USD22.4 m). With the passage of the
Forest Act in 2005, Kenya is advocating a major shift away from exclusive government
conservation and management of forest resources towards greater joint management with
local communities and the private sector for the protection and sustainable use of forests.
This would require improved forest governance and participation and investment by
private sector stakeholders. This approach is consistent with the wider and ongoing
reforms in related sectors such as water resources. To assist the Ministry of Forestry and
Widlife (MoFW), and the newly established Kenya Forest Service (KFS), in carrying out
these reforms, the project will provide: (i) assistance in creating a transparent and
accountable regulatory and institutional framework; and (ii) targeted support to
implement the Forest Act. Investments are expected to complement activities already
undertaken in the sector and in critical watersheds that have involved partnerships by the
Bank with FAO, USAID and the Government of Finland. Foremost among the needs
covered in these activities are: (i) Supporting Forest Sector institutional reforms to assist
the GOK with the reforms necessary to transform the Forest Department into a semi-
autonomous KFS at national level; (ii) Enabling community participation and benefit
sharing, providing assistance to identify and prioritize an array of partnership models to
implement the legislative framework and improve benefit sharing; and (iii) Community
and private sector investment in commercial forestry to strengthen institutional support
services for the creation of an enabling environment for community and private sector
involvement in development and management of production forests.

  Component 3 - Livelihood Investments in the Upper Tana Catchment (USD6.2 m).
Using a CDD approach, proposals are sought from communities in the catchment to
invest in livelihood enhancing micro-projects which support the natural resource base.
For example, opportunities to establish afforestation schemes in the watersheds,
development of private sector/community partnerships for timber, fuelwood and pulp
production, production and sale of seedlings, introduction of productivity-enhancing
techniques of agro-forestry or conservation farming, and other investments in farm
agriculture development are considered.

 Component 4 - Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (USD4.9 m). The
component provides the resources necessary for effective management and monitoring of
the project. Management of the tasks undertaken by the two line ministries and their
respective organizations is mainstreamed.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is implemented at several levels where the environmental and social
safeguards frameworks are applied. At the national level, the legal framework for
environmental safeguards is primarily based on the 2002 Water Act, the 2005 Forest Act,
and the Lands Policy, coupled with the associated National Environment Management
and Coordination Act of 1999. These policies cover institutional, financial, and technical
aspects and arrangements for ensuring environmentally and socially sustainable
management of natural resources. The overall project has been designed to support this
framework, including some sub-project activities at the basin, catchment, sub-catchment
like flood plains and gazetted forests, and community levels.

 In particular for social safeguards, the Lands Policy recognizes the rights of
communities, forest dwellers, pastoralists, hunter and gatherers and other vulnerable
groups. These continue to be addressed in the proposed restructured project through CDD
approaches. The other areas of coverage include: (i) participatory catchment
management; (ii) improved governance of water resources and irrigation schemes; (iii)
consolidation of irrigation investments and reforms; (iv) building capacities of river basin
authorities, such as the MoWI, the WRMA (including Water Resource User Associations
- WRUAs), National Irrigation Board (including Irrigation Water Users Associations -
IWUAs), and the KFS (including Community Forest Associations - CFAs); (v) control
measures to ecosystem degradation; and (vi) establishment of environmental flow
requirements.

 To improve project implementation with respect to OP4.10 and OP4.12, the following
measures have been agreed to during the January 2011 restructuring mission: (i)
preparation of VMGPs (advancing the IPPF into specific plans) and a Process Framework
(PF); and (ii) providing technical assistance to facilitate the establishment and operation
of an Inter-Ministerial Task Force on Lands and Resource Rights, to be chaired by the
Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife, in liaison with relevant key ministries such as Ministry
of Lands and the Offices of the President and Prime Minister. Rather than developing a
National Resettlement Policy, the project will support the work of the Task Force,
facilitating the provision of inputs into the ongoing review of laws and regulations as part
of the Constitution Implementation process to ensure that land tenure and user rights are
being taken into account.

 At the sub-national level, the project will involve construction of some small to medium
sized water storage structures and check dams in the Upper Catchment of the Tana River,
which is Kenya#s largest river, and supplies water to the hydroelectric dams and is a key
source of Nairobi#s main water and electricity supply. In addition, the project will also
rehabilitate the Mwea irrigation schemes and develop a new 3,500 ha schemein the lower
catchment of River Nzoia. Other areas in the Western Province, particularly where they
relate to water resources and forestry management, include Mt. Elgon, Kakamega,
Cherangany Hills, Nandi Hills, and Lower Nzoia Catchment. In the forest areas,
especially in Mt. Elgon and Cherangany Hills, there are possible relocations of forest
dwellers and/or restrictions of access to forest resources, some of whom have already
been relocated in the past to nearby glades.

 The project intervention areas include the following districts: Kiambu, Thika,
Murang#a, Nyeri, Kirinyaga, Laikipia, Nyandarua, Mbeere, Machakos, Mt. Elgon, West
Pokot, Kakamega, Vihiga, Butere Mumias, Lugari, Bungoma, Busia, Uasin Gishu, Trans
Nzoia, Keiyo, Nandi North, Nandi South, Marakwet, Ugunja, Siaya, Bunyala, Kirinyaga
East, Mwea East and Mwea West.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
   Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
   Ms Junko Nishikawa (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no changes in the safeguards policies triggered by the Project. The 2007 Project
Appraisal Document (PAD) and Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (ISDS) classified the
project as Category B since the investments will be of a small or medium sized nature,
with environmental, human health and safety, and transboundary impacts, that can be
easily identified and mitigated. Despite the complexities in addressing issues related to
vulnerable Indigenous Peoples, restricted access to resources, and possibly, involuntary
resettlement, a change in category is not considered warranted at this time.

  Overall, the set of project investments suggests no critical environmental issues. An
environment and social management framework (ESMF) outlines the screening for sub-
projects and identifies potential environmental and social impacts. The ESMF addresses
several safeguards policies as follows: (i) OP4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is
triggered and mitigation measures are included in the design of sub-projects, based on
completed environmental impact analysis (EIA), and as applicable, environment
management plans (EMPs); (ii) OP4.36 (Forests) applies and actions to reduce forest
destruction due to encroachment and resulting loss of water, non-timber forest products,
timber, and cultural values and forest management are core activities under the
restructured project; (iii) OP4.04 (Natural Habitats) applies and mitigation measures
covering the natural habitats in two catchments, including the Aberdares and Lake
Victoria catchment areas and flood plain management are in place; (iv) OP4.09 (Pest
Management) applies but is not triggered, and guidelines for pesticide use were
developed even though it is anticipated that pesticide use will be minimal or non-existent;
(v) OP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) is triggered and specific mitigation measures
are incorporated in the ESMF and covered in construction contracts of infrastructure
works; and (vi) OP4.37 (Safety of Dams) is not triggered since there are no new capital
investments in large scale dams. At the same time, some of the subprojects (such as
irrigation and water storage infrastructure as well as CDD activities), may have localized
adverse environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas
for which specific environment management plans (EMPs) will be developed based on
the ESMF guidelines. The ESMF was disclosed in the Bank’s InfoShop on January 10,
2007.

  The social safeguards policies triggered are OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) and OP4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement. The impacts on indigenous peoples (vulnerable and
marginalized groups), namely the Ogiek and Sengwer/Cherangany, who reside or use
resources, in and around forest areas in Mt. Elgon and Cherangany Hills will be
addressed under OP4.10. Since the number of villages and indigenous peoples
(vulnerable and marginalized groups) affected have not been determined at the time of
the PAD (in 2006), an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) was disclosed in
the Bank’s InfoShop on January 10, 2007. The IPPF referred mainly to activities under
the forest component. However, in retrospect, the IPPF posed a number of
implementation challenges. It included a number of undertakings that would require
significant policy interventions and multi-agency actions regarding ancestral and land
rights, that were beyond the remit of the project to implement and that could not
realistically be completed within the time horizon of the project, particularly in light of
the delays that have occurred in project implementation. Specifically, the IPPF included
three commitments which the project was not designed to implement: (i) a commitment
to hasten the provision of titles for land presently occupied and used by these
communities in the Project areas, including support for necessary steps (such as land
survey and demarcation, registration, and documentation) to ultimately provide IPs in the
Project area with letters of allotment, group ranch titles, etc.; (ii) a commitment to
establish a comprehensive strategy to rehabilitate the livelihoods of evicted indigenous
peoples to the level of December 30, 2002; and (iii) a commitment for the Project to offer
specific assistance within the land restitution process to indigenous peoples to claim all
lands over which indigenous peoples have lost control between 1895 and December 30,
2002. In accordance with the IPPF, the restructured project will support preparation and
implementation of what would be equivalent to Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) in
Kenya, called Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Plans (VMGPs) -- [NOTE: Given
sensitivities with respect to the term Indigenous Peoples in Kenya the new Constitution
of Kenya uses the term "vulnerable and marginalized groups" (VMGs) Since adoption of
the Constitution in 2010, the GoK has requested that project instruments related to the
implementation of OP 4.10 use the constitutionally-sanctioned terminology. OP 4.10
contemplates that different terminology may be applied in different countries without
affecting the application or substance of the policy. It states "Indigenous Peoples may be
referred to in different countries by such terms as indigenous ethnic minorities;
aboriginals, hill tribes, minority nationalities, scheduled tribes, or tribal groups."]

 The VMGPs would include livelihood and CDD types of programs, building upon a
Social Assessment (SA) that has already been completed in June 2010. Consultations
during preparation of the VMGPs will include explicit discussion and explanation of the
fact that it is now clear that the project will not be able to support the measures
mentioned above. It should be noted that these measures, while desirable on their own
account, were not clearly related to the mitigation of anticipated project impacts
 Under OP4.12, a separate Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed in
January 10, 2007 since the construction of a new irrigation scheme in Lower Nzoia may
involve the involuntary resettlement of households for which necessary programs,
including compensation and livelihood restoration, will be provided. In addition, the RPF
applied to possible relocation of forest dwellers into areas outside of gazetted forests.
The RPF has been updated and re-disclosed in the Infoshop on May 31, 2011 and in-
country on June 3, 2011. When relocation and displacement are to be undertaken, the
RPF provides the guidelines for development of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The
restructured project will re-disclose a stand-alone Process Framework (PF) currently
being consulted upon, which was originally included in the 2007 RPF. The PF, as a
separate safeguards document, provides guidelines for dealing with possible restrictions
of access to forest resources and describes an approach for management of sustainable
forest uses by vulnerable and marginalized groups (Indigenous Peoples) in and around
the Cherangany Hills and Mt. Elgon areas.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are three potential environmental and social impacts that would need to be
managed and monitored carefully under the restructured project. The first is the increase
in the influx of migrants from other areas that can be stimulated by the project once some
infrastructure and development programs are started. These migrants would increase the
already high land and population pressures in the project areas, which could lead to
further deforestation and degradation. The increased influx of migrants into the fragile
watersheds could also lead to occupation of steep hills for agricultural production, which
could increase soil erosion rates. The restructured project will ensure there are sufficient
measures for catchment rehabilitation and sustainable land/water management programs
integrated into social and economic investments in the project areas.

 The second set of impacts have to do with unintended consequences of the new Forest
Act which envisages not only the establishment of a semi-autonomous forest service but
also promotes greater involvement for the private sector and communities in the
management of plantations and natural forests. Together with the potential lifting of the
existing logging ban, this may result in increased pressures on forest resources. It is
therefore critical to ensure that any harvesting (while not financed by the project) is being
done according to management plans based on agreed and recognized forest management
standards.

 The third set of impacts are those occurring in directly affected forest communities, such
as encroachments, restricted access, and weakness in conduct of free, prior, and informed
consultations. There are underlying tensions and conflicts between the KFS and forest
dwellers and encroachers which have affected project implementation, including alleged
evictions and inhibitive measures toward settlers inside demarcated forest areas*.. These
have been the subject of extensive discussions and correspondence between the Bank,
KFS and indigenous communities. In a letter dated April 7, 2011, the Bank required
written assurance from the GOK confirming that no further evictions of people from
forests in the project areas will be carried out until applicable safeguard instruments
satisfactory to the Bank (including a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan, Process
Framework and, where displacement is envisaged, a Resettlement Action Plan) have been
developed and disclosed. A response from the Ministry of Finance (dated April 27,
2011) has been received confirming that no further evictions of people from forests in the
project areas will be carried out until a Process Framework or Resettlement Action Plan,
as required, has been put in place. Throughout these events, the Bank Task Team: (i)
engaged in discussions, led by the Country Director in Nairobi, with high-level GoK
officials (organized by the Ministry of Finance) specifically on issues related to
indigenous peoples; and (ii) organized enhanced field supervision missions, which started
in 2009 (the latest in May 2011), including free, prior and informed consultations
involving numerous meetings and focus groups in the affected areas.

  The risk of lack of free, prior, and informed consultations. Because the restructured
project will deal with policy and local level types of interventions, community
consultations will be important. These include conduct of intensive field visits, village
meetings, and focus groups, and strengthening of the CFAs and user groups.
Implementing agencies are currently elaborating a project’s communication strategy,
including practical guidelines specifying steps and procedures for ensuring the process of
free, prior, and informed consultations is undertaken in a culturally appropriate, gender
sensitive, and inter-generationally inclusive manner. In addition, in order to address
observed communications challenges by indigenous communities (vulnerable and
marginalized groups), such as lack of and/or delays in information flow as well as
incidents of distortion of information by "gate keepers", the project has established
Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Coordinating Committees to formalize the
communications channels with communities based on the recommendations in the Social
Assessment. Furthermore, to address the risk of deprivation, the restructured project
proposes development of VMGPs that will include specific activities for participatory
livelihood enhancement and services delivery.

 Finally, the RPF and the stand-alone PF address the risks associated with displacement,
including potential restrictions of access to forest resources. The processes for ensuring
that adequate mitigation measures, such as Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in cases of
relocation of people and assets, will be followed are defined in the RPF.

 * The 2005 Forest Act prohibits residing or erecting any structure inside a gazetted
forest without a license, permit or a management agreement issued under the Act.
Another focus of tension concerns earlier displacement of some indigenous groups which
occurred before the project, but which has emerged as a prominent issue in the post-2008
election violence in Kenya.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The sub-project activities will be assessed in accordance with procedures for
environmental and social screening as defined in the ESMF (2006). This screening
process will allow project proponents at central and district levels to identify, plan, and
mitigate any potential adverse impacts, where needed, by conducting environmental and
social impact assessments. Mitigation measures in the ESMF (2006) include proposing
design modifications or alternatives that take into consideration the environmental and
social criteria.

  To achieve the expected outcomes, the restructured project will introduce some changes
in Components 1 and 2, but the major changes will be in Component 2 where three
enhancements related to social safeguards, under the existing activities, are proposed.
First, the project will assist the government in carrying out a livelihood and rural
development program, especially for indigenous forest communities. This program will
be part of the project#s VMGP which government will adopt as part of a community
driven development approach. In 2009, the government completed a Task Force Report
for the Embobut Forest (part of the Cherangany Hills Ecosystem), and which described
the types of livelihoods and social services to be provided to relocated households in sites
near forests. In 2010, the project also completed a Social Assessment (SA) of forest
communities in the Cherangany Hills and Mt. Elgon forests, and a needs assessment, for
the design of community support programs. Second, technical assistance, as originally
planned under the project for formulation of a strategy to improve forest management,
will be expanded to cover integration of guidelines for vulnerable and marginalized
communities, which is the term adopted by the government, consistent with the new
Kenyan constitution. Third, the restructured project will have the opportunity to
strengthen the decentralized structure of community forest associations and user groups.
In this context, together with the other components dealing with water resources
management, and irrigation, the restructured project will have an overall impact on the
country’s participatory approach to sustainable development and poverty reduction
programs.
  Comprehensive land rights and access issues that are related to implementation of the
VMGPs, RPF, and PF go beyond the forestry sector and the mandate of forest sector
institutions (MoFW and KFS), and the remit and time-horizon of the project. While the
project will make targeted contributions to these issues through the preparation of
relevant safeguards instruments, a more comprehensive resolution of land issues will
need to be addressed as part of the overall GoK-Bank dialogue. In this context, it also
has become clear that the preparation of a National Resettlement Policy (as anticipated at
project appraisal) cannot be delivered through the project. However, the restructuring
will support the GoK through the testing of tools and instruments which would help to
strengthen its capacity towards developing country systems to deal with these issues in
the future.This is important, as it is evident that conflicts over access to, and use of, forest
land will only become more prominent.
  With this in mind, it is important that the proposed set-up and operationalization of the
Inter-ministerial Task Force to continue the land tenure and legacy related commitments,
alluded in the IPPF is driven by GoK. The Bank#s role will be to facilitate the logistical
support, such as providing financing for dedicated Technical Assistance at the ministerial
level.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The measures taken by the GoK and project implementation units to address safeguards
related issues include: (i) completion and disclosure of relevant safeguards documents
which include participatory programs for livelihood and services for the Sengwer/
Cherangany and Ogiek Indigenous Peoples; (ii) dissemination and consultations on
safeguards issues and programs, in particular, appropriately conducted free, prior, and
informed consultations as defined under OP4.10; and (iii) recruitment of environment
and social specialists in the implementation agencies. As summarized in Table 1, the
project has prepared and disclosed the following safeguards documents: (i)
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF); and (iii) Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) The
mitigation measures specified under operational policies on Natural Habitats, Forests, and
Physical Cultural Resources are covered under the ESMF. In compliance with OP7.50, a
notification was sent to the Nile Basin Council of Ministers.

  Under OP4.10, VMGPs will be developed, including participatory programs for
livelihood and services benefitting Sengwer/Cherangany and Ogiek peoples under the
restructured project. A PF, which is already covered in the existing RPF, will also be re-
disclosed as a stand-alone document to cover guidelines affecting people with restrictions
of access to forest resources.

 The livelihood investments provided under the NRMP will be linked to the
decentralization agenda, provided for in Kenya#s new Constitution and the Bank#s
ongoing dialogue on a country wide program to provide support to marginalized
areas.This will not only help in leveraging support for the sustainable management of
natural resources, but activities under the project are expected to guide and encourage
GoK to use CDD type investments. These will be important when seeking longer-term
solutions for dealing with scarce land resources given population pressure and increasing
degradation of the natural resource base in the country.
 Monitoring, auditing and reporting requirements, covering both biophysical and socio-
economic parameters, at each stage of the restructured project#s implementation are
already described in the ESMF and RPF. More detailed activities and mitigation
measures will be applied to specific sub-components, as appropriate, through
development of EMPs and RAPs; chance finds procedures in contracts for infrastructure
and works; specific activities and support under the VMGPs, and updated guidelines on
access to forest resources in the PF. Measures required for the implementation of the
various safeguards related activities, including capacity building and training, are
budgeted and conducted as part of the restructured project#s core activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include, but not limited to, national and local government
authorities, NGOs and CBOs active in the project intervention areas, target communities
including indigenous communities (vulnerable and marginalized groups), the private
sector, and development partners. These mechanisms will help in mapping the
settlements, analyzing their current status and issues thereof, and drawing future course
of actions.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   11/09/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               11/22/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                01/10/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   07/07/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               06/03/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                05/31/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   11/09/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               11/22/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                01/10/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The safeguards documents are being re-disclosed as follows: updated RPF (stand-alone
from joint RPF with WKCDD project); PF section in the RPF re-disclosed as stand-alone
document after completion of new consultations consistent with free, prior and informed
consultations.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification              N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christian Albert Peter                    05/10/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa                       06/03/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi                           06/03/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz                  05/16/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     06/10/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough               06/06/2011
  Comments: Cleared
