                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                         Report No.: 84359
I. Basic Information
Date updated: January 24, 2014
1. Basic Project Data
                                            Project ID: P148881
 Country: South Asia
                                            Additional Project ID (if any): P147957
 Project Name: Bangladesh Trade and Transport Facilitation Studies RETF
 Task Team Leader: Diep Nguyen-van Houtte
 Estimated Appraisal Date: January 29,      Estimated Approval Date: January 30, 2014
 2014
 Managing Unit: SASDT                       Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                            Financing RETF (Small Grants)
 Sector: Transport (70%), Trade (30%)
 Theme: Regional Integration (25%), Trade (25%), Transport (50%)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 Other financing amounts by source:
 RETF, DFID (US$ m)             4.999
 Total (US$ m)                  4.999
 Environmental Category: A
 Simplified Processing: Simple [ X ]      Repeater [ ]
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [ X ]
 or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The development objective is to support analysis of institutional and management constraints
related to trade and transport facilitation, and to support the preparation of potential
investments to facilitate national and regional trade and transport for Government and
Development Partner support.

3. Project Description

This activity is linked to the Bank-Executed South Asia Eastern Corridor Programmatic
Trade and Transport Facilitation TA (P147957), and is an essential component of the NLTA
program. The goal of the program is to improve the regional transport network and logistics
performance, and increase intra-regional trade and cooperation in the Eastern sub-region of

                                         Page 1 of 11
South Asia, comprising Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, and selected states in India's Northeast
region. Third-country trade and connectivity aspects with East Asia will also be supported.

This Recipient-Executed Trust Funded (RETF) Project will fund the following studies.
Technical assistance will be incorporated in the terms of references for the consultants
conducting the studies as needed.
  1. IWT Dredging: Strategic prioritization of IWT routes, and dredging feasibility and
     design study for prioritized IWT routes (US$2.7 million, Projected Completion Phase 1
     December 2014, Phase 2 June 2015).
  2. Improvement of Sea Ports: Feasibility and design study for Karnafuli Container
     Terminal (KCT) at Chittagong (US$0.6 million, Projected Completion December
     2014).
  3. Thegamukh LCS Development: Feasibility, design and safeguards studies for
     Thegamukh (and possibly other LCS/land ports) Land Customs Station (US$0.3
     million, Projected Completion December 2014).
  4. Chittagong Hill Tracts Connectivity: Feasibility study of route options to connect
     Thegamukh and Chittagong Port, including environmental and social screening and
     alternatives analysis, followed by detailed designs of selected option (US$.4 million,
     Projected Completion June 2015)
  5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Studies: for proposed investments or related to
     studies in Components 1, 2, and 4 (US$.7 million)
        Environmental and Social Safeguards Studies for studies/investments managed by
           Ministry of Shipping, i.e. Components 1 and 2 (safeguards studies for Component
           3 will be done as part of the technical study).
        Environmental and Social Safeguards Studies for studies/investments managed by
           LGED, i.e. Component 4
  6. PMU Capacity Support (US$.299 million)

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

Dredging of Inland Waterways and Development of River Ports

BIWTA provided a priority list of 53 Inland Water Transport (IWT) routes for dredging, and
requested assistance for acquisition of six amphibian dredgers, various support vessels,
navigational aids and development of 22 river ports. The routes and ports cover a significant
portion of Bangladesh’s inland water transport network. The total length of the requested
dredging is 3,099km and estimated volume is 341.3 million m3. This is a large number of
routes to be financed given that financing is limited. The project will therefore further
prioritize the list of routes and ports based on an economic cost-benefit analysis of the full
list, in consideration of cargo/traffic forecasts and costs associated with road transport
alternatives.     Detailed feasibility, design, hydrology/geomorphology, environmental and
social safeguard studies, as well as preparation of performance-based dredging bid packages,
will be carried out under the proposed project only for the routes on the shorter, highest-
priority list.

Karnaphuli Container Terminal

Chittagong Port Authority has requested financing for the construction of a new Container
Terminal called Karnaphuli Container Terminal (KCT) at Chittagong Port. Currently, the
general cargo is handled on Berths 1 to 12 with 6-8 meters draft. These are more than 50

                                          Page 2 of 11
years old, dilapidated, have outlived their economic life and need reconstruction. Chittagong
Port Authority (CPA) is planning to convert four of these (jetties 9-12, adjacent to CCT for a
total of 700 meters of berths) to KCT. The studies will include technical, engineering,
financial, economic, environmental and social safeguards aspects including hydrological and
morphological studies. The expected future physical works of KCT under study are listed
below:
     Old berths structure comprising RCC superstructure and piles, concrete pavements,
        quarry run base and compacted sub-base, will be dismantled and debris disposed of
        outside port limits.
     For construction, raw materials (cement, steel, aggregate and sand) will be stored in
        the area.
     Batch mixing plants, vibration hammers and other construction machinery will be
        operative within the premises.
     Dredging will be done in front of berths and in the approach channel. The dredged
        material will be deposited on side banks of the river or at the nearby low land.
     There is not expected to be additional land acquisition required. However, the present
        sheds will be dismantled and container yards with Rubber-Tire Gantry (RTGs) cranes
        will be set up.

Transport Connectivity between Rangamati/Chittagong Port and Thegamukh

There are multiple route options for connecting Chittagong Port and Thegamukh on the
border with India (Mizoram state). Although four routes including a waterway were
proposed by the Government of Bangladesh, six more alternative routes are also under
consideration. The total of ten possible routes involve a combination of roads and inland
waterways. Although “katcha? motorable roads are shown in the LGED map for the
proposed route options, only a stretch of about 12 km in Bilachari was found to have Herring
Bone Bond (HBB) roads with some old jeeps used as public transportation. According to
local residents, the rest of the routes do not have any motorable roads in any form. People use
waterway and foot trails to reach their settlements. Therefore, all potential road alignments
will require major works including greenfield road construction. Route options including
waterway stretches will involve dredging. All the routes will furthermore require numerous
water crossings.
Each route has pros and cons depending upon their purpose and use. The physical features of
all the land routes are rolling hills with limited plains, full of vegetation with some forests.
The soil geology is mostly silty clay with soft sand stone in some areas. Given the terrain and
significant earth-moving required for road construction, landslides will be a risk. Kaptai
Lake is a particularly ecologically sensitive area and will need careful treatment in the studies
to ensure impacts to natural habitats and biodiversity are properly identified and mitigated.
All of the routes furthermore pass through lands inhabited by tribal communities.
Based on available information, the likely most efficient connectivity between Chittagong
and Thegamukh is Chittagong-Ranguniya- Bangchara (Kaptai)-Chitmaran-Chakuwapara-
Bhangamurapara-Bilaichhari-Silchhari-Mitingapara         (Jurachhari)-Barkal-Chhotoharina-
Thegamukh. However, a comprehensive screening and alternatives analysis will assess all
potential options to identify the most optimal route, which will then be subject to further
detailed studies including safeguards studies.




                                           Page 3 of 11
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

     Leanne Farrell, Environmental Specialist, SASDI
     Iqbal Ahmed, Environmental Specialist, SASDI
     Akhtar Zaman, Social Development Specialist, SASDS

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                         Safeguard Policies                          Yes              No
      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
      Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
      Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
      Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
      Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                X
      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1.    Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
     Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The feasibility and preliminary design studies under the project will lead to major
investments in the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) districts, Chittagong sea port, and along
Inland Water Transport (IWT) routes and river ports across the country. The areas both north
and south of Kaptai Lake of Rangamati (in CHT), at least one of which will likely be affected
by the selected Chittagong-Rangamati-Thegamukh LCS transport connectivity route, are
particularly sensitive from an environmental perspective, especially the areas of the
Rampahar and Pablakhali Wildlife Sanctuaries. The CHT areas also have presence of tribal
peoples in their ancestral territories with distinct culture, language and livelihood practices.
These peoples will be socially impacted by the growth in transportation and commerce in that
region.
Although the studies to be conducted under this RETF project will not themselves generate
any adverse environmental or social impacts, the future infrastructure investments which are
the focus of these studies may have significant potential environmental and social impacts.
Based on these considerations, the RETF is classified as Environmental Category "A".
Classification of the TA as a Category A project will ensure that the environmental and social
studies to be carried out through the project will meet Bank safeguards standards, such that
any potential future World Bank investment project to finance any of the activities being
studied under this project would require minimal if any additional preparation-stage
environmental and social impact assessment work to ensure safeguards compliance. Full

                                              Page 4 of 11
environmental and social studies, and development of related environmental, social,
resettlement and tribal peoples action plans, will thus be conducted in accordance with World
Bank Safeguards and Government of Bangladesh policies as part of the proposed RETF.
Impact assessment and management planning through the studies will ensure that future
investments adequately avoid, minimize mitigate and/or compensate for all identified
impacts.
World Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) has been triggered to
ensure that the studies focus on avoiding, reducing, mitigating and managing adverse impacts
and enhancing positive environmental and social impacts of the potential future investments.
Significant environmental issues associated with the future potential investments relate to
dredging of prioritized IWT routes from among the 53 pre-identified routes; river and land
ports development; reconstruction of Karnaphuli Container Terminal; and establishment of
Chittagong-Rangamati-Thegamukh road connection. Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest
Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
have been triggered as precautionary measures; their applicability and necessary compliance
actions under each will be verified in the course of execution of the various studies
corresponding with each potential investment noted above. The environmental studies will
also conform to requirements for EIAs and Environmental Clearance Certificates as per
Bangladesh’s Environmental Policy (1992), Environment Conservation Act (1995),
Environment Conservation Rules (1997), as well as other applicable requirements specified
under the Wildlife Conservation (protection and safety) Act (2012) and Fisheries Policy
(1998).
The social safeguard policies -- Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) -- have been triggered, given that some of the investments which
are the focus of study are planned in areas where a significant number of tribal peoples1 live
(e.g., CHT area), and at least some of the physical works associated with various proposed
investments under study will require displacement of people and/or economic activities due
to land acquisition. The future investment activities under study would involve acquisition of
land which, in many cases, will result in displacement of people and economic activities. For
the proposed Chittagong-Rangamati-Thegamukh connectivity route, displacement is likely to
involve tribal peoples in the CHT areas. Governance and land management in the CHT area
is different from the rest of the country, so lands to be acquired for the selected route in the
CHT area will need to follow “The Chittagong Hill Tracts (Land Acquisition) Regulations,
1958?, whereas other proposed investments elsewhere in the country requiring land
acquisition would follow the “The Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property
Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance II of 1982)?. In all cases, compliance with World Bank OP 4.12
on Involuntary Resettlement, as well as additional requirements related to land acquisition for
tribal peoples as per OP 4.10 where required, will also be ensured for land acquisition and
resettlement planning.

With respect to the International Waterways policy (OP 7.50), the policy is triggered;
however, since the proposed project is only financing preparatory studies, all sites for
proposed investment are not yet known, and no investments will be financed under the
project, the project falls under the exception to the notification requirement as per

1
  Tribal peoples are tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and communities living in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and
dispersed in other plain districts in Bangladesh. They are distinct indigenous cultural groups having customary
cultural, economic, social, or political institutions separate from those of the mainstream society and culture.
They have their own indigenous language different than the mainstream Bangla language. These small groups of
peoples have similar characteristics of indigenous peoples covered under the World Bank OP 4.10.

                                                  Page 5 of 11
paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
   activities in the project area.

This project is only supporting technical assistance and studies, which will not have any
direct environmental or social impacts. However, the future large scale investments arising
out of these studies are likely to have significant impacts. The future investments overall are
expected to improve economic prospects for local communities living along or near transit
corridors and ports which are the target of the studies under this project. The Chittagong-
Rangamati-Thegamukh LCS connectivity component will eventually lead to the most
significant future impacts once developed, by opening up hitherto isolated areas in the
Chittagong Hill Tracts to development and facilitating even better connectivity with India.
This future investment, which the proposed project’s studies will help enable, will provide
long term benefits to local communities and the country as a whole by helping to reduce trade
and transport barriers in some remote upazillas (sub-districts) and between Bangladesh and
India. However, the future unplanned developments which may arise in that area following
development of the new road / inland waterway to Thegamukh may also increase stress on
sensitive ecosystems and lead to tensions with tribal communities. Other future investments
in dredging of inland waterways, upgrades and development of river ports, and development
of the Karnaphuli Container Terminal at the Chittagong Port will also result in diverse long
term positive and negative impacts associated with increased transport and port use. All of
these impacts will be analyzed through the proposed environmental and social studies under
this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The studies to be conducted in this project will explore all alternatives to avoid or minimize
adverse impacts. The environmental and social assessments for each proposed intervention
will be carried out in parallel to feasibility and design studies, so that environmental and
social considerations can be factored into design decisions as they are being made. The
studies will also cover the full range of anticipated impacts on relevant social and
environmental receptors, including as applicable, historic and cultural heritage resources,
protected areas, wildlife, sensitive and endangered species, bird migration and movement,
rare plants, fisheries and aquatic environments, wetlands, vegetation, land use, human
settlement (tribal communities and non-tribal settlers), air quality, climate, noise, landscape
and visual environment, health and safety, etc. The goal of these studies will be to identify
measures to avoid or minimize adverse impacts to the extent possible, while enhancing
positive impacts. The social assessment will also investigate the social feasibility of
investment options in terms of community engagement, land acquisition and population
displacement, and adverse impact on tribal peoples. For the Chittagong-Rangamati-
Thegamukh connectivity studies in particular, the initial feasibility analysis of the 10
potential routes will include environmental and social screening and alternatives analysis.
Once the preferred routing and basic design option(s) have been established, full
environmental and social assessment(s) will be carried out for the preferred option(s) in
parallel with further economic, technical and design analyses.




                                          Page 6 of 11
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
   assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Potential investments under study will be implemented by multiple agencies of GoB
including Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA), Bangladesh Inland Water
Transport Corporation (BIWTC), Chittagong Port Authority (CPA), Mongla Port Authority
(MPA) and Bangladesh Land Port Authority (BLPA) under MoS, and Local Government
Engineering Department (LGED) under the Ministry of Local Government, Rural
Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC). The CHT Development Board (CHTDB)
under the Ministry of Chittagong Hill Tracts Affairs (MoCHTA) will coordinate all relevant
activities affecting CHT locations. However, the MoS and LGED will be contracting out the
studies for preparation of the investments through this project, including safeguards related
studies for the intended investments.

While safeguards related work is indicated as a separate component of the proposed RETF
(Component 5), the work will be conducted in parallel to activities under each of the other
components, to ensure that relevant information for the assessments emerging from detailed
feasibility and design studies are feeding into the impact assessment and management
planning process, as well as to ensure that social and environmental aspects are being
reflected back into decisions regarding route selection (in the case of the Chittagong-
Rangamati-Thegamukh connectivity component) and design (for all other investments) so as
to avoid or minimize negative impacts wherever possible. MoS and LGED will facilitate this
coordination and ensure adequate information sharing across the consulting teams.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed for the RETF to
guide the approach to carrying out the safeguards studies. The Framework outlines additional
detail on the process and required contents each of the specific safeguards studies required, as
well as consultation and participation procedures, in order to ensure safeguard policy
compliance for the various investments being planned under Components 1 to 4 of the
project.

For studies of investments in the CHT area, resettlement planning processes will take into
account the unique governance and land management in that area, which is different from the
rest of the country. Land acquisition in the CHT area will need to follow “The Chittagong
Hill Tracts (Land Acquisition) Regulations, 1958?, while elsewhere would follow the “The
Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance II of
1982)?. The ESIAs will also include review of project impacts and required mitigation and
management measures in light of relevant national laws and policies, in addition to Bank
safeguard policies and standards.

The specific study approach for safeguards in relation to each component is outlined below.


Component 1 (Strategic prioritization of IWT routes, and dredging feasibility and design
study for prioritized IWT routes):
The main environmental issues for this component relate to the impacts of dredging on
aquatic environments, as well as selection and management of areas for disposal of dredged
material on land. Among key social issues, displacement due to land acquisition for disposal
of dredged material may be required. As the priority IWT routes are not yet selected, it is not
yet known whether any will traverse areas where tribal peoples are present, but this is a

                                           Page 7 of 11
possibility. To ensure full identification and management planning for these and other
relevant environmental and social impacts for the prioritized IWT routes once selected, a full
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and
Tribal Peoples’ Development Plan (TPDP) if required will be conducted in parallel with the
detailed feasibility and design studies. The safeguards studies will be contracted out by MoS
separately from the feasibility and design studies to an independent consultant, as required
under OP 4.01 for Category “A? projects.
Component 2 (Improvement of Sea Ports: Feasibility and design study for Karnafuli
Container Terminal (KCT) at Chittagong):
For this component, key safeguards issues relate to the Karnafuli Container Terminal
construction, which will also involve dredging and rebuilding of a section of the existing
Chittagong Port facilities. A full ESIA will be required for this proposed investment. While
no new land acquisition is expected for the Container Terminal itself, the applicability of OP
4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) will be confirmed during the detailed design stage (for
example, in case lands are required for disposal of dredged materials). If needed, a RAP will
be prepared.
Component 3 (Thegamukh LCS Development: Feasibility, design and safeguards studies for
Thegamukh (and possibly other LCS/land ports) Land Customs Station):
This component will involve planning studies for the construction of a Land Customs Station
(LCS) on a greenfield site in Thegamukh at the border with Mizoram state of India.
Environmental and social impacts are expected to be minimal, site-specific, and easily
mitigated or managed; nonetheless, an ESIA will be required to ensure adequate planning for
impact management and to ensure local residents in Thegamukh are appropriately consulted.
If required, a RAP and TPDP will also be carried out. In addition, if the borrower requests
studies for other LCSs/land ports under this component, appropriate safeguards instruments
will also be prepared as required for these additional facilities. The studies under this
component will be contracted out by MoS.
Component 4 (Chittagong Hill Tracts Connectivity: Feasibility study of route options to
connect Thegamukh and Chittagong Port, followed by detailed designs of selected option):
This component is the most sensitive from a safeguards perspective, given the social and
environmental context of the CHT as well as the more broadly transformative nature of the
new connectivity route to the region in terms of stimulating trade and facilitating market
access to what is currently a largely isolated region. The safeguards compliance process will
therefore consist of two steps:

The feasibility study consultants contracted by LGED will design and conduct environmental
and social screening for the full list of initial candidate routes under analysis, to inform the
alternative site analysis and final selection of the preferred route for Chittagong-Thegamukh
connectivity. This screening process will include, on the social side, a stakeholder analysis,
community consultations and representative household surveys using Participatory Rural
Appraisal (PRA) techniques, in order to produce a high level social and poverty baseline
characterization of the 10 routes and to characterize key social impacts and associated with
each alternative route’s development. On the environmental side, the screening should
identify important environmental and social features at every 100m within a 150m buffer
along each proposed route, as well as near possible locations of quarry and borrow sites,
materials storage sites, construction camps and associated services (water supply sources and
others), access roads, spoils disposal sites for wastes, dredge material disposal sites, and other


                                            Page 8 of 11
ancillary facilities associated with route construction. Appropriate locations for dredging and
civil works, including river bed and floodplain locations, should be identified in consideration
of social and environmental features and on the basis of feedback received during initial
consultation events.

There will be two outputs of the environmental and social screening process. First will be a
comparative environmental and social scoping report, including for each route studied: (a)
high level environmental, social and poverty baseline characterizations and stakeholder
analyses, (b) identification of key likely environmental and social impacts and sensitivities
(positive and negative) to be mitigated or enhanced, and (c) key safeguard policy as well as
national legal compliance considerations. Where possible, the comparative analysis will
highlight costs vs. benefits from an environmental and social perspective associated with
development of the alternative routes. Once the preferred route is selected for further study,
the second output will be a set of detailed draft TORs for the full ESIA, Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP), and Tribal Peoples’ Development Plan (TPDP) to be completed for the selected
route (see below).

For the selected preferred connectivity route, a separate environmental and social consulting
team will be contracted by LGED to carry out a detailed ESIA, RAP and TPDP for the
preferred route, in parallel to detailed feasibility and design studies. The scope of the studies
will also include the Thegamukh LCS and any additional land ports for which feasibility and
design work is being done under Component 3 of the project. LGED will consult with
relevant stakeholder groups on the TORs for the set of studies and make modifications as
needed based on feedback received, prior to initiation of work by the independent
consultants. The full studies will require additional baseline data collection, analysis,
consultations with local communities (including free, prior and informed consultation with
tribal communities who would be affected by future construction of the connectivity route),
and development of detailed mitigation and management plans for all negative impacts.
From an environmental perspective, key aspects of baseline assessment and impact analysis
include: (a) flora and fauna including aquatic and terrestrial for the full area of influence; (b)
landslide susceptibility in hilly areas, (c) impacts of cut and fill activities in hill and wetland
areas respectively, (d) hydrology, sedimentation and siltation characteristics of Karnaphuli
River and waterways to be dredged, (e) fish habitat and breeding areas, and (f) plan for
dredging material disposal.

Institutional capacity: MoS has not implemented any World Bank supported projects
recently but LGED has long previous experience in implementing infrastructure projects
under financing from the Bank and other donors. LGED therefore has existing knowledge of
Bank requirements on environmental and social safeguards, community participation and
gender empowerment. However, neither of these agencies has permanent resources for
environmental assessment, social development and safeguards management. Other than the
consultants’ services, additional professional resources with expertise in safeguards issues,
including environmental and social assessment and management as well as land acquisition
and involuntary resettlement planning, will be contracted by both MoS and LGED. Both of
the agencies will contract an Environmental Specialist and Social Development Specialist for
the study period to enhance their capacity in safeguards management and ensure quality
planning acceptable to the Bank. The Bank team will also review all Terms of Reference, as
well as draft and final versions of the technical studies, rigorously.



                                            Page 9 of 11
5.    Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
     disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The investment project design will be inclusive of all social groups including women,
vulnerable communities and tribal peoples. Public consultations (FGD/informal meetings)
with all stakeholders will be carried out and the nature and number of consultation, location,
and type of participants and the summary of findings will be documented. Consistent with
requirements for Category A projects, the responsible agencies for each study (MoS and
LGED) will hold consultations on the ESIAs outlined above at least twice – once prior to
finalization of the TORs, and again once draft studies are available. In addition to national
government agencies, key stakeholders to be consulted will include affected communities,
traditional tribal organizations, NGOs, port and transport labor unions, etc. For studies related
to potential investments in the CHT area which may affect tribal communities (e.g.,
Chittagong-Rangamati-Thegamukh connectivity route, inland waterway, and Thegamukh
LCS port development as applicable), free, prior and informed consultation will be carried
out with the tribal communities covering inter-generational groups.

In addition to community-level consultations, GoB will also hold regular consultations with
relevant agencies during study implementation. Particular attention will be given to the CHT
area, which is politically, socially and environmentally-sensitive. In addition to formal
administration of the government, these CHT districts have the existence of traditional
administration under the tribal rajas (monarchs), who will be regularly consulted as the
studies progress.

Summaries of the sub-project specific ESIAs and related social safeguards (resettlement and
tribal peoples) reports will be translated into local language and disclosed locally. Copies of
the full reports (in English) and the summaries (in Bangla) will be sent to all applicable
divisional / regional offices of MoS and LGED and will be made available to the public, both
in hard copy and on the agencies’ websites. The English versions will also be disclosed in
the World Bank InfoShop, once complete. The comments and the findings from the
consultation workshops, along with any other feedback received from other interested
persons and groups will be reviewed and incorporated in the final safeguards reports.


B. Disclosure Requirements

                            Disclosure Requirements                                 Date

 Environmental and Social Management Framework
     Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 yes
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 1/22/2014
     Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             1/30/2014
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                              1/29/2014




                                            Page 10 of 11
D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by           Name                            Date
Task Team Leader                  Diep Nguyen-van Houtte    January 16, 2014
                                  Leanne Farrell and
Environmental Specialist                                    January 16, 2014
                                  Iqbal Ahmed
Social Development Specialist     Akhtar Zaman              January 16, 2014
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator   Francis Fragano           January 24, 2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Karla Gonzalez Carvajal   January 16, 2014
  Comments:




                                  Page 11 of 11
