Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2011 
Report No.:  61667
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P096336 
Original Project Name: Second National 
Water Development Project 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P124486 
Project Name:  Second National Water Development Project - Additional Financing 
(IDA) 
Task Team Leader:  Michael John Webster 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (70%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to sustainable water supply and 
sanitation services in target areas and improve water resources management at the 
national level.   
 
3. Project Description 
The components to be supported under the proposed Additional Financing are as follows:  
 
#
Component A: Urban, Towns and Market Center Water Supply.  Investments and 
technical assistance in urban, towns and Market Center water supply implemented by the 
Water Boards;  
 
#
Component B: Sanitation and Hygiene.  Investments and technical assistance in urban 
and rural sanitation and hygiene promotion implemented by the Ministry of Irrigation and 
Water Development and the Water Boards;  
Page  2
#
Component C: Water Resources Management.  Technical assistance to enhance 
capacity and prepare future investments in water resources management implemented by 
the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Development;  
 
#
Component D: Sector Reforms and Program Management.  Support for sector 
reforms, capacity enhancement and program management implemented by the Ministry 
of Irrigation and Water Development; and  
 
#
Component E: Rural Water Supply.  Investments and technical assistance in rural 
water supply implemented by the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will be implemented in cities, towns, market centers and rural villages throughout 
Malawi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most of the civil works to be supported under the Additional Financing (AF) would have 
rather low and highly localized environmental impacts that would be most evident during 
the construction phase of each sub-project; examples include very small-scale land 
clearing; management of construction-related wastes; control of soil erosion and run-off 
from construction sites; noise; dust; local traffic disruption; and occupational health and 
safety. Typical civil works would include water wells (bore-holes), intake structures, 
pumping stations, water pipelines, water treatment plants, storage tanks, water provision 
kiosks, latrines, and ancillary facilities such as small office buildings, short access roads, 
and parking lots. The AF-supported civil works with potentially more significant 
environmental impacts--though still Category B--would be the (i) Lilongwe Water 
Conveyance System and (ii) Mzimba Water Supply Scheme. Both of these sub-projects 
Page  3
would involve the installation of low weirs and intake structures within relatively small 
rivers, along with pipelines to transport the abstracted water to treatment facilities. The 
AF includes funding for Environmental Impact Assessments (including social impacts) 
for both sub-projects, which would be complete d in parallel with the final engineering 
designs and publicly disclosed in advance of civil works bidding.  
 
Many of the AF-supported sub-projects would involve small-scale land acquisition and 
displacement of agricultural crops; some would also require the resettlement of small 
numbers of people, to be addressed in a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for each 
relevant sub-project. The costs of replacement land or housing, as well as cash 
compensation (where applicable), are incorporated within the budget for each relevant 
civil works sub-project. The cumulative number of households that will need to be either 
(i) compensated for lost land, crops, or other assets and/or (ii) physically relocated for all 
AF-supported civil works sub-projects is quite low; it will be estimated during appraisal.  
 
In addition to financing civil works, the AF would support pre-investment studies of 
several larger-scale water resources development projects with potentially more 
significant environmental and social impacts. These studies comprise the detailed 
engineering designs and independent Environmental (including social) Impact 
Assessments for: (i) Mombezi Dam, a proposed new water source for the city of 
Blantyre; (ii) Diamphwe Dam, a proposed new water source for the city of Lilongwe; and 
(iii) Lambilambi Dam, a proposed new water source for the city of Mzuzu. The AF does 
not include financing for the civil works to build these new dams.  
 
The additional financing intends to assist with the completion of current works, increase 
the current access to water and sanitation, and improve management or water resources 
which mimic the original project. As there are no major changes in possible project 
activities, the current RPF would be used as a guideline for water improvement activities. 
Capacity building workshops have provided training to a large number of water board 
staff throughout Malawi such that the implementing agency is well aware of the RPF, the 
importance of screening for impacts during project planning, and processes which need to 
be followed in preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan if it is determined that activities 
will require land acquisition or cause impact on assets.  
 
International Waterways:  The World Bank#s policy for Projects on International 
Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) requires that riparians on international waterways be notified of 
proposed project activities that will be carried out on a shared waterway.  For the parent 
project, the Bank, on behalf of Malawi, carried out the riparian notifications to all 
riparian countries of the Zambezi River (Mozambique, Tanzania, Angola, Botswana, 
Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe) prior to Board Approval (letters were sent in 
December 2006).  No unfavorable responses were received from any of the riparians 
based on international waterways issues.  
 
The original notification informed riparians of the proposed project to improve water 
supply services and improve water resources management throughout Malawi.  The 
notification listed the cities/towns of Blantyre, Lilongwe, Mzuzu, Kasungu, Zomba and 
Page  4
Mangochi and other towns and rural communities to be selected during project 
implementation.  Based on the calculations in the notification, the letter asserted that the 
consumptive use resulting from the project as a proportion of the river flows of the Shire 
and Zambezi Rivers is too small to measure and will not cause any appreciable harm to 
any riparian.  The notification focuses on the planned works needed to improve water 
services, but implicit in this is the need for design work for source development to be 
able to expand such services.  
 
Investments under the proposed Additional Financing will largely be in the same towns, 
and often for the same works as in the parent project (due to cost overruns).  In addition, 
the new investments proposed to be financed will all fit within the same description 
provided in the parent project notification letter.   Three new towns are being added 
(Songwe, Salima, Nsanje) and up to 2 new villages.  All settlements are located in 
catchments that are tributaries to Lake Malawi and the Lower Shire River which joins the 
Zambezi River below the Cabora Bassa Dam, and are thus covered by the original 
notification.    While the investment amount is significantly increased (from US$ 50 
million to US$120 million), and the number of beneficiaries will significantly increase 
(from 1 million to 2.2 million), the impact on the resulting abstraction on the river flows 
of the Shire and Zambezi will remain too small to measure and will not cause any 
appreciable harm to any riparian.  Therefore, further notification is not required as it is 
already covered under the original notification.  
 
The Bank staff has considered those aspects of the Project that might have an effect on 
the downstream riparians and are satisfied that the Project will not cause appreciable 
harm to the other riparians and will not be appreciably harmed by the other riparians# 
possible water use.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Due to their relatively small physical footprint and general proximity to urban or 
otherwise densely-populated areas, the AF-supported civil works are not expected to 
generate significant adverse impacts of an indirect or long-term nature.  
 
In the case of the AF-supported pre-investment studies, the terms of reference for each 
Environmental Impact Assessment will specify the need to assess induced or indirect and 
long-term impacts, in addition to the other kinds of environmental and social impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For the larger-scale sub-projects, including the Lilongwe Water Conveyance System, the 
feasibility studies compared alternative options with respect to basic project design 
(including the no-action alternative), site selection (such as location of the water intake 
and pumps), type of structure (pipeline vs. canal), and materials to be used.  
 
For the pre-investment studies of proposed larger-scale future water development 
projects, the terms of reference for each Environmental Impact Assessment will specify 
Page  5
the need for an analysis of alternatives, consistent with the requirements of: (i) the 
project's Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (ii) the Bank's 
Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4. 01); and (iii) the Malawi Government's 
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since implementation of the parent NWDP II Project began in 2008, the Borrower's 
capacity to manage the environmental and social aspects of the project has improved 
substantially. Project- supported training during 2010 on applying the World Bank's 
environmental and social Safeguard Policies has reached a critical mass of project staff, 
within the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Development as well as each of the Water 
Boards (Northern Region, Central Region, Southern Region, Blantyre, and Lilongwe). As 
a
result of this training, project staff understand better: (i) the environmental and social 
requirements of the World Bank, as well as the Malawi Government; (ii) the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that specifies the 
safeguards-related criteria and procedures that the project must follow; (iii) the use of 
Environmental and Social Screening Forms (ESSFs) as the first step in assessing the 
nature and extent of environmental and social analysis and follow-up management 
measures that will be needed for each sub-project; and (iv) the preparation of 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for those sub-projects that involve some degree of 
land acquisition, loss of crops or other assets, or physical resettlement of people. 
Additional environmental and social safeguards-related training is planned under the AF, 
particularly for District-level staff.  
 
Under the original NWDP II Project, Environmental and Social Screening Forms 
(ESSFs) were completed for subprojects involving civil works. Based on this ESSF 
screening process, small-scale Resettlement Action Plans were deemed necessary for 
several subprojects. Because of their low environmental sensitivity (based on the ESSF 
findings), none of the sub-projects already implemented under the original NWDP II 
Project was found to require its own Environmental Management Plan (EMP). However, 
all civil works contractors were expected to comply with the Environmental Guidelines 
for Contractors, as specified in Annex 6 of the NWDP II Project#s Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
For all AF-supported sub-projects involving new civil works, an expanded land area 
footprint, and/or increased water abstraction, ESSFs have been filled out, providing a 
good indication of what types of environmental and social follow-up measures are needed 
in each case. Depending on the complexity of the investment from an environmental or 
social stand point, follow-up documentation can include a RAP, Project Brief (sometimes 
required under Malawian law), Environmental Management Plan, or (for the special 
above-mentioned cases) an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA, including the social 
aspects). For eligible AF-supported sub-projects, all of these required follow-up 
documents will be completed and publicly disclosed before the start of civil works 
bidding.  
 
Page  6
The main safeguards documents that govern the implementation of the parent project as 
well as the proposed AF are the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF and RPF for the original 
NWDP II Project were prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in March 2007; they are 
still applicable and relevant to this Additional Financing. However, based on feedback 
received from the Safeguard Policies training that took place in 2010, the ESMF has been 
slightly modified, so that (i) the Environmental and Social Screening Form (ESSF) is 
easier to use and (ii) the Environmental Guidelines for Contractors include Chance Finds 
Procedures for physical cultural resources (archaeological relics, fossils, human remains, 
etc.) that might be discovered during construction activities.  The updated ESMF was 
publicly disclosed, in the World Bank#s InfoShop in Washington as well as locally 
within Malawi, on March 31, 2011.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the Regional Water Boards, Blantyre and Lilongwe Water 
Boards, District Executive Committee Members in the targeted cities, towns   and 
districts; Water User Associations, Local Operators, Ministry of Irrigation and Water 
Development, Ministry of Energy, Mines and Natural Resources/Environmental Affairs 
Department; and villagers. The ESMF was prepared during field visits in consultation 
with officials from the Water Boards, Town and District Assemblies, members of 
fishermen associations, villagers, land officers, and potentially affected persons. They 
viewed the project as very beneficial to their quality of life. Their suggestions have been 
reflected in the ESMF. The ESMF makes provisions for stakeholder consultations as part 
of the environmental and social screening process for sub-projects.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/28/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/01/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael John Webster 
04/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
04/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
04/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
