                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1100
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P143751
                            Project Name:      Second Tamil Nadu Road Sector Project (P143751)
                            Task Team          Pratap Tvgssshrk
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Dec-2014                        Estimated   20-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (50%), Infrastructure services for private
                                              sector development (30%), Managing for development r esults (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     778.20           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   478.20
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      300.00
                              Total                                                                                      778.20
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase road capacity, enhance quality of maintenance,
                           improve safety and support institutional development of the Tamil Nadu's core road network (CRN)
                           of state highways.



                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be supporting the GoTN’s broader state highway development initiative, through
                         three components: (A) Network Improvement; (B) Institutional Capacity Enhancement; and (C)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Road Safety. These are described briefly below :

                         Component A: Network Improvement (Total Cost: USD 748 mn; IBRD Loan: USD 274.45 mn):
                         The project will support the upgradation and/or maintenance of selected roads within the state’s core
                         road network, through three contracting approaches as explained below.

                         •        Upgradation and maintenance through EPC contracts (Sub-component A1): construction of
                         civil works for widening and upgrading of approximately 435 km of existing single lane/intermediate
                         lane roads of the state’s CRN, to two-lane with paved shoulders standards through EPC contracts,
                         with maintenance for a 5-year period after the construction.
                         •        Upgradation and maintenance through PPP concessions (Sub-component A2): construction
                         of civil works for widening and upgrading of approximately 165 km of existing single lane/
                         intermediate lane roads of the state’s CRN, to four-lane standards and maintenance during the
                         concession period, with the option of tolling; and
                         •        Maintenance through Multi-year Performance-based Maintenance Contracts (Sub-
                         component A3) of approximately 600 km of SH for a 5-year period.

                         In all the upgradation works, the design and implementation is aimed at achieving substantially better
                         road safety outcomes, with provisions that go beyond the 3-star iRAP and with particular attention to
                         the needs of the vulnerable road users through site-specific design interventions. Apart from
                         supporting a portion of the cost of the civil works, this component is also envisaged to support the
                         associated activities including (a) transaction advisory, supervision of quality control, and advisory
                         services; and (b) land acquisition, resettlement & rehabilitation, shifting of utilities.

                         Component B: Institutional Capacity Enhancement (Total Cost: USD 11 mn; IBRD Loan: USD 8.8
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mn): This component is aimed at assisting fine-tuning and implementation of the Institutional
                         Capacity Enhancement Plan (ICEP) developed by the HD and approved by GoTN. The Plan
                         envisages policy level actions and commitments to improve both mobilization and allocation of
                         resources in the road sector and operational level initiatives to enhance enterprise-level efficiency
                         through (i) process improvements; (ii) organizational restructuring; (iii) sustaining investments in IT-
                         ICT infrastructure; and (iv) Training & Knowledge Management. The assistance from the component
                         will be used for goods and consulting services to implement the operational level initiatives and to
                         establish and operate an information system for monitoring achievements w.r.t. policy commitments
                         and institutional capacity and implementation effectiveness.

                         Component C: Road Safety (Total Cost: USD 20 mn; IBRD Loan: USD 16 mn): In addition to the
                         provisions for better road safety on project-supported upgradation roads, the project will support
                         achievement of improved road safety at two levels.

                         First, at the state level, the capacity of the state to achieve better road safety would be enhanced
                         through development and implementation of a comprehensive road strategy. Specifically, this sub-
                         component will support stakeholder departments engaged in the road safety agenda, viz.,
                         Transportation, Police, Public Works, Health and Education. Focusing on areas/gaps identified
                         during the recent review of the state’s capacity for managing road safety, this sub-component would
                         support inter alia (a) awareness and promotion, results framework, monitoring & evaluation,


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         research, training and knowledge transfer, through advisory assistance, (b) better enforcement and
                         compliance (Police and Transport) and, (c) integrating the RADMS with the road management
                         system and the health system and mainstreaming it, through complementary investments. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activity will be implemented through the Road Safety Management Cell and the Road Safety
                         Executive Leadership Group - the existing multi-disciplinary institutional arrangement for better
                         coordination and focus on the road safety agenda.

                         Second, at a district-level and a corridor-level, the project will support design and implementation of
                         an initiative to demonstrate how multiple stakeholder departments engaged in road safety could
                         achieve better outcomes through coordinated efforts and investments. The interventions will include
                         effective management of roadside safety issues, speed management, risk-targeted patrol plans,
                         campaigns, promotion of helmet-wearing, trauma services etc. This approach focusing on a single
                         district is expected to achieve better coordination between various stakeholder departments as these
                         departments are organized as district level offices and come under the administrative remit of the
                         District Collector (administrative head of the District).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in different parts of Tamil Nadu spread across several districts. The
                         phase-I upgrading roads (427 Km) are spread across 9 districts (Thiruvannamalai, Kanchipuram,
                         Cuddalore, Vllipuram, Namakal, Salem, Virduhanagar, Tirunelveli andTuticorin) and some of these
                         districts are underdeveloped. The project will help in improving road network and thus enable the
                         people of these districts to have improved access to markets, schools, health infrastructure, etc.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         I. U. B. Reddy (GSURR)
                         Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The potential environmental concerns in the
                          BP 4.01                                             project, depending on the choice of project
                                                                              corridors and final alignments, are expected to
                                                                              include range of environmental impacts including
                                                                              loss of vegetation, forest land, impacts on cultural
                                                                              and community properties, impacts on water
                                                                              bodies and natural drainage areas. The project
                                                                              implementation also would lead to temporary
                                                                              environmental impacts during construction stage.
                                                                              The expected impacts of the project was to be
                                                                              studied thoroughly with appropriate management
                                                                              measures and thus the application OP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             As of now, based on the detailed Environmental
                                                                              Assessment, there are no impacts on designated
                                                                              Natural Habitats including National Parks,
                                                                              Sanctuaries, etc. However, during implementation
                                                                              of Phase - II (PPP roads) of the project, some of
                                                                              the project corridors could be passing within 10
                                                                              km radius of the existing Natural Habitats. In


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                                                         anticipation of potential impacts, OP/BP 4.04 has
                                                                         been triggered and the provisions under the policy
                                                                         have been integrated into the EMF for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The proposed project does not involve in any kind
                                                                         of commercial exploitation of the forests and also
                                                                         do not envisage commercial logging. The forest
                                                                         diversion for the project is limited to 0.5Ha of
                                                                         forest land during implementation of Phase I
                                                                         (EPC Roads) roads improvement. Necessary
                                                                         provisions have been integrated for compensatory
                                                                         afforestation as well as double the land diverted
                                                                         towards forestation. To this effect EMP for the
                                                                         Phase I EPC roads has documented the details.
                                                                         Also, to factor expected impacts, if any, during
                                                                         Phase-II of the project, the Environmental
                                                                         Management Framework (EMF) for the Project
                                                                         has been suitably designed with necessary
                                                                         environmental management provisions.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Not applicable as the proposed project do not
                                                                         apply pesticides
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           As observed during preparation, the road
                         BP 4.11                                         corridors in TN pass through areas rich in
                                                                         physical cultural resources. The project
                                                                         implementation, depending on choice of
                                                                         corridors, could lead to potential impacts on
                                                                         religious structures, historical and archeological
                                                                         sites. Thus the applicability of OP 4.11 on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Physical and cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The tribal population of Tamil Nadu is only about
                                                                         0.8 million and constitutes just 1 percent of the
                                                                         total population and is scattered across the State.
                                                                         Further, during social impact assessment and
                                                                         consultations, it was not observed the presence of
                                                                         people in the project area who exhibited
                                                                         characteristics such as those distinct from others,
                                                                         speak separate language from dominate
                                                                         population, having separate institutions and close
                                                                         attachment to the forest, etc. The project roads do
                                                                         not pass through those few tribal areas that exist
                                                                         in the state. Therefore, the policy on Indigenous
                                                                         people is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The proposed roads under Network Improvement
                         4.12                                            component (about 600 Km) involves substantial
                                                                         private land acquisition and displacement of
                                                                         people . A project specific Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) has been prepared describing



                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                                                                                 the process for carrying out impact assessment,
                                                                                 census surveys, consultations and proposing
                                                                                 mitigation measures to different types of impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 The provisions in this RPF are based on India's
                                                                                 new LARR Act- 2013 and the World Bank's
                                                                                 Operational Policy 4.12, on Involuntary
                                                                                 Resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              Not applicable

                            Projects on International        No                  Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable as the project is not located in any
                            7.60                                                 disputed areas

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The nature of potential environmental issues assessed as part of project preparation, vary at
                              different locations of the proposed project interventions. While the safeguard issues of phase-I of
                              the project (EPC roads) are assessed, the issues relating to Phase-II (PPP roads) are currently being
                              assessed. The project implementation would result in range of impacts including (as noted in EAs
                              for Phase-I project corridors): (a) loss of roadside trees on an average, about 44 trees per kilometer
                              of varying girth size; (b) though limited, diversion of 0.5 Ha. forest land during Phase - I of the
                              project; (c) impacts on water bodies and natural drainage areas; (d) impacts on community/
                              common property resources; and (e) impacts on several sensitive receptors along the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                              project corridors. Though mitigable, some of these impacts are significant in nature requiring
                              detailed Environmental Management Plans. The project implementation also would lead to
                              temporary environmental impacts during construction stage. Given this, the proposed project
                              triggered: “Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)”; considering expected impacts on cultural
                              properties, the Physical “Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)” policy; although there is no impact on
                              Wildlife and Natural Habitats, in anticipation of possible impacts during Phase-II, “Natural
                              Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)” policy; and “Forests (OP/BP 4.36)” policy.

                              Social Safeguard Issues and Impacts: The Road Network Improvement component involves
                              supporting the up gradation of about 600 Km of roads which involves widening, strengthening
                              and reconstruction of existing carriageways. 3 out of 14 road sections will be undertaken through
                              PPP concessions which involve widening to four lanes from existing intermediate or two lanes.
                              There will also be some bypasses in these road packages. All these proposed activities will trigger
                              social safeguard issues such as loss of land, houses/ shops, community infrastructure, etc. It is
                              assessed that substantial private land acquisition and displacement of families- both title and non-
                              title holders will be affected. The impacts include about 150 hectares of private land acquisition
                              and displacement of about 2,000 families involving loss of shelter or livelihood. In addition, about
                              7000 families will suffer minor losses such as loss of narrow stretch of land or a small portion of a
                              house or shop. Out of total affected families, 53% are title holders and the remaining 47% are
                              non- title holders consisting of squatters or encroachers. The socio-economic characteristics of the


                                                                         Page 5 of 12
                           major affected households in phase-I (EPC roads) roads include: 54% percent of the major
                           impacted residential structures are temporary in nature, followed by 21 percent that are semi-
                           permanent in nature and 24 percent are permanent in nature. About ten percent of project affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                           households are headed by women and the average size of the project affected household is 4.1 or
                           says 4 members. 371 households belong to vulnerable households consisting of women headed
                           households, those living below poverty line, households with disabled members and schedule
                           caste members.

                           The above described impacts and characteristics will have implementation issues related to
                           coordination of land acquisition and resettlement implementation with procurement and civil
                           works time table, timely availability of alternative resettlement sites, effective grievance redressal
                           mechanism, availability of budget from counterpart funding, resistance from the affected land
                           owners for compensation and resettlement assistance as well as impacts to structures and wet
                           lands.

                           The private land acquisition will be carried out using Tamil Nadu Highway Act, 2001, which
                           requires amendment to incorporate the compensation and R&R provisions under India’s new
                           LARR Act, 2013. In this context, GoTN has now proposed to pay compensation as per the new
                           Act in two installments as follows. First, an interim payment at the minimum rate stipulated in the
                           new Act and the second and final payment (the difference) once the multiplier factor is decided by
                           State Government. Accordingly, a Government Order will be issued.

                           There are few outstanding social safeguard issues of previous project. These consist of: (i) issue
                           of titles (Patta) to 11 houses and 10 shops; ( ii) electricity connection to 5 houses and ( iii) R&R
                           cash assistance to those who have not approached to the courts for enhancement of compensation
                           among those who have received compensation under TN Highway Act. The client has confirmed
                           that these pending resettlement issues have been substantially resolved and the remaining are
                           being acted upon and will be completed soon.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to improve road corridors by strengthening and widening which could
                           result in road safety issues especially relating to community crossings. This aspect is expected to
                           be effectively addressed through road safety component under the project. Other than this, there
                           are no perceived and / or long term negative impacts in the project area.

                           In case some of the roads, part of road sections or bypasses for few towns are either already under
                           implementation or planned to be undertaken outside the project. In such cases, there may be
                           differences related to R&R assistance and support to the affected people in the Bank assisted
                           project and roads undertaken outside the project, especially to the non- title holders.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project alternatives were considered at two levels. At the first level choice of selection of
                           project corridors considering minimum environmental and/or social impacts, without
                           compromising on the network level transport efficiencies. The second level relates to choice of
                           alternative alignments for a given corridor including the choice of geometric corrections. The
                           second level of alternative analysis was an integral part of the corridor level designs wherein
                           significant optimization efforts were put in to minimize adverse environmental impacts. These
                           measures included: (a) concentric or eccentric widening choices depending on location to save

                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                          maximum number of trees; (b) horizontal alignment optimization to minimize impacts on
                          community and cultural properties; (c) thorough investigation of bypass alignments to achieve
                          optimal designs with limited social and environmental impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alternatives were considered in the project designs through realignments, bypasses to congested
                           towns, reduced road width in in certain built up areas to avoid or minimize impacts to build up
                           structures, project affected people and minimize loss of wet lands and preserve the age buildings
                           and missionary schools and churches (Iddaiyapur).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Considering the multiplicity of road corridors to be improved under the project, and the typical
                           impacts described above, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) approach has been
                           adopted to address the EA requirements of the project. The EMF for the project defines the EA
                           process to be followed, complying with the in country environmental legislations as well as
                           Bank’s environmental safeguards policies. The EMF defines the four key process steps to be
                           followed for corridor level EAs with relevant illustrations. These include: (i) Environmental
                           Screening and Scoping; (ii) Environmental Assessment; (iii) Environmental Management Plan;
                           and (iv) integration of EMPs in to actionable mechanisms including road construction contracts.
                           The EMF also defines the public consultations which shall form part of the process steps (i) to
                           (iii), cumulative impact assessment requirements, and the institutional management framework.
                           Prior to finalizing the draft, the proposed EMF has been tested for Phase-I (EPC roads) roads with
                           necessary changes and also subjected to extensive public consultations. Based on the application
                           of EMF, the Environmental Assessment and the Environmental Management Plans for the Phase-I
                           corridors have been completed. Further, generic environmental management measures which
                           would be applicable for all the corridors have been derived. The disclosure of EMF and the
                           corridor specific EAs and EMPs for Phase-I project roads have been completed by the borrower
                           and the Bank in the Info shop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The corridor specific EAs for Phase-I roads included detailed environmental management
                          measures with necessary implementation arrangements including integration into construction
                          contracts. In addition, the corridor level designs considered alternative options and design
                          optimization measures to minimize impacts. Summary of environmental management measures
                          include: (a) upfront identification of construction stage measures and regulatory requirements
                          which formed part of the bid documents; (b) compensatory afforestation in 1Ha revenue land
                          contiguous to forest area and afforestation measures; (c) compensatory plantation at 1:10 ratio to
                          offset the loss of avenue trees; (d) protection of sensitive receptors all along the project corridors
                          with appropriate measures during construction and operational phases; (e) protection, conservation
                          of cultural properties and heritage sites; (f) measures to protect water bodies; and (g)
                          environmental enhancement measures to benefit the communities along the project corridors. In
                          addition, measures to minimize cumulative impacts have also been adequately addressed.

                          During the implementation of TNRSP I, the PIU has developed relevant institutional capacity for
                          effective implementation of environmental management measures. The PIU is currently has an
                          Environmental Cell which will continue to implement environmental safeguards management
                          measures for TNRSP-II. The EC is currently staffed with one Environment Specialist, deputed
                          from Pollution Control Board, who will oversee the environmental safeguards management. The
                          EC also comprises one Assistant Conservator of Forests, two Rangers and field staff. The forester
                          will supervise and coordinate compensatory plantation, successful coordination for compensatory


                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         afforestation. For implementation effectiveness, under the leadership of the Project Director (PD),
                         the EC will work jointly with a Superintending Engineer, an Assistant Divisional Engineer, 2
                         Assistant Engineers (HO) and 6 Assistant Engineers (Field Offices – 1 in each of the six field
Public Disclosure Copy




                         divisions).

                         Social Safeguards: The following measures were taken by the borrower to address social safeguard
                         policies.

                         Project Specific Resettlement Framework. In order to address the potential social impacts related
                         to land acquisition and resettlement, a project specific Resettlement Policy Framework ( RPF)
                         has been prepared based on the provisions available India’s new land acquisition and R&R act-
                         RTFCTLARR Act, 2013 and the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement.
                         There are few issues related to Entitlements ( cut-off date for eligibility and alternative sites for
                         displaced families for non- title holders, quantum of rehabilitation assistance for title holders)
                         that need to be agreed with the borrower during appraisal as part of finalization of RPF
                         followed by Government approval prior to closure of appraisal. The borrower is planning to hold
                         stakeholders consultation workshop on the draft RPF shortly and incorporate any feedback in the
                         final version. Keeping the anticipated difficulties in timely handing over of land to developers in
                         PPP projects as per concession agreement provisions, the RPF has a well-defined coordinated time
                         schedule for completion of various key land acquisition and R&R actions prior to completion of
                         various milestones in the process of leading financial closure in PPP concessions. This requires
                         efforts from both borrower and Bank to ensure that this coordination is maintained to ensure
                         that encumbrance free land is available by financial closure and affected people receives
                         compensation and R&R assistance.

                         India’s new LARR Act, 2013. This new Act replaced the previous anarchic Land Acquisition Act
                         of 1894, seeks to balance out the interests of the land owners, project affected people and the
                         acquirers and links land acquisition and the obligations of resettlement and rehabilitation. This law
                         also provides that no one shall dispossess their land and assets until the payments are made and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alternative resettlement sites have been prepared. This Act significantly reduces the differences
                         between India’s national standards for land acquisition and R&R and the World Bank’s
                         operational policy requirements in relation to compensation, transitional support, resettlement
                         sites, and support to vulnerable people, grievance mechanisms, consultations, disclosure, etc. The
                         provisions of this Act are appropriately incorporated in the project specific Resettlement Policy
                         Framework adopted for this project.

                         Resettlement Action Plan. A draft Resettlement Action Plan for phase-I (EPC roads) roads has
                         been prepared and will be finalized based on the final RPF provisions and approval from
                         Empowered Committee will be obtained by PIU by close of appraisal. The RAP describes the
                         baseline socio-economic characteristics of PAPs, mitigation measures, grievance redress
                         mechanism, monitoring and evaluation procedures and coordination with procurement and civil
                         work time table and cost estimates. The entire cost of land acquisition and R&R assistance will be
                         met out of counterpart funding and prior to handover of the land to the contractor, the
                         implementing agency will confirm the payment to compensation and R&R assistance to the
                         affected people through certification. The Government has already placed a budget of INR. 1000
                         million (USD 16.50 million) to meet the costs land acquisition and R&R assistance for the first
                         year. The first notification for private land acquisition for phase-I roads has been already
                         completed and the final notification expected shortly. The borrower is in the process of sharing the
                         draft RAP with affected communities to explain the process and provisions described in the RAP

                                                                   Page 8 of 12
                          to mitigate the impacts. The outcome of consultations will be incorporated in the final RAP. A
                          separate RAP will be prepared subsequently for the PPP connections prior to initiation of bidding
                          process for these roads. The impacts in these roads are significantly higher since the roads are
Public Disclosure Copy




                          planned to be widened to four lanes.

                          Borrower’s Capacity for social safeguard Implemeniton: A separate Land Acquisition and R&R
                          unit (LARRU) has been created within the PIU headed by Chief Engineer reporting to Project
                          Director. In addition, three regional units were established to manage the land acquisition and
                          resettlement impacts at field level. All key staff in these regional units (3 Special District Revenue
                          Officers and 3 Resentment Officers) is in position. A separate Government Order has been issued
                          delegating the Special Revenue Officers as competent authority with delegated powers to carry out
                          the land acquisition in a timely manner. The borrower is in the process of hiring the services of
                          NGOs and concurrent Monitoring consultants who are expected to be in place by Appraisal and
                          will support PIU in the implementation and monitoring of RAP implementation. Two level project
                          level grievance committees to respond to the complaints and grievances of the project affected p
                          people related to compensation and R&R assistance. The implementation of land acquisition and
                          resettlement impacts are aligned with procurement and civil works time table to enable the
                          affected people to receive compensation and R&R assistance prior to taking over of the land and
                          assets. In case of PPP annuity concessions , a well-designed coordinated actions are identified to
                          be completed prior to completion of each of the milestones of contracting process to enable that
                          80% of land is available by the time financial closure and the remaining land within 6 months of
                          financial closure.

                          A MIS system will be set up to track and monitor the progress in land acquisition and resettlement
                          implementation and generate periodical progress reports and also serve to generate queries from
                          the data base.

                           Risks: The likely risks from social safeguard points of view will be �(i)difficulty in timely
                           handover of encumbrance free road stretches to the contractors due to delays in payment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           compensation and R&R assistance, (ii) impact on poor, marginal land owners and vulnerable
                           people requiring careful handling, (iii) inadequate capacity to meet the Bank’s requirements and
                           India's new LARR Act provisions in implementation, (iv) resistance from the land owners for
                           impact to their wet lands and built- up structures, (v) availability of budget from counterpart
                           funding due to large requirement (about USD 100 Million)(vi) inter departmental coordination on
                           certain land acquisition and resettlement implementation and (vii) effective grievance mechanism
                           for handling the grievances and complaints from the land owners. The PIU is taking appropriate
                           measures to deal with the above risks though delegation of powers to land acquisition,
                           establishing grievance mechanisms, availing services of local NGOs/consultants for
                           Implemeniton support, adequate R&R support to all section of affected people, coordination with
                           civil works and procurement time table, ensuring adequate budget support from the Government.
                           On the other hand the Bank is factoring the readiness and implementation progress in land
                           acquisition and resettlement Implemeniton while according the No obj ections at different stage
                           of procurement of civil work contracts and obtaining certification on payment of compensation
                           and resettlement assistance at time of handing over road stretches to the contractors.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include local Government, road users, and communities living along the
                           project roads and industry and business within the area of influence. As part of census and socio-


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           economic surveys, consultations were held with the displaced households and other stakeholders
                           in 23 locations along the road-projects of phase-I roads (EPC contracts). As many as about 1350
                           people including 14% women participated in these consultation meetings. Similar consultations
Public Disclosure Copy




                           are being held separately in phase-II roads also (PPP concessions). The consultations were
                           initiated by presenting an overview of the project features to the participants, the justification for
                           undertaking the project, its benefits and likely impacts. Participants’ views and concerns about the
                           project were discussed and key outcomes were integrated in the design and mitigation plans. The
                           key outcome of consultations includes: safety concerns due to increased speed and accidents,
                           impacts to trees, avoiding impacts to drinking water pipelines, impacts to graveyards, suggestion
                           for bypasses and realignments, loss of livelihoods due to impacts to business establishments, loss
                           of irrigated lands, suggestion for reduction of width of corridor of impact to avoid physical
                           displacements, etc. These concerns are incorporated in the designs and RAP to the extent possible.
                           The key concerns among women includes safety to school going children due to anticipated
                           increase in speed of vehicles, support for livelihood impacts, disturbances to drinking water
                           pipelines and loss of certain trees. The proposed measures to these concerns was explained to
                           them by the implementing agency.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    24-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       17-Oct-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             18-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       09-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    19-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             18-Sep-2014
                           Comments: In Country disclosure date for Draft Resettlement Framework is September 18, 2014
                                         and for Draft Resettlement Action Plan is October 14, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Pratap Tvgssshrk
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 12-Dec-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)               Date: 17-Dec-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
