Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  January 29, 2007 
Report No.: 
38588
 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P095901 
Project Name:  Improving Rural Livelihood through Carbon Sequestration by Adopting 
Environmental Friendly Technology based on Agro-forestry Practices 
–
An Aforestation 
Project under Clean Development Mechanism (AR-CDM)  
Task Team Leader:  Martien Van Nieuwkoop 
Estimated Appraisal Date: n.a. 
Estimated Board Date: n.a. 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  CF 
Sector:  (Agro-) Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Climate Change (P)  
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.):US$1,117,800 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
 
The proposed AR-CDM project will mobilize and encourage resource poor farmers 
(especially women and marginal farmers) to raise plantations of tree species with high 
rates of carbon removal in their farmlands. The proposed AR-CDM project activity will 
also facilitate in exploring and demonstrating the technical and methodological 
approaches related to credible carbon removal process. This will be a pilot initiative that 
aims at improving rural livelihoods through “Carbon Sequestration” by adopting 
environment friendly technologies based on agro-forestry (reforestation) practices. The 
AR-CDM project has been developed through a series of consultations with different 
partners such as farmers, Veda-Max, JK paper mills (JK) and World Bank, where in a 
broad consensus on the following objectives were reached:  
·
To remove CO
2
through plantation forestry in degraded areas and test and pilot 
how reforestation activities generate high-quality greenhouse gases emission 
removals that can be measured, monitored and verified. 
·
To develop plantation and agro-forestry models for providing multiple benefits to 
the farmers in respect of timber, pulpwood, firewood, minor forest produces, 
intercropping along with carbon removal.  
Page  2
·
To provide additional income and promote livelihoods of the resource poor 
farmers through carbon revenues. 
·
To reforest degraded lands and increase soil and moisture conservation for 
reclaiming the waste land in the region.  
·
To reduce the dependence of the paper industry on natural forests and increase 
bio-diversity. 
·
To build capacity of the various stakeholders to benefit from global mechanisms.  
 
3. Project Description 
 
The project will promote plantations of multi purpose and multi-type species. The project 
partners will take into consideration criteria such as carbon removal rates, biodiversity 
enhancement, soil and moisture conservation and the associated minor forest produces. 
Several options for choice of species with carbon credit potential have been finalized in 
consultation with the farmers and other sector partners. This includes fast growing and 
short rotation species, timber species and various options of inter-cropping.  The 
percentage of inter-cropping and species density in AR-CDM project area is dependent 
upon the soil suitability, preferences of the farmers and availability of technologies.   
 
While the AR-CDM project is an independent pilot initiative, it can also be considered as 
an additional component of the ongoing JK paper mill supported plantation programme. 
Both projects (CDM & JK) focus on different approaches and implemented on different 
lands 
–
at the same time complement each other in all respects.  The JK being a 
community driven project focuses on enhancing pulp wood production through extensive 
community mobilization process and technological innovation (i.e., development of 
clonal technologies and local gene pool).  Whereas in AR-CDM project, the focus is only 
on afforestation for which the farmers will receive cash incentive (by being a potential 
seller of carbon credit) on two types of lands; (i) non-arable agriculture waste land, and 
ii) degraded common property land. The pilot initiative aims to bring 3500 Ha of 
degraded non-arable land under plantation in six districts of AP and Orissa (three districts 
in each state).  
 
The project plans to strengthen the farmer-industry partnerships with buy-back 
arrangements to purchase pulp wood and other produces expected under the project (after 
the stipulated carbon emission period). It will encourage farmers to go for agro-forestry 
practices such as inter-cropping during the first year of the plantation to meet their 
subsistence needs. It has also established a long-term credit network with financial 
institutions to support resource poor farmers to meet the cost of plantation and 
maintenance (if required).  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
The project will be implemented in AP and Orissa covering six districts (Raigarda, 
Kalahandi, Koraput, Vizayanagaram, Srikakulum and Visakhapatnam). The interventions 
Page  3
proposed under the project makes the villagers a strategic seller of carbon credits under 
the Kyoto Protocol and also selling carbon in response to global demand for Certified 
Emissions Reductions under the Clean Development Mechanism. While doing so, the 
project has ensured that the opportunity cost does not deter marginal farmers shifting 
from house hold food security to a cash economy with any type of adverse environmental 
impact. In order to ensure environmental sustainability, the project proponent (Veda-Max 
and JK Paper Mills) had undertaken an environmental assessment in the project areas and 
prepared an environmental management framework (EMF) to address relevant 
environmental issues likely to emerge due to project interventions.  Given the size of the 
pilot initiative/project, the overall environmental and social impacts may not be 
significant. However, a detailed analysis was undertaken to identify the challenges the 
project is likely to encounter in the region. The same environmental analysis is captured 
in the EMF. The EMF highlights two types of environmental challenges
 “Water 
Management and Integrated Pest Management” and has suggested adequate mitigation 
measures with monitoring framework.   
 
The EMF clearly states that farmers in the project area are willing to divert their non-
arable waste land for such plantation. At present, the entire operation of plantation by JK 
is below 50, 000 Ha spread over five states (AP, Orissa, West Bengal Gujarat and MP), 
which is presently below the optimal level to make any visible environmental impact.  
Besides, the present AR-CDM project will focus on 3500 Ha of degraded agricultural 
land in six districts (Orissa & AP). Given the existing coverage, the overall project (JK 
and AR-CDM project together) will not make any significant environmental impacts. 
Considering the fact that the demand and supply situation for the pulpwood is widening 
over the last few years, it is obvious that the JK needs to expedite their campaign to bring 
more land under pulpwood cultivation. This pilot initiative of 3500 Ha with active 
community participation and villagers accruing carbon value with a long term buy-back 
arrangement will have significant impact in meeting pulp-wood demand for the paper 
industry at large.  
 
The JK industry requires 35 lakh tonnes of pulpwood every year and is able to receive 30 
lakh tonnes of pulpwood from their own contractual farming and from the open market. 
According to JK officials, the demand and supply gap is widening every year. Promoting 
private plantation seems to be the only option under such a crisis scenario. The AR-CDM 
project is a good opportunity for value addition to the marginal farmers likely to be 
engaged with JK and was only receiving timber value. Now all of them will also be 
receiving additional cash benefits by selling carbon credits, which is over and above 
timber value guaranteed by JK. This is likely to attract more marginal/small farmers to 
convert their non-arable land under tree tree/pulpwood cultivation as a result of sheer 
opportunity cost.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
Mr. RR Mohan (SASES) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
Social Safeguard Perspective:
 Social issues were discussed and at all stages of project 
preparation with all stakeholders and also during disclosure workshop. The project 
involves mutual agreements between willing farmers and the private entrepreneur. This is 
substance means there is choice and voice of for the farmers. It does not involve 
community and common land, thus ruling out potential adverse impacts on vulnerable 
groups who are dependent on these common properties. The project spreads in six 
districts with a target of 3500 Ha, which will have insignificant impact in terms of the 
inclusion issues. However, some of the beneficiaries could be tribal families (not all). The 
project design is in compliance with the principles stated in IP policy. The project 
proponents have agreed to adopt (i) informed consent approach, (ii) use culturally 
appropriate communication strategy, (iii) transparency in ensuring that all participants 
(particularly vulnerable groups) are fully aware about their entitlements and (iv) 
mechanisms are in place to monitor this process.  The project has already developed local 
cultural 
–
tribal friendly IEC campaign that are use by JK Paper mill (one of the partners) 
as part of their corporate social responsibility. The project has also developed strategy for 
benefit sharing in terms of equity.  
 
Environmental Perspective
:
An environmental assessment (EA) has been undertaken. 
This included an analysis of sector specific environmental issues, policy and institutional 
bottlenecks and lessons learned from past and ongoing projects. Incorporating the key 
environmental challenges identified under the EA, an EMF was prepared. Keeping the 
potential risks in mind, the EMF has developed various environmental management 
strategies to be used during the implementation of the project. The impact of the 
proposed project on the environment and plantation associated risks are expected to be 
negligible. Since there is a possibility of short-term adverse environment impact 
associated with some of the project interventions, the EMF outlines specific mitigation 
measures for the same. The EMF outlines several environmental issues and has 
developed specifications required to mitigate/manage those risks such as water resources, 
pesticide, soil nutrition depletion and change in land use and industry raw material 
dependency on agriculture land. However, there are two specific issues prioritized as a 
key environmental challenge that needs more attention and the EMF has included a 
Page  5
detailed environmental analysis with mitigation measures for the same
 “Water 
Management and Pesticide management”.  
 
Surface water conservation and groundwater recharge mechanism
:
Most of the degraded 
lands likely to be brought under the project have access to irrigation facilities. The EMF 
clearly indicates that the status of groundwater in project areas of AP and Orissa is 
showing a surplus scenario except in certain pockets in AP over-exploitation of ground 
water is reported to be critical. There is a possibility that majority of the marginal farmers 
(in project area) are likely to opt for eucalyptus plantation because of the sheer economic 
benefits. Many reports claims that the Past experience of eucalyptus plantation in other 
states have shown decline in groundwater table.  While the impact of eucalyptus on 
groundwater is debatable, it is best for the project to restrict its activities to areas 
designated as “safe” and not take up plantation activities in areas that are classified as 
“semi-critical”, “critical” and “over-exploited” with respected to groundwater resources. 
It is also recommended that the groundwater resources are assessed periodically and the 
EMF is updated to respond to any changes in the groundwater resource of the project 
area.  
 
Use of pesticides
:
The project areas in AP and Orissa seem to have clear distinctions in 
terms of land use. Three districts in AP are predominantly used under agriculture 
practices and three districts in Orissa are having both agriculture and forest cover. 
However, there is one cross-cutting problem in both the States and that is of pest attack of 
white-ant/termite in most of the tree crops. The major use of pesticide in project activity 
seems to be in the control of termite attacks on eucalyptus saplings and trees. Treatment 
against termites is a pre-requisite in raising any plantation particularly, softwood 
plantation, which could be a preferred species in the project area because of its economic 
potential. Termites attack the root zone and the saplings are susceptible to such attack 
during the initial six months. Besides, the bigger trees are also attacked during anytime of 
its rotation period. The project will be using clonal seedling developed in the green house 
chamber of JK paper mill. Therefore, termite treatment in project areas is essential to 
maintaining a high survival rate of the seedlings.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area. 
 
The project could experience two types of long-term impacts; (i) There could be lowering 
of water table in selected pockets due to plantation of fast growing species such as 
Eucalyptus, (ii) excessive use of pesticide may pose public health risk and leaching of the 
pesticide residue may contaminate groundwater and surface water quality. However, the 
possibility of such impacts is remote and the past efforts on similar plantation 
programmes do not reflect any such negative impacts.  
 
It is important to state that the project areas (six districts) experience significantly higher 
rain fall (more than 1100mm) every year than many parts of the country. As stated above 
only 5% of the groundwater resource is used for irrigation, which is less than the aquifer 
recharging capacity. With such high rain-fall and basin on-field conservation, Eucalyptus 
Page  6
plantation in only 3500Ha (in an optimal scenario) may not pose significant threat to the 
local aquifers. Despite this adequate mitigation measures are proposed in the EMF to deal 
with water conservation process in Eucalyptus plantation pockets. In terms of biomass 
productivity, the project will reduce the dependency of people on natural forest. The 
project will help in increasing the regeneration of perennial grasses that are used as 
fodder.  Overall, no major adverse impacts are foreseen.  
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts. 
 
Environment: Alternative options will be looked into during the planning of individual 
block wise schemes in terms of biodiversity. The project will ensure that species 
diversities are maintained so that pressure on the surrounding nature forest does not 
increase. However, the project has developed several alternative options that includes,   
 
·
Fast Growing Tree Species - Eucalyptus, Casuarina equisetifolia, Emblica 
officinalis,  
·
Timber trees spices - Tectona grandis, Gmelina arborea, Fruit/seed yielding 
species -  Pongamia pinnata, Mangifera indica, Tamarindus spp, Azadirachta 
indica,  
·
Intercropping species - Sorghum and other vegetables. The project is expected to 
result in positive impacts. No negative impacts are anticipated. 
 
·
Alterative land use options will be assessed prior to initiation of any plantation 
work 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described. 
 
All environmental management measures are integrated within the overall project cycle 
and will be implemented at various stages of planning, execution and post-
implementation through an integrated EMF and PDD. The EMF can be used as an 
Operations Manual.  The project staff of JK and Veda-max will be directly responsible to 
monitor environmental compliance. The EMF has provided different level of monitoring 
framework that need to be followed during planning, execution and during post 
implementation phases.  
 
Borrower’s Capacity
:
The key strategic advantage of the AR-CDM project has is that the 
project is being implemented in partnership with JK Paper mill. The JK paper mill has a 
separate on-farm research (with several Green house chambers) and community 
development unit to deal with such projects.  They are producing 400,000 seedling per 
year.  It has a network of staffs at the block level to provide technical and community 
mobilization support. In light of such inbuilt capacity, the project has already developed 
institutional mechanisms to support the sale of Certified Emission Reductions (CERs), 
test carbon purchase transactions and accumulate
 
experience in practical and technical 
Page  7
measures for AR- project activities. The project will build on the institutional mechanism 
already established by the JK Paper Mill. This includes extensive community 
mobilization process by CBOs and cooperatives through a participatory approach. The 
project will use clonal technologies (from the local gene pool) for raising nurseries that is 
already established by JK Paper Mills with a network of seedling distribution in all six 
project districts.  
 
Safeguard Policy/Mitigation Measures
:
Pest management: The mitigation measures on use of pesticides for control of 
termites/white ants in plantations follow the same evolutionary path as that for agriculture 
crops in general. The earlier recommendations were use of organo-chlorines such as 
Aldrin and Heptachlor 
–
are no more used in the project areas. These pesticides are 
having Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and are now banned by the Government due 
to their hazardous nature and persistence. Therefore, most of the sector partners involved 
in such type of project activities including Government line departments are using 
chemical pesticides that are locally available and have lesser degree of hazardous and 
persistence compared to the banned ones. Most of the plantation projects in the country 
are using Chloropyriphos (Forest Department, Agriculture Department and JK Paper 
Mills). The EMF has developed specifications on the use of pesticides, such as, (i) 
treatment of the planting pits with 5-10gm of Phorate, (ii) in case of termite attack, 
application of 0.05% - 0.10% of Chloropyriphos (with a dilution of 5-10 ml in one litre of 
water) is recommended depending on severity of the infection.  
 
While the EMF claims that both the Phorate and Choloropyriphos are absorbed by the top 
soil and dissolved through rain water and would not have any leaching affect, WHO puts 
them into the II-classification of the moderately hazardous pesticide category making 
them a non-preferred pesticides by the global communities. The EMF has also suggested 
use of bio-pesticides. However, because of imminent capital cost needed for making bio-
pesticide a viable proposition in the project area, it was agreed that JK and Veda max will 
explore the possibility of involving donor/private sector for initiating decentralized bio-
pesticides production centres in the project area as a long-term entrepreneurship 
proposition.  The project will discourage fumigation with Monocroptophos. The project 
will ensure use of protective attires while using pesticides in the project areas. 
 
Water management
:
The project will undertake regular monitoring of groundwater and 
ensure proper maintenance of field bunds to conserve maximum rain water. The project 
will provide extension support on soil and moisture conservation measures (models are 
already developed by JK paper Mill). It will provide technical specifications on field 
bunding, timely transplanting at the onset of monsoon and affective monitoring tools to 
measure soil moisture conservation and groundwater fluctuation. It will also ensure that 
there is no competition with other groundwater users during dry season. It has 
recommended use of efficient irrigation equipment and various conservation measures.  
 
Other mitigation measures include reducing vehicle emission while transporting 
seedlings to the farmer’s field, assessing alternative land use prior to initiating plantation 
Page  8
work, nutrition management for ensuring appropriate density of the plant species and 
specific recommendation on site preparations.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The environmental analysis and EMF have been undertaken through a consultative 
approach. Information on various aspects of environment related to water management, 
pest management and tree cropping have been collected through structured questionnaires 
and extensive consultation with the local people. Stakeholder consultation workshops 
have been organized to discuss the EMF findings among the various agencies that are 
directly or indirectly involved in the AR-CDM project.  
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Environmental 
Management Plan (EMF) was prepared by the client
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
The draft EMF was received 
by the Bank on 06/09/2006  
and this was modified after 
the disclosure workshop and 
the final EMF was submitted 
to bank on 10/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
The EMF was disclosed to 
all stake holders 
on10/09/2006. The 
participant included farmers, 
Government Line 
Departments, NGOs/CBOs 
and private sector.  The EMF 
was widely circulated for 
review and comments.  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the 
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive 
Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMF) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMF incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Martien Van Niewkoop (SASAR) 
November 9, 
2006 
Environmental/Social Specialist (s): 
Priti Kumar (SASES), Ranjan Samantaray 
(SASES), R R Mohan (SASES) 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
January 29, 
2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
MR. Adolfo Brizzi 
November 10, 
2006 
Comments:   
