ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 A World Fro* of Povorty
4 foShop
lbc W&iwd Ik
Report No AC70
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/13/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PERU                                    Project ID: P035740
Global Supplemental ID: P074021
Project: LIMABUS TRANSPORT                       Task Team Leader: Paulus A. Guitink
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 5, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: September 18, 2003                IDA Amount ($m):
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 7.93
Managing Unit: LCSFT                             Sector: Roads and highways (70%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (30%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P),
Access to urban services for the poor (P); Pollution
management and environmental health (S);
Environmental policies and institutions (S); Other
social protection and risk management (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The main objective of the project is to establish an efficient, reliable and safe mass rapid transit system
by implementing and operating high capacity buses in segregated bus corridors - COSAC -, which will
improve public transport of Metropolitan Lima population, especially for the low-income population of
the peri-urban poor neighborhoods.
To achieve this, its specific objectives would be to: (i) help strengthen the Municipality of Lima's
planning, regulatory, administration, and operation capacity of public transport provision for Lima and
Callao (Metropolitan Lima) in the medium and long-term; (ii) rehabilitate and improve the existing road
infrastructure, with emphasis on rehabilitation/construction of segregated bus corridors and feeder bus
roads; and (iii) enhance transport and environmental conditions by improving traffic management and
safety, reducing air pollution and improving conditions for vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians,
bicyclists and mobility constrained persons.
The objectives of this operation will be achieved through physical road infrastructure interventions,
rationalization of road space, and through technical assistance for institutional strengtheninlg of the
Municipality of Lima to reduce the oversupply of public transport which results:  (i) in large
inefficiencies in public transport provision; (ii) urban congestion and adverse environmental and safety
impacts; (iii) irrational and inefficient use of scarce road space; (iv) predatory and counterproductive



2
ISDS
competition; and (v) low average speeds and long travel times.
The segregated bus corridor system, with larger and cleaner vehicles, operated through well-enforced
private sector concessions will: (i) increase service efficiency and reduce GHG and local emissions per
passenger-km; (ii) increase the service quality and reduce travel times; (iii) rationalize public space
consumption by various transport modes; and (iv) prioritize public transport. It is expected that the
proposed activities will yield significant benefits to the urban transport sector, including reduction of
traffic congestion and improved traffic flow for all vehicles reducing emissions per vehicle-kin; improved
road safety by eliminating predatory driving behavior of public transport vehicles; improved finanicial
sustainability of the public transport system; improved economic efficiency and competitiveness of the
city through reduced travel times; and provision of better accessibility to low-income commuters.
I.A.3. Project Description:
1. Project Components
The Project will finance a first phase, which includes a basic network of segregated high capacity bus
corridors of more than 24 km that will provide service to the low-income population segments who need
an efficient, low-cost and affordable transport service. The basic high capacity network consists of bus
corridors with operational and functional compatibility with follow-up phases, and will be using existing
road corridors, while bus-stops and feeder-trunk route transfer terminals will be newly constructed. Apart
from compatibility between phases, each of the sections is expected to be functionally, economically, and
operationally self-sustainable.
The Project will also invest in the construction of access routes to terminals, focusing on accessibility for
pedestrians and bicycles. Along the high capacity corridors horizontal and vertical road markings will be
rehabilitated, including an overhaul of the traffic lights. While road safety improvement forms a separate
component, implementation of road safety audit recommendations will be included under various civil
works. Monitoring of air quality will take place through the establishment of an air quality monitoriig
network which includes operation and maintenance. The Project will also prepare the business plan for
the bus service concession; develop the fare collection system and its adjustment conditions; support the
creation and strengthening of an operations entity; and assist in the development of an efficient
organizational structure for the municipal management of urban transit and transport.  Within the
framework of the latter, the project will also provide support to MML's transport agencies to develop
well-defined responsibilities, coordinated management and resource utilization, as well as transport
performance monitoring and control mechanisms.
It is foreseen that the physical infrastructure to be provided under the first phase will be financed by
MML and by the project while private concessionaires will provide vehicles, bus parking facilities and
maintenance facilities for the buses on terrains acquired by MML. The terminals could be given in
concession, providing public and commercial services to the users. The fare collection system will be
developed and operated privately. It is also foreseen that system management will be self-sustainable
through a percentage of the user fares (for Transmilenio S.A. this is 4%). This fare will cover the
investment, operation and maintenance costs of the operators and of the collection system; it will also
cover the operation, monitoring and control costs of PROTRANSPORTE. An analysis will also be made
regarding the generation of a basic infrastructure maintenance fund (main corridors, bus-stops and
terminals).



3
ISDS
1.1. Investment in Infrastructure (US$106.5 million)
Investments in infrastructure include: (i) construction of three public transport segregated corridors with
a total length of 24 km, with operational and functional compatibility; (ii) bus-stops and terminals; (iii)
horizontal and vertical road markings along the selected corridors; (iv) paving and/or improvement of
selected feeder roads, with an approximate length of 95 km, which will operate as an integrated network
with the main corridors; (v) construction of sidewalks and bicycle paths to improve access to
non-motorized means users. This will complement the GEF's non-motorized transport investments. US$ I
million will be specifically dedicated to bikeways; (vi) works for the improvement of pedestrian and
vehicle circulation in five selected sensitive areas; (vii) road safety measures along the buscorridors, its
feeder roads, and the streets in its area of direct influence; (viii) recovery of public space, with emphasis
on the interface between corridors, walkers and users of the system; and (ix) supervision of the works.
The proposed physical works will be based on 'inclusive designs' that take into account the needs of
vulnerable (e.g., women, children) and mobility constrained (e.g., handicapped, visually impaired) road
users.
1.2. Institutional Strengthening (US$5.3 million)
The coverage of this component includes Project management as well as the strengtheninlg and
coordination of regulatory, monitoring, and control functions of urban public transport for the whole city.
Thus, it provides support to: (i) the development and implementation of a uniform public transport policy
in the city, its regulatory and policy-setting framework, as well as its administration, operation,
monitoring and control; (ii) the creation (design, formalization and establishment of policies), technical
assistance and training of the entity in charge of F'roject management-PROTRANSPORTE; (iii) training
and technical assistance to DMTU, focusing on public transport service regulation, and its monitoring
and control; (iv) training and strengthening of the new private operators; (v) implementation of an air
quality monitoring system; (vi) development of a road safety strategy; (vii) a pilot project that will
enhance the introduction in Peru of more environment-friendly vehicle scrapping methods (co-finenced
with the GEF) and (vii) follow-up and assessment of the system operation and the Project.
1.3. Social and Political Feasibility (US$3.2 million)
This activity, which is critical for the success of the Project, will support two activity areas: (i)
community participation; and (ii) participation of actual public transport operators. As for community
participation, this activity aims to include public consultation processes, such as: (a) a campaign for
consultation, sensibilization and social participation; and (b) public transport use and road behavior
educational measures. With regard to public transport operators it will consist of: (a) a consultation and
negotiation strategy with the people affected; (b) measures to mitigate the negative social impact of the
sector rationalization in coordination with the corresponding GEF component, and (c) organizational
strengthening of the public transport operators.
1.4. Technical and Environmental Studies (US$3.9 million)
This includes economic feasibility and environmental studies as well as the final designs required to
expand the integrated public transport network in a second phase beyond the 24 kilometers funded by the
Project.



4
ISDS
1.5. Administrative Expenses (US$5.5 million)
This includes the operational expenses of the institution responsible for the system implementation and
operation, most likely PROTRANSPORTE. This component also includes the cost of a comprehensive
monitoring and evaluation mechanism that will use qualitative and quantitative indicators for each of the
sub-components.  Techniques to be applied include user scorecards to measure public transport
performance; beneficiary assessments using structured interviews and focus group discussions; poverty
impact assessments using household surveys and linked to qualified data from the aforementioned
methods.
1.6. GEF Components (US$ 7.930 million)
The GEF-financed components will: (i) support the reduction in the public transport fleet oversupply,
(ii) consolidate the bikeways pilot project developed in Lima North Cone, (iii) carry out an institutional
strengthening program on sustainable transport, targeting municipalities and institutions dealing with
environmental issues and/or transport planning, and (iv) assess and monitor the GEF project
performance.
For more details on each component, see Annex "GEF Project Detailed Description".
1. 6.1 To support public transport capacity rationalization (US$ 1. 7 million)
The activities to be developed in the framework of this first component aim at supporting the
WB-IDB-financed Limabus Project, which will rationalize public transport services and provide
opportunities to reduce the size of the current fleet operating in Lima (more than 55,000 buses, most of
which are extremely polluting and obsolete). This component can be divided into three sub-activities:
*   Provide financial incentives through a Credit Guarantee Fund (and hence low-cost loans) to
bus concessionaires to encourage them to scrap additional obsolete and pollutant public
transport vehicles
*   Support programs aiming at mitigating the social impacts of this program in terms of
employment (training programs, access to micro-credits) in coordination with existing social
programs such a those promoted by Prompyme.
*   Support a pilot project that will enhance the introduction in Peru of more
environment-frienidly vehicle scrapping methods and that will build the local capacity
required to make sure that the adoption of those new methods will be sustainable.
1.6.2 Consolidate Lima Northi Cone bikeways pilot project (US$ 4.180 million)
Through this component, the project will aim at resolving the problems identified in the context of the
WB-financed non-motorized transport pilot program (1994) and that are seen as the explanatory variables
of the still low levels of use of the North Cone bikeways. These problems are mainly linked to traffic and
personal safety, low quality of the engineering design in some places, and lack of information and
communication on the issue, This component can be divided into four sub-activities:
* Realize the required physical improvements on the existing network and extend it by 6 km of
"missing links" to increase its connectivity, provide bike parking facilities and install
"ciclomodulos" to improve the attractiveness of the bikeways (see Annex "Ciclomodulos"),
*   Finance one year of bikeway maintenance during which municipalities will benefit from a
hands-on training,



5
ISDS
*   Carry out a promotion campaign on bike use,
*   Restart the dormant credit program called Plan Bici for bicycles acquisition, by making it
more flexible and applicable to the financing of small bike-related businesses.
This component will be supported through a US$1 million investment plan from the infrastructure
component (1.1) to be financed by the World Bank loan.The GEF contribution and the World Bank
contribution have been bundled together in the consolidated budget table at the end of this section under
the "bikeways pilot project" heading.
1.6.3. Carry out an Institutional Strengthening Program on Sustainable Transport (US$ 1.1 million)
This component will be targeting municipalities and institutions dealing with environmental issues and/or
transport planning. It aims at incorporating climate change and environmental considerations into
decision making processes, but will also strengthen the technical capacities of the municipal teams
currently in charge of transport planning and that are stakeholders of the project. This institutional
strengthening program, designed as an outcome of a diagnosis and capacity assessment exercise carried
out jointly with the expected beneficiaries, aims at laying the groundwork for the success of the project
and ensure it can be sustainable over time once those institutions will take over when the project is
closed.
The following institutions will benefit from the program: two provincial municipalities, Lima and Callo
and seven municipal districts, Los Olivos, Independencia, San Martin de Porres, Comas, Rimac,
Bellavista, Carmen de la Legua - Reynoso, along with FONAM which is the Project Implementation
Unit.
1.6.4. Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, Replication Strategy and Administrative Costs (US$
950,000)
The project includes a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation component based on qualitative and
quantitative performance indicators for each of the sub-components. These indicators will include public
transport and bicycle user surveys and impact assessments, public transport ridership data, road safety
data, general traffic counts on trunk routes and bus counts on public transport routes given in concession.
This data will be used in turn to estimate project-related GHG emission reductions.
The monitoring strategy for this project aims at tracking the changes towards the adoption of new
transport patterns and behaviors. The methodology opted for is probably quite time-consuming and might
require some more efforts than regular monitoring processes but the objective of the exercise is to
provide the GEF with the necessary information it needs regarding GHG impacts of sustainable transport
projects to decide whether expanding their support to similar measures is justified from a climate change
perspective.
At that point, a very important factor to assess will be evaluation the change in perceptions, attitudes and
behaviors within the different segments from the population vis-A-vis sustainable transport. This change
will be measured against the results of the various focus groups carried out in during the GEF project
preparation phase. The final evaluation will be repeated two years after the project conclusion in order to
examine sustainability and medium and long term impacts. The source of financing of this last activity
has yet to be defined which is not an easy task since it will take place after project closing. One option is
to use part of the uncalled capital in the Credit Guarantee Fund, another being to commit the Borrower to
do this through the loan agreement.
A replication strategy will be designed in the first half of the project implementation period and carried



6
ISDS
out in the second half. Mayors and technicians of secondary Peruvian cities will be invited to Lima for
field visits and discussion with their Lina counterparts while seminars on sustainable transport will be
organized in their cities, with the participation of stakeholders of the Lima project.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
This project is located in Lima Metropolitan Region, Peru. The impact on air quality is expected to
benefit the whole metropolitan area. The civil works are along existing roadways, where no protected
areas nor cultural property is evident. The GEF civil works components will be concentrated in the North
Cone of Lima and on Avenida Arequipa. The 32 kilometers of bikeways to be rehabilitated and the
additional six km to be built are located along the following axes : Tomas Valle, Colonial, Universitaria,
A. Gamarra, Morales Duarez and Arequipa avenues. These works will be carried out on existing
rights-of-way and will not involve any resettlements, nor construction on green areas.
B. Clheck Environtmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. Any possible negative environmental impacts from the project are easily predicted and
can be adequately managed, therefore a category B is appropriate.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OPIBP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes * No    O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' clalins
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Main Project:
Environmental Assessment
O.P. 4.01 is triggered due to possible environmental and social impacts of the construction and policy
interventions. The project is expected to positively affect the local and global environment. First of all,
reduction in air pollution will have a direct positive affect on public health. In 1998, 99% of medical
admissions of children under 5 was due to respiratory infections, most of which can be attributed to
pollution from the transport sector. Secondly, rationalization of key bus routes and traffic corridors, and
retirement of highly-pollutinig vehicles will result in a reduction in C02 emissions. Recent trends in



7
ISDS
Lima show an increase in used vehicle imports, a significant increase in the taxi and small bus fleets, and
a reduction in use of public transport. The project will address many of these underlying issues through
policy reforms. Impacts from the policy reforms and the program as a whole are being studied in a
Strategic Environmental Assessment. The Strategic Environmental Assessment has a regional focus,
focusing on social and environmental consequences of the program, the involvement of civil society, and
development of an environmental and social management plan.
Since construction will occur in already-existing roadways, no impacts on natural habitats are expected.
Construction of bus lanes in an urban environment needs careful planning. Specific impacts related to
the dedicated bus lanes are being addressed through a site-specific Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental guidelines for contractors will be included in the Environmental Management Plan and all
bidding documents. These guidelines will include chance find procedures as well as measures to ensure
public awareness, dust and noise reduction, proper disposal of waste, maintenance of equipment, etc.
Environmental considerations will be built into the physical process of the bus scrapping to ensure proper
procedures and disposal. The feasibility consultant for the GEF add-on project has developed basic
guidelines, which will be turned into a detailed operational manual prior to implementation of the
component. The guidelines include provisions for site preparation, liquid waste handling and disposal,
worker safety, and recycling of parts.
The analyses to be completed during project preparation also address social impacts, such as those on
employment, resettlement, market values, effects on the informal sector, displacement of bus routes,
affordability, etc.
Involuntary Resettlement
The EIA will complete a cadastre of stores and houses along the affected routes. A determination will be
made if physical displacement is required. If so, a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared. Studies
are also being conducted to fix the number of informal vendors and bus chauffeurs/operators who will be
affected. A proposed social program has been designed which includes training, public awareness,
technical assistance, and compensation.
GEF:
GEF component: from all the activities to be executed under this operation, two only have to be examined
from an environmental perspective, since the others are more related with financing, training, and other "soft
items." The two activities are: (i) the rehabilitation of the bikeway network and (ii) the scrapping of the
obsolete public transport vehicles to be displaced by the scrapping program as a result of the implementation
of the Limabus segregated busways.
(i) The project will involve minor works to rehabilitate and slightly change the design of 32 kilometers of
bikeways located on existing streets, and to extend the existing network by 6 km. Guidelines for
contractors will ensure that materials are properly disposed of and that traffic disruptions will be
minimized. The new bikeway designs result from a safety audit and are expected to reduce traffic
accidents.
(ii) the overall project will result in the retirement of a number of public transport vehicles that are
currently substantially contributing to the low air quality of Lima. Their disposal is an environmentally
sensitive activity but the GEF project will help local authorities ensure that vehicle retirement is
performed in a cleaner way than it is currently. One of the GEF-financed preparatory studies outcome has
been the definition of a retirement plan which indicates (a) the specifications of the disintegration
process, (b) the firms habilitated to carry it out, (c) the retirement costs along with the potential revenues



8
ISDS
to be drawn from it, (d) the enforcement measures required to make sure everything is done by the book
and (e) the final destination of every part of the vehicles, recyclable or not. In addition, the WB-IDB loan
and the GEF project will support a pilot project (200-300 vehicles) that will help assess the realism and
feasibility of more stringent scrapping norms and which will aim at laying the groundwork in order to
ensure this new norms and methods will be followed in the future on a sustainable pattern. In short, the
bus retirement component will have a positive impact on air pollution and should not affect local
environmental conditions as long as the norms specified in the preparatory studies regarding bus
retirement are strictly followed and enforced.
Il.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The potential cumulative impacts are being studied in the Strategic Environmental Assessment,
to be delivered in May, 2003.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Main Project: Long-term impacts are being studied in the Strategic Environmental Assessment, to be
delivered in April, 2003.
GEF:
Long-term impacts of the project will be positive, due to the reduction of global and local emissions,
such as C02, particles, NOx, SOx and other contaminants currently present in Lima Metropolitan Area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Alternatives are being studied in the SEA.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment as well as the Environmental Impact Assessment for the
BRT corridors will be completed before project appraisal. Environmental Management Manuals which
apply to the proposed works are under preparation and will be completed before appraisal. In addition,
within the bidding procedures, documents and contracts, there are specific clauses which clearly spell out
the obligations of the contractors and supervising consultants to ensure compliance with the applicable
environmental requirements.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project has been extensively discussed during the two years of preparation. Affected populations
include those living or working along the bus routes, informal vendors, users of the bus system, bus
chauffeurs and operators, and others. Extensive interviews have been done with these groups during
project preparation. The EAs will both be publicly discussed and disclosed, when avaAable.
participatory approach will be followed by the project to ensure involvement of relevant
stakeholders based on each one's capacity to absorb and deliver.
Government Agencies: Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy and Finance at
the national level and their regional andetrict counterparts, local government ministries, and
municipalities
Transport User Groups community members (women, elderly/pensioners, students, ethnic communities
(if any in the project areas), population below poverty line, redundant labor force (if any in the project



9
ISDS
areas), squatters, encroachers, street vendors and sidewalk hawkers, shop owners , and petty traders in
the Limabus corridor ) from project influence areas, and transport associationsTransport Provider and
Supplier Groups. NGOs, media, community organizations, private sector (transport suppliers, including
informal operators), and labor unions ( if any Project preparation and implementation include extensive
use of participatory techniques to involve all above stakeholders through sharing information,
consultation and collaboration leading to their empowerment.
During preparation, collaborating with the government agencies, information has been shared and will
continue to be shared and consultations have been and will continue to be carried out among all
categories of stakeholders including the government through structured interviews, semi structured
interviews, focus group discussions and stakeholder workshops.'
During implementation, collaborating with the government and possibly civil societies and NGOs,
participation of all categories of stakeholders will be facilitated by sharing information and consultation
through periodic workshops and focus group discussions. In addition, engendered report cards will be
implemented to ensure public's views regarding the quality, efficiency, and adequacy of the LimaBus
transport project are continuously addressed.
Stakeholders which have been involved in project preparation include bus owners, private transport
associations, local government and central government officials. 'I'he social program will ensure that all
affected populations are adequately dealt with. Different workshops have been conducted to shape the
final proposal and to involve the transport sector in the decision-making. To understand the opinionis and
the feelings vis-a-vis a change in the public transport sector and the vehicle retirement program, a
specialized company carried out two focus groups with drivers of combis and buses.
In a two half-day workshop, representatives of the private sector, provincial government and central
government were briefed on the findings of the consultant's initial report and various forms of incentives
for removing the obsolete vehicles. Based on the results, the consultants developed the complete
incentive system, which was presented in a second workshop with representatives of the transport sector.
The final and here presented version has been exposed to public opinion a third time. After the delivery
of the first report it turned out that regular meetings withi the two key-players of the public transport
sector PROTRANSPORTE and DMTU would an indispensable asset to the work of the consultants.
Therefore a weekly meeting was agreed during which all latest developments have been discussed. A
similar methodology has been adopted regarding the other components. Various focus groups have been
carried out on bike use (24 focus groups with workers, cyclists, students, women, bus drivers, inhabitants
of the zones served by the bikeways, in-depth interviews with municipal authorities and traffic
policemen), on the bus retirement program (first on a small sample of bus drivers and owners in the
context of the bus retirement design study) theni on a much wider number of stakeholders in the context
of the design study of the social impacts mitigation program (more than 700 interviewees), on the bike
promotion campaign (workshops with municipalities, interviews with university deans, schools
managers, factories bosses), on the institutional strengtheninig component to define its scope
(municipalities, DMTU), etc.
Table: Workshops and Presentations
May 13, 2002   Presentation in presence of PROTRANSPORTE
Technical proposal: Design of a financial incentive scheme to promote to
promote public transport capacity rationalization
May-July 2002  Focus Groups on bike use with workers, cyclists, students, women, bus
drivers, inhabitants of the zones served by the bikeways, etc.



10
ISDS
July, 10, 2002  First workshop with representatives of private operators in the public
ransport sector and governmental institutions : design of a financial
incentive scheme to promote public transport capacity rationalization
July 2002    FONAM workshop: Presentation of the preliminary results of the focus
groups with current drivers and owner
July, 08. 2002  First presentation to the Peru GEF project Consultative Committee of the
financial incentive scheme to promote public transport capacity
rationalization and of the bus physical retirement process
July-September Continuous consultative process with the municipal districts and other
2002       beneficiaries of the institutional strengthening component to assess the
needs and design the training program.
August, 21, 2002 Second workshop with representatives of private operators in the public
ransport sector and governmental institutions : design of a financial
incentive scheme to promote public transport capacity rationalization
August, 27, 2002 Second presentation to the Peru GEF project Consultative Committee of
he financial incentive scheme to promote public transport capacity
rationalizationi and of the physical retirement process
October 2002  Focus groups with more than 700 bus drivers, owners and conductors on
the bus retirement scheme and their expectations vis-a-vis the social
impacts mitigation program.
October, 28, 2002 Proposal of the Incentives to promote the removal of old obsolete vehicles -
FONAM
November, 2002 Workshop with the municipal districts served by the bikeways on bike use
promotion.
November 8, 2002 Presentation of the expected environmental benefits to the GEF project
Committee
December, 10, 2002 Last presentation : design of a financial incentive scheme to promote public
transport capacity rationalization - FONAM
April 9, 2003  International Seminar on the GEF aspects and sustainable transport to raise
awareness among national and local decision makers to secure support to
the project
July, 2003 (date to  Seminar to discuss the findings of the GEF preparatory studies at the
be determined)  technical and at the citizenry level.
E. Safeguar(ds Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI ] 51. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ 1 S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements



11
ISDS
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  5/19/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  5/19/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:              Paulus A. Guitink                            05/12/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Kirsten Oleson/Person/World Bank         05/12/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                           05/12/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Jose Luis Irigoyen                            05/13/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
LEARCH          FEEO8ACI     | SUTE MAP       SH LiOWCASE



