Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4342
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mexico 
Project ID:  P107159 
Project Name:  MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr 
Task Team Leader:  Walter Vergara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (67%);Environmental policies and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,825.00 
 Carbon 
Fund 
0.00 
 Clean 
Technology 
Fund 
200.00
2,025.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to contribute to the transformation of urban 
transport in Mexican Cities to a lower carbon growth path. This objective will be 
achieved by improving the quality of service provided by the urban transport systems in a 
cost efficient manner, and by deploying equipment, infrastructure, and operational 
strategies that reduce CO2 emissions. Achieving the PDO will significantly reduce the 
transport sector carbon footprint and the emission of related air toxics.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes the following components:  
 
Component 1 - Capacity Building: This component will finance capacity building at 
State level and in the participating cities, for developing or strengthening the local urban 
transport development process.  The capacity building activities include: (i) preparation, 
update or completion, of Integral Transport Plans (ITP) including climate change 
considerations;  (ii)  development of plans for modernizing traffic management, efficient 
allocation of public space for transport related services, and non-motorized transport; (iii) 
support for urban transport institutions responsible for sector coordination (iv) training 
Page  2
and skill development of local government staff and other civil servants in areas relevant 
to sustainable urban transport.  
 
Component 2 - Development of integrated transit systems: This component will finance 
mass transit corridors and ancillary investments:  
 
a) 
Integrated Mass transit Corridors # Development of Integrated Mass Transit 
Corridors in cities that have an ITP. The financing of such corridors includes but is not 
limited to: preparation, design, construction, supervision, maintenance and rehabilitation 
of roads for trunk lines and feeder roads, terminals, yards, transfer and access stations, 
mixed traffic lanes adjacent to the project, rolling stock, signaling, control centers, 
information systems, environmental monitoring equipment, and fare collection systems.  
 
b)
Other low carbon transport investments # Traffic management measures, 
optimization of public space for mass transport, non-motorized transport, universal access 
facilities, bike-transit integration, vehicle use restriction, safety and security programs, 
demand management marketing and promotion, freight management, and car free 
planning.  
 
Component 3 - Promotion of low carbon bus technologies and scrapping of buses: This 
component will facilitate market penetration of low-carbon vehicle technologies and 
scrapping of old and displaced vehicles:  
 
a) 
Market penetration of low-carbon transit technologies (low-carbon rolling stock) 
#
These vehicles would not be purchased otherwise, because they represent an additional 
financial commitment to the operator that is not readily justifiable by current market 
conditions. Financing this sub component will help cities obtain low-carbon buses 
without having to transfer the additional cost of acquisition to the user.  
 
b)
Scrapping of old and displaced vehicles # This sub-component will finance 
scrapping programs including: (i) institutional capacity to develop/adopt clean and 
environmentally sound scrapping strategies (including dismantling process, classification, 
disaggregation, and final disposal in recycling plants or landfills, and financial 
mechanisms for implementation), (ii) the purchasing of displaced rolling stock, and (iii) 
the implementation of the scrapping process.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management: This component will support the overall technical 
coordination of activities within the cities through a project implementation unit 
(including the implementation of a technical monitoring system) as well as the 
administrative and financial management of the eligible projects. It will include goods, 
consultancy services, travel, and operating costs undertaken for project management. 
This component could finance the project staff of the implementing agencies, such as 
coordinator, procurement specialist, environmental and social specialists, and other 
required personnel for project management, as well as external audits, and project 
indicators, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program targets the transformation of the urban transport sector in Mexico in order to 
improve the efficiency of delivery of transport services in urban areas, and towards a low 
carbon path through activities that would reduce its carbon footprint.  
 
The UTTP will support the PROTRAM (Federal Support Program for Mass Transit). 
PROTRAM is open for all cities that comply with some minimum criteria set in the 
Page  3
guidelines of the program. As such, cities and projects that will be subject to Bank 
financing will not be known until after effectiveness. The Bank agreed with the 
government to prepare a resettlement policy framework.  
 
In accordance with this agreement, the government has prepared a Social and 
Environmental Management Framework (MASTU ) in order to ensure that all financed 
projects comply with social and environmental sustainability principles as identified in 
the Bank#s safeguards policies. The MASTU will guide cities on how to ensure proper 
consideration of environmental and social aspects within their project cycle.  
 
The MASTU establishes the social and environmental procedures and institutional 
responsibilities to ensure that projects will include adequate prevention, mitigation and 
compensation measures to address and minimize the potential environmental and social 
impacts of construction and/or operation of the different projects. The MASTU also 
includes grievance and conflict solution mechanisms as well as dissemination guidance at 
the various phases of the project cycle.  
 
The mainstreaming of these procedures by participating cities ensures that projects will 
have fulfilled national/state/local regulations as well as the Bank#s safeguards 
requirements. The MASTU has a clear set of guidelines that incorporates the experience 
of cities on urban transport projects executed in Mexico. The program is expected to have 
positive environmental and social impacts in the long-run, since it aims at improving the 
quality of public transport and non-motorized transport systems and improve traffic flow 
and passengers safety. The program is designed to have a positive long-term impact due 
to the reduction of global and local emissions, as CO2, NOx, SOx, Particulate matter, and 
other contaminants currently present. The reduction will be directly linked to improved 
vehicle operation, reduced trip lengths, use of more efficient modes of transport and 
improved technologies. A detailed screening # using standard forms # of the different 
project sites will confirm that none are close to natural habitats or environmentally 
sensitive areas.  
 
The main direct impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized 
negative environmental impacts and temporary social impacts. Such impacts are expected 
to consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption, and limitations 
accessing houses and business. Additional negative impacts during the follow-on 
construction stage will occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials. 
Environmental impacts associated to the operational phase will mainly include emissions 
of air pollutants and waste generation (e.g., oils). Most of these impacts will be mitigated 
by proper designs and the implementation of environmental and social management plans 
to be followed according to the procedures defined in the MASTU.  
 
In addition, the proposed UTTP is expected to have positive impacts on living standards 
of the population by improving physical access and quality of public transport, enhancing 
non- motorized infrastructure, and improving the built environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
Ms Carla Della Maggiora (LCSEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given that cities subject to financing will not be known before appraisal, and the 
complexity of implementing these works in dense urban areas and potential 
environmental and social impacts, the UTTP has been in principle qualified as Category 
A, and  the program considers the use of an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (MASTU) that will guide cities on how to ensure proper consideration of 
environmental and social aspects within their project cycle.  
 
The MASTU establishes the social and environmental procedures and institutional 
responsibilities to ensure that projects will include adequate prevention, mitigation and 
compensation measures to address and minimize the potential environmental and social 
impacts of construction and/or operation of the different projects, including the protection 
of cultural assets. The mainstreaming of these procedures by participating cities ensures 
that projects will have fulfilled national/state/local regulations as well as the Bank#s 
safeguards requirements. The MASTU has a clear set of guidelines that incorporates the 
experience of cities on urban transport projects implemented in Mexico. At present, the 
MASTU is fully embraced by the national government.  
 
In general, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. However, 
in particular, for the case of BRT (bus rapid transit), there are some critical points in each 
corridor which require a close consideration at the early planning and design stage; and 
especially during the infrastructure works. These include the potential effect on historic 
and cultural heritage sites, on socially vulnerable spots. Moreover, implementation of the 
BRTs has the potential to cause involuntary displacement in some corridors, particularly 
limited access to businesses and displacement of some of the current operators.  Main 
localized negative environmental impacts are expected to occur during construction. Such 
impacts are expected to consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. 
Additional negative impacts during the follow-on construction stage will occur due to 
haulage and final disposal of materials. Environmental impacts associated to the 
operational phase will mainly include emissions of air pollutants and waste generation 
(e.g., oils).  Most of these impacts will be mitigated by proper designs and the 
implementation of environmental and social management plans to be followed according 
Page  5
to the procedures defined in the MASTU. In the case of cultural assets, protection 
measures will be set up following national regulations under the supervision of INAH 
(National Institute of Anthropology and History) following the process described in the 
MASTU.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The program is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts in the long-
run, since it aims at improving the quality of public transport and non-motorized transport 
systems and improve traffic flow and passengers safety. The program is designed to have 
a
positive long-term impact due to the reduction of global and local emissions, as CO2, 
NOx, SOx, Particulate matter, and other contaminants currently present. The reduction 
will be directly linked to improved vehicle operation, reduced trip lengths, use of more 
efficient modes of transport and improved technologies. A detailed screening # using 
standard forms # of the different project sites will confirm that none are close to natural 
habitats or environmentally sensitive areas.  
 
The main direct impacts are expected to occur during construction and cause localized 
negative environmental impacts. Such impacts are expected to consist essentially of 
noise, vibration, dust, and traffic disruption. Additional negative impacts during the 
follow-on construction stage will occur due to haulage and final disposal of materials. 
Environmental impacts associated to the operational phase will mainly include emissions 
of air pollutants and waste generation (e.g., oils). Most of these impacts will be mitigated 
by proper designs and the implementation of environmental and social management plans 
to be followed according to the procedures defined in the MASTU; this process includes 
the protection of cultural assets.  
 
As indicated above, the environmental and social management procedures to be 
followed by all activities financed by the program are also described in the MASTU. 
Environmental procedures described in the MASTU are based on the Federal Law on 
Ecological Equilibrium and Environment, and other relevant federal ordinances, as well 
as state and local regulations, complemented with the necessary procedures to ensure that 
safeguard#s requirements will be met. Cities will be responsible for the implementation 
of the MASTU, and at the national level SEMARNAT will supervise the fulfillment of 
the MASTU environmental procedures in the projects. SEDESOL, the national entity in 
charge of urban development will overlook management procedures to avoid or mitigate 
social impacts.  Both agencies are members of the Consultative Group of PROTRAM 
that will be in charge of overlooking urban projects seeking financing from the UTTP.  
Protection of cultural assets will follow national regulations under the supervision of the 
INAH.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given that specific projects funded under the UTTP will not be known before appraisal, 
the program considers the use of an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(MASTU) that will guide cities on how to ensure proper consideration of environmental 
and social aspects within their project cycle.  
Page  6
Specifically, the MASTU consider the assessment of alternatives as part of the project 
cycle of any project subject to financing under the UTTP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government of Mexico has prepared the Social and Environmental Management 
Framework (MASTU) to be implemented by all cities seeking financing under the UTTP.  
 
The MASTU has been designed as a tool to facilitate the inclusion of environmental and 
social management procedures in the design, implementation and operation of a project 
for cities willing to participate in the UTTP.  It includes: (i) information about the 
Program#s legal and institutional framework; (ii) procedures and responsibilities of the 
different stakeholder involved; and (iii) general guidelines to prepare environmental 
assessment (environmental impact assessment and environmental management plans) and 
social assessment and programs to be adapted to conditions of each city  
 
The MASTU main objectives include the following:  
 
#
Identify and assess social and environmental impacts derived from projects;  
 
#
Mainstream social and environmental procedures from an early stage in the 
project cycle;  
 
#
Guide the preparation as needed of Environmental Assessments and Social 
Management Plans to avoid or mitigate impacts; and  
 
#
Introduce consultation procedures that ensure broad stakeholders# participation.  
 
Cities will be responsible for the implementation of the environmental and social 
procedures set in the MASTU, while at the national level, SEDESOL and SEMARNAT, 
as members of the Consultative Group overlooking the project will be responsible for 
supervising its implementation for all projects in the UTTP.  
 
Cities are expected to implement the procedures described in the MASTU and through 
this process, to mainstream its procedures in their project cycle. This means that each 
project should have technical management capacity, including adequate instruments (e.g., 
environmental manuals, adequate regulations, and specialized social units) and qualified 
staff. Project planners will follow due diligence procedures, including monitoring and 
tracking of key aspects of the process, to provide assurance that the procedures of the 
MASTU are being implemented.  
 
SEDESOL, through its Division of Urban Development, supports urban development 
and poverty alleviation local level plans and programs. It supports programs to provide 
for basic infrastructure at the state and local levels, and provides technical assistance in 
the management of basic urban services. SEDESOL will be responsible for the revision 
of all the documentation dealing with social issues described in the MASTU.  
 
SEMARNAT mission is to promote the protection, restoration and conservation of 
ecosystems and natural resources, goods and environmental services, aimed at ensuring a 
sustainable development. SEMARNAT will be responsible for the revision of all the 
documentation dealing with environmental issues described in the MASTU.  
 
Although specific projects funded under the UTTP will not be known before appraisal, 
assessment of the institutional capacity at the local level in sample cities (i.e., Monterrey 
and Leon) indicate that they have started to mainstream social and environmental 
management into their project cycle.  
Page  7
Main observed features of these two cities include that: (i) both have developed their 
own methodologies to incorporate social considerations into the design and 
implementation phases of urban transport projects based on lessons learnt from previous 
experiences; (ii) environmental management has generally been institutionalized, and 
projects# teams include social management units capable of managing social impacts 
associated to the projects. However, both cities recognize the need of further technical 
assistance to consolidate their capacity; and (iii) they both understand the benefits of 
embracing the consultation process formulated in the MASTU and are very willing to 
adopt it. Other cities that may fulfill the criteria to participate in the project have also 
adopted social and environmental processes based on their experience in the previous 
Medium Cities Urban Transport Project in Mexico and their contribution to prepare a 
previous version of the MASTU.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consultation process is divided into two levels: program and project level. The 
program consultation refers to the consultation of the MASTU per se. This consultation 
took place in March 2009 in Mexico, and included NGOs, cities interested in 
participating in the project, governmental agencies, research institutes, transport 
consulting companies, and bus operators among others. Comments and feedback from 
stakeholders have been incorporated into an updated version of the MASTU, to be 
disclosed before appraisal. The second level of consultations refers to consultation with 
stakeholders directly involved in specific projects, which will be carried out at each 
participating city. Both types of consultation are also described in the MASTU (e.g., 
Environmental impact assessments, Social impact assessments, Resettlement plans, etc.).  
 
Annex 3 of the MASTU provides general guidance for project developers in reference 
to the consultation process at three distinct levels: (i) general information to the public; 
(ii) consultation with key stakeholders; and (iii) consult and participation of potential 
affected people and/or groups.  
 
At the local level, the consultation process will involve meetings and forums with local 
authorities (municipalities), communities# grass-root organizations and local and regional 
NGOs and university development institutions as well as the federal participating 
institutions (SEMARNAT, SEDESOL, BANOBRAS, FONADIN).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/07/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/03/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  9
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
08/31/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Carla Della Maggiora 
08/31/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz 
08/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
09/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
09/03/2009 
Comments:   
