Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2010 
Report No.:  AC4957
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P103037 
Project Name:  Electricity Expansion 
Task Team Leader:  Paivi Koljonen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2010 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (40%);Public administration- Energy and 
mining (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (55%);Small and medium 
enterprise support (21%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Education for the 
knowledge economy (2%);Health system performance (2%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
330.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
178.85 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
168.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
252.00 
 
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid 
5.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
320.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
84.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
88.35
1,096.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project has two development objectives:  
 
(a) increase the capacity, efficiency, and quality of electricity supply; and  
 
(b) expand access to electricity in urban, peri-urban, and rural areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components:  
 
Page  2
Component A - Geothermal Generation.  This component will construct 280 MW of 
geothermal generation capacity in Naivasha (2x70 MW extension at the existing Olkaria I 
power station and 2x70 MW in the Olkaria Domes field (Olkaria IV).  
 
Component B - Transmission. The component will construct three 132- kV transmission 
lines: (a) Kindaruma-Mwingi-Garissa; (b) Eldoret-Kitale; and (c) Kisii-Awendo.  
 
Component C - Distribution. This component will: (a) upgrade and extend electricity 
distribution networks in urban, peri-urban and rural areas; (b) electrify priority loads 
(pubic facilitates) in rural areas; and (c) provide grants for slum electrification;and  
 
Component D - Sector and Institutional Development. This component will support 
training, institutional development; M & E and provide project implementation support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The geothermal generation investments in Olkaria I and Olkaria IV (Domes) will be 
located in and adjacent to the Hell's Gate National Park in the greater Olkaria geothermal 
area of the Rift Valley about 120 km from Nairobi.  Transmission investments will be 
located in Eastern, North Eastern, Nyanza and Western Provinces.  Distribution 
investments in urban, peri-urban and rural areas will be located in the Nairobi, Coast, 
West, Mount Kenya, Nyanza and Western provinces. The rural electrification component 
will finance high priority rural electrification targets throughout the country, such as 
secondary schools, health clinics, and community centers in administrative headquarters, 
larger rural towns/market centers and agriculture areas where the IDA-financed KAPAP 
is operating.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTEN) 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts:   All three project components are likely to cause some air and 
water pollution during the construction phases and limited loss of animal and plant 
habitats.  There are four main issues of concern associated with project areas, the first 
three related to the generation component. The Olkaria I extension will be situated 
adjacent to the existing geothermal plants in the Hell's Gate National Park whereas 
Olkaria IV will be just outside the borders of the Park.  The construction and operation of 
the generation facilities will result in some loss and degradation of wildlife habitat.  
Secondly, both Olkaria I and IV will rely on water from Lake Naivasha, resulting in 
potential impacts on water availability and quality. Thirdly, there will be some soil and 
water pollution caused by brine water discharge and sludge disposal. The other key 
environmental concern relates primarily to the transmission component (and the 20km 
stretch from Olkaria IV to the existing grid), and the need to take appropriate measures in 
design and construction of the transmission lines to minimize the risk of electrocution of 
raptors and nesting birds known to inhabit the area of the proposed transmission lines.  
 
Adverse social impacts:  The main adverse social impacts will be involuntary 
resettlement primarily due to land acquisition for power generation facilities and 
transmission lines.  Preliminary estimates indicate about 6,025 project affected persons 
(PAPs), who are entitled to compensation.  The main impact will be loss of assets, 
including those required to maintain livelihood.  The number of PAPs requiring 
relocation is likely to be relatively small.  An estimated 93 households (685 persons) will 
require re-location due to land acquisition for the projects generation component.  The 
transmission component will require the relocation of an additional 1,290 households 
(5,340 persons).  Any relocation resulting from the distribution and electrification 
components will not become known until after project appraisal but is likely to be 
minimal.  Also, initial screening reports indicate that the proposed project may adversely 
affect the cultural cohesiveness of indigenous peoples.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term indirect impacts are positive as the use of geothermal energy and the 
expansion of electricity access will reduce dependence on fossil-fuel fired generation 
facilities, and a reduction in use of off-grid diesel generation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Transmission and distribution lines will be aligned to minimize adverse environmental 
and social impacts.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
1. Generation component.  KenGen has agreed to monitor the impact of fauna in the 
Hell's Gate Park, and implement mitigation measures to limit habitat loss and 
degradation, in particular during drilling and construction stages, in accordance with a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between KenGen and Kenya Wildlife 
Service (KWS) in 1994. KenGen will liaise with KWS to periodically monitor the effect 
on wildlife (if any) attributed to construction of the power station and associated 
facilities. Should such impact be deemed significant by KWS, KenGen may consider 
purchasing land to offset the loss of the wildlife migratory corridor, or may provide some 
natural barriers to enable wildlife to freely and safely bypass the construction area.  
 
2. 
Hydrological studies are currently being undertaken to determine water 
abstraction rates, including measures adopted by the Lake Naivasha Riparian Association 
to harmonize water abstraction from all users around the lake, and findings will be 
presented in the final ESIA.  Continued monitoring of water use and water levels will be 
undertaken by the Association and by KenGen, and recycling will be undertaken 
wherever feasible. In addition, KenGen has agreed not to use lake water in landscaping 
and will undertake rainwater harvesting.  
 
3. 
Before discharging brine water to any water body, KenGen will analyze the brine 
water quality before discharging it. Where possible, concrete piping for brine transport 
will be utilized and brine will be re-injected. Sludge including toxic non-biodegradable 
substances will be taken out from condensers and cooling towers during major overhaul 
activities. Though the frequency and the quantity of sludge is expected to be small, 
KenGen will manage the sludge properly by drying, encasing it in concrete and burying 
it.  
 
4. 
 To minimize bird collisions in the transmission component of the project, wire-
marking will be undertaken to alert birds to the presence of power lines. KPLC will take 
appropriate measures in design and construction of the transmission lines to minimize the 
risk of electrocution of raptors and nesting birds. NatureKenya, the Ornithology 
Department of the Museums of Kenya and KWS can provide guidance on which specific 
actions are appropriate. For the generation component, bird-friendly transmission lines 
will be used on the 20km stretch from Olkaria IV to the existing grid. KenGen has signed 
an MoU with the National Biodiversity Institute to this effect.  
 
5.    An Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework and Resettlement Action Plans have 
been prepared, in consultation with stakeholders.  
 
Borrower capacity.  Under previous Bank operations, KenGen has had sufficient 
capacity to manage the potential environmental and social impacts and should be able to 
manage those associated with the additional geothermal capacity of the proposed project.  
Its Geothermal Resource Development (GRD) Environment Unit at Olkaria has 22 
qualified staff in the fields of EIA, air quality, waste management, safety, environmental 
resource management etc.  Furthermore, KenGen has an ISO9001 accreditation and its 
Page  5
Environmental Inspection Unit regularly monitors the environmental and social aspects 
of its operations in close cooperation with the KWS, which manages the Hell's Gate 
National Park.  KenGen has experience in international resettlement policy guidelines, 
having relocated Project Affected Persons in the Sondu Miriu Hydro Power project, 
partly supported by a bilateral donor.  For this Project, KenGen has set up a Resettlement 
Implementation Committee to manage the resettlement in Olkaria under the leadership of 
its Regulatory Affairs Director.  The committee includes the District Commissioner for 
Naivasha, the District Lands and Settlement Officer for Naivasha, Community Elders, 
Representative for women and vulnerable groups and KenGen staff.  
 
KPLC has a functional Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) Department.  The staff of 
SHE has received environmental training under the ongoing ESRP and have managed the 
safeguards issues of that project satisfactorily.  They will work in close collaboration with 
the PIT to ensure the implementation of the T & D components according to the 
provisions of the applicable environmental and social safeguards instruments and the 
RAP.  In addition to environmental monitoring, KPLC's Resettlement Unit (RA) has had 
experience in resettlement, having relocated about 500 persons who lost their assets due 
to the acquisition of land for a thermal power project in Mombasa.  The RA includes the 
following specialists: Team Leader, Legal Advisor, Accountant, Building Technician, 
Environmental and Social Specialist, Socio-Economist, Land Valuer, Electrical Engineer, 
Way Leaves Officer, Surveyor, and other specialists as required for a specific project.  
 
REA has contracted KPLC's SHE and RA to manage environmental safeguards and 
eventual resettlement and compensation cases in the components that it is responsible for.  
The RA will carry out screening of project areas in line with the guidelines in the 
Resettlement Policy Framework and if this screening identifies the need for resettlement 
or compensation, KPLC's RA will carry out the required consultations, prepare the 
required abbreviated RAPs and implement them.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Generation Component:  
 
The preparation of the ESIA for the Olkaria I plant included 11 public consultation 
meetings with key stakeholders  in 11 locations during September of 2009.  Similarly, the 
preparation of the draft ESIA report for the Olkaria IV plant included consultations in ten 
locations with relevant stakeholders during the month of September 2009.  KenGen held 
follow-up meetings with senior community members, the Provincial Administration, and 
other stakeholders in October and December 2009.  Elements of the proposed projects 
and the potential positive and negative impacts, as well as mitigation measures, were 
clearly explained to the relevant stakeholders in both Swahili and English using maps and 
figures.  
 
Transmission Component:  
 
Page  6
Extensive stakeholder consultations already have taken place with residents along the 
proposed routes, local administrative officers, and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs), community-based organizations (CBOs), and faith-based organizations.  For the 
Kindaruma-Mwingi-Garissa line, consultative public meetings have taken place in each 
of five project divisions.  For the Kisii-Awendo line, there were consultations in three 
districts during October 2009.  And for the Eldoret-Kitale line, eight consultative 
meetings took place during September and October of 2009.  
 
Distribution Component:  
 
Consultations will take place with affected communities in accessible locations in each 
district as part of the environmental and social screening process.  The results will be 
communicated in an understandable language to potentially affected persons and 
beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/23/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/28/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/06/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/26/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paivi Koljonen 
03/11/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
03/11/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
03/11/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/11/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/11/2010 
Comments:   
