Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2010 
Report No.:  53554
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P086807 
Project Name:  Integrated Coastal Zone Management & Clean-Up Project (APL #1) 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Solid waste 
management (30%);General public administration sector (15%);Ports, waterways and 
shipping (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (29%);Pollution management and 
environmental health (29%);Other environment and natural resources management 
(14%);Municipal governance and institution building (14%);Environmental policies and 
institutions (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.95 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.71 
 Local 
Communities 
1.26 
 
EC: European Commission 
5.20 
 
AUSTRIA, Gov. of  (Except for Fed. Chancellery-DG Dev. Coop)2.60 
 
NETHERLANDS, Govt. of THE  (Except for MOFA/Min of Dev. Coop 
3.11 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
2.23
20.11 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The revised PDO is to assist the Government of Albania in developing, on a sustainable 
basis, tourism in the South Albania coast by improving critical public environmental 
infrastructure and municipal services, remediating and containing pollution hazards from 
a
former chemical plant in Porto Romano near Durres, improving community 
infrastructure and enhancing architectural and cultural resources.  
 
The revised PDO is supported by key outputs defined as follows:  
 
1.
Outcome Indicator (i)  
Page  2
*
Increased % of population served by a newly built landfill site and transfer station 
and at least 5,000 tons of household waste properly disposed through:  
 
o
Establish infrastructure for safe disposal of municipal solid waste in the Southern 
Coast that meets EU standards through construction of a landfill in Bajkaj and transfer 
station in Himare built and operational.  
 
*
Improvement of Saranda water supply and sewerage including piped household 
and hotel water supply and sewer household and hotel connections in Saranda through:  
 
o
Reconstruction of sewer networks (2.1 km of new sewer lines) and extension of 
water supply (2.5 km)  
 
o
Construction of wastewater outlet from the Wastewater Treatment Plant in 
Saranda to the Chuka Channel (2.8 km).  
 
-
Increased access for international tourists and access of cruise liners to the 
Southern Coast by:  
 
o
Reconstruction of port facilities through a 180m new berth front with 9 meter 
water depth, paving and drainage, fencing, and utilities constructed.  
 
2. 
Outcome indicator (ii):  
 
*
Remediation of contaminated sites through removal and containment of 
hazardous materials in Porto Romano to reduce human health hazards through  
 
o
landfilling and encapsulation of 45,000 m3 of hazardous waste on one of the sites  
 
3. 
Outcome indicator (iii)  
 
*
Community-based investments in coastal villages have improved critical village 
infrastructure enabling sustainable tourism development in the Southern Coast through:  
 
o
Completion of the first and second phase of the Coastal Village Conservation and 
Development Program with active participation of the South Coast communities and 
Local Government Units.  
 
*
Protection and promotion of the vernacular architecture of the Southern Coast by:  
 
o
Enhancing conditions for conserving traditional villages and promoting the 
recognition of their value as an engine for economic development by piloting a Roof and 
Facades and Bed and Breakfast Program in coastal villages.  
 
Global Outcome indicator:  
 
Strengthening of the protected areas management capacities for the long-term protection 
of Butrint National Park and the surrounding Ramsar wetlands complex.  
 
The following outcome indicator of the original Project under Component A has already 
been met, namely the completion and approval of the Southern Coastal Development 
Plan by the National Land Use Planning Council. This indicator was met in July 2008.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed changes are a result of changes in the original economic, financial, and 
technical environment specific to the original design of the Project. The restructured 
Project also addresses design and implementation issues raised in the Inspection Panel 
Investigation Report for the Project and serves to align the project with the 
recommendations of the Management Report and Recommendation in Response.  
Page  3
Respectively, the Project Development Objective (PDO) has been changed to focus on 
support for provision of critical infrastructure to improve environmental and sanitary 
conditions essential for coastal development. The proposed changes will not have major 
effect on the original implementation arrangements, financial management, procurement 
arrangements, nor on the safeguards category of the Project.  
 
Though the Integrated Coastal Zone Management and Clean-up Project was originally 
foreseen as an Adaptable Program Lending Credit (APL) consisting of two phases, no 
second phase will take place.  
 
Under the original Project, Component A focused on enhancing the capacity of 
Albanian authorities to manage coastal resources through development of an adequate 
policy, legal and regulatory and monitoring framework, including effective management 
functions at the central, regional and local levels. The findings of the Inspection Panel 
Investigation Report, follow-up described in the Management Report in response to the 
Inspection Panel report, and subsequent discussions with the Government of Albania 
have led to a decision to drop certain Project activities and restructure the Project. 
Subsequently, financing for land use planning activities is not included in the restructured 
Project.  
 
The activities under Component A related to Strategic Policy Support and Coastal 
Management Strengthening that will not be incorporated in the restructured Project 
include (i) Sub-component A.1 Strategic Policy Support; (ii) Sub-component A.2 Coastal 
Management Strengthening, consisting of the following activities: (a) regulatory capacity 
strengthening; (b) capacity building for the resolution of disputes; (c) strengthening of 
integrated coastal zone management capacity; (d) environmental management 
strengthening; and (f) land-use and spatial planning strengthening.  
 
Project Components which will remain under the restructured Project include:  
 
Sub-component A.2.e): Protected Area Management Strengthening piloting and 
implementating sustainable management activities in and around of Butrint National Park 
(BNP), Albania's most important protected area. This component includes (i) finalizing 
the protected areas Management Plan, (ii) provision of environmental infrastructure in the 
Park, and (iii) preparing a Social Assessment (SA) to complement the Social Survey 
already completed.  
 
Component B: Southern Coastal Environmental Infrastructure and Rehabilitation. This 
subcomponent will remain largely unchanged.  
 
Sub-component B.1: Southern Coastal Solid Waste Management, for which the Project 
will finance construction of one municipal landfill near Saranda and one transfer station 
near Himare.  Originally, the Project was to support construction of a landfill near 
Himare. However, due to the small quantities of waste generated by local communities, 
the difficulty of locating the suitable landfill site near Himare, and construction and 
Page  4
upgrade of the coastal road (financed by the Government of Albania), this has been 
changed to a transfer station from where waste will be transported to the constructed 
landfill near Saranda.  In addition to the construction of the landfill and transfer station, 
the restructured Project will support a review of issues related to the unsanitary dumpsite 
near Saranda. Finally, the restructured Project will support review of regulatory issues 
related to construction and demolition waste. The key success factor to reduce the effects 
of Construction Demolition Waste (CDW) is strict enforcement of the laws prohibiting 
quarry operators and construction firms from dumping CDW dispersed throughout the 
terrain and coastal slopes. Regulatory measures, if implemented properly, would be more 
effective rather than bringing waste to a designated collection point.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Saranda Gateway. No changes are foreseen under this sub-
component which will support investment for rehabilitation of the Saranda port 
infrastructure to facilitate passenger access to the Southern Coast.  
 
Sub-component B.3: Sewer and Water Supply in Saranda Tourist Area will be included 
in the restructured Project as originally planned.  
 
Sub-component B.4: Coastal Village Conservation and Development Program (CVCD) 
program will support the following (i) Infrastructure Improvements, including (a) local 
public investments related to rehabilitation of water supply and roads, cultural heritage 
enhancement and waste water treatment; and (b) private infrastructure improvements 
through rehabilitation of roof and facades (R&F) in traditional villages; and (ii) Capacity 
Building and Technical Assistance.  Local land use plans will not be financed anymore 
under this sub-component as originally envisaged. Likewise, to simplify Project 
implementation, small-scale environmental protection and sustainable economic activities 
have been removed from this component.  
 
Component C: Porto Romano Hot Spot Clean-up will support investment for 
remediation and containment of hazardous pollution on the site of the former chemical 
plant at Porto Romano, near Durres. No changes in the design of this component are 
envisaged.  The obsolete chemicals stored in the warehouses have been repackaged and 
incinerated abroad, which was financed and implemented separately by the Government 
of the Netherlands.  The demolition of the remaining structures and the remediation and 
rehabilitation of the area will be financed under the restructured project.  No land-use 
planning will be financed under the restructured Project. Technical assistance to prepare a 
monitoring and implementation of site after-care program and a covenant in the Finance 
Agreement towards the institutional responsibility to implement the after-care program 
will be included to protect the long-term integrity of the encapsulated site.  
 
Component D: Project Management and Monitoring will remain to provide support for 
project management, coordination, public awareness and outreach, monitoring & 
evaluation and the preparation of the Social and Vulnerability Assessment.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There are no changes in the project geographical area. There are no new safeguards 
issues which will require changing of the safeguards category assigned to the project. A 
detailed ESSF has been prepared for the original project which has been updated to 
reflect changes related to the project components, namely elimination of components 
supporting investments in land use/urban planning or related activities.  
 
Project investments under the restructured Project in the coastal infrastructure will 
require special attention to ensure proper functioning of facilities, financial soundness 
and sustainability of investments. Similarly, design of the infrastructure investments will 
meet appropriate technical standards.  
 
During implementation of the original Project, component level and site specific EIAs 
have been carried out. For Category A subprojects, international consultants have been 
hired and have produced good quality EIAs and EMPs. EIAs were discussed with 
stakeholders, publicly disclosed and public consultations held in line with the 
requirements of the ESSF. Environmental management plans were included. The 
following have been prepared for Category A subprojects: (a) EIA for the remediation of 
Porto Romano; (b) EIA for rehabilitation of Saranda Gateway; and (c) draft EIA for the 
Bajkaj Landfill and Transfer Station in Himare. Safeguards requirements applicable to 
category "A" intervention have been applied in the preparation of these EIAs.  
 
Environmental safeguards requirements for small scale community investments under 
the CVCD Program follow the safeguards provisions in the CVCD Program Operational 
Manual. Implementation of infrastructure investments under the Project has not yet begun 
except for community investments under CVCD Program.  Under the CVCD program, 
sewer rehabilitation works have been financed in Himare and further investments are 
under consideration for wastewater treatment. Wastewater treatment which include an 
outfall to the Adriatic Sea is considered as Category "A" intervention and safeguard 
requirements have been applied accordingly.  
 
In accordance with the ESSF, which incorporates the Resettlement Policy Framework 
for the Project, investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) shall be submitted 
to the Bank for approval / no objection when the scope and design of sub-project civil 
works are available, at least 3 months (90 days) prior to the anticipated commencement 
of sub-project construction works. Construction work will not begin, however, until the 
Bank has approved the RAP covering that specific sub-project investment. In the event of 
a
discrepancy between Albanian jurisprudence and Bank policy, the latter will prevail.  
 
While the Project does not envisage major land acquisition, some sub-project activities 
may involve limited land acquisition. The Southern Coastal Solid Waste Management 
component includes construction of a municipal landfill in Bajkaj with a transfer station 
in Himare. The detailed design study for the landfill identifies the need for acquisition of 
two private parcels of land. The RAP for the Porto Romano Hot Spot Clean-up site had 
been prepared and approved as part of project preparation by Ministry of Environment, 
Page  6
Forests and Water Administration and has subsequently been partially implemented, but 
the resettlement needs to be completed consistent with the principles of the ESSF and 
with the agreed-upon RAP. Land acquisition or right of way may be necessary for 
community infrastructure investments to be made under the CVCD Program. The Port of 
Saranda rehabiliation, which will facilitate tourism in the Southern Coast, will focus on 
rehabilitation within the confines of an existing port facility. However, changes in traffic 
patterns and access to the Port will be assessed to identify any associated impacts. In 
most cases, compensation for land acquired is likely to suffice as a remedy; however the 
ESSF also includes measures to redress economic displacement of people, if necessary.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSS3) 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS) 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project safeguards category will remain as FI. Since Board approval in 2005, the 
Bank practice and guidelines have evolved so that FI category applies to projects 
disbursed through financial intermediaries that meet the criteria of OP 8.30. However, the 
FI rating has been retained for continuity. Also, the EIAs for all major infrastructure 
investments financed by the Project have been completed or are near completion, so 
changing the project category would not result in a chance of approach to preparation of 
EIAs. The existing ESSF has been updated to reflect the changes in the project described 
above, including minor adjustments to reflect recent experience in implementation of 
Porto Romano resettlement plan. The original project ESSF has been originally disclosed 
in the country and the Infoshop in April 2005 and the revised ESSF has been disclosed in 
the country on February 22, 2010 and in the Infoshop on February 24, 2010.  
 
Page  7
In the course of supervision, and prior to completion of the project restructuring the 
Bank reviewed the actions and processes undertaken by the PCU. The conclusions of this 
review is that the capacity of the PCU is sufficient to ensure that Project investments 
comply with the ESSF. The revised ESSF reflects the scope of restructured Project and 
progress made on meeting safeguards requirements. With respect to social safeguards, the 
restructured Project will require expropriation of two private parcels of land for 
construction of the municipal landfill in Bakaj.  Four families which have been living on 
the contaminated site in Porto Romano have been resettled; transfer of titles to their new 
apartments need to be finalized.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4/11). Under sub-Component B3 the project will 
support investments to enhance the vernacular architectural heritage of the Southern 
Coast. This include measures to protect assets from further deterioration and increase the 
awareness/capacity of municipalities and communes to preserve the economic value of 
this important asset. Additionally, the CVCD Program is expected to support the interior 
rehabilitation of a small number of homes to include installation of new bathrooms as 
well as repair and upgrading of some interior utility networks (e. g., electricity, water, 
heating, air conditioning). Interventions will be undertaken and managed in accordance 
with principles of good international practice in field of cultural heritage conservation.  A 
cultural heritage conservation manual, describing the materials and methods for 
conservation has already been elaborated. Conservation guidelines, based on the cultural 
heritage conservation manual, will be developed by local authorities as part of capacity 
building efforts to ensure the sustainability of the program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project interventions aim to contribute to the sustainable development of the Southern 
Coast and Project-supported investments are expected to have a positive impact on the 
environment (e.g. sanitary waste disposal, remediation of contaminated sites) or, if 
potential negative impacts occur, impacts are mitigated as prescribed in tailored EMPs.  
 
With regard to indirect and/or long term impacts: The Solid Waste Management 
component will result in a sanitary disposal facility for municipal solid waste in the area. 
This will have a long-term positive effect on waste management.  A possible impact 
relates to waste pickers working on the current dumpsite. Closure of the existing 
dumpsite is not financed under the restructured Project; however, the Project will finance 
a
review of possible dump closure best practices and measures, including foreseen social 
impacts and mitigation measures. Other negative impacts beyond the direct identified 
impacts are not envisaged.  
 
The Porto Romano remediation component will resolve the long outstanding issue with 
contaminated lands in the area with long-term positive environmental and health impacts. 
The component will require a long-term, low-intensive monitoring regime for which the 
agreement for such after-care program between Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Water Administration and the Municipality of Durres has been included in the 
restructured Project.  
Page  8
For the component of the Saranda Gateway, the objective of the rehabilitation of the 
Port is to attract more international tourists through the Port of Saranda. It is not foreseen 
that this will have a substantial impact with regard to the number of total tourists 
compared to the impact on the number of visitors to the region by road.  
 
For the other smaller investments, no impacts beyond the direct impacts identified in the 
EIAs are foreseen. The CVCD Program will not allow for construction of new roads and 
water supply systems that could trigger new waterfront construction development; 
instead, it focuses on existing roads and systems rehabilitation. Private infrastructure 
investments are focused on the traditional historic villages in the mountains to conserve 
and develop the traditional vernacular architecture of the region. Lastly, the project 
supports the preparation and approval of the Butrint National Park Management Plan.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
It is a standard practice, that during project implementation, different options and 
alternatives to mitigate environmental impacts are examined during the design stage of 
sub-projects. Various landfill sites and alternative technologies to deal with landfill gas 
and leachate generation have been considered  to select the most robust and sustainable 
solutions for the Saranda landfill component. The same criteria have been applied to find 
the preferred design alternative for the Porto Romano remediation component. Given the 
volume of materials, export of contaminated materials has not been an option and the 
design resulted in a simple low-maintenance solution to safely dispose the materials on-
site in a dedicated containment. Alternative engineering solutions the rehabilitation in the 
Saranda Port were assessed. This includes piles, sheetpile and block wall. The sheet-pile 
solution was selected as more environmental friendly and meeting the engineering 
requirements. Simirlarly, analysis of alternatives has been an integral part of the EIA 
process for other Project-supported investments.  
 
Activities under Component A related to strategic policy support and coastal 
management strengthening will not be included in the restructured Project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The PCU capacity to monitor EIA implementation has increased during the 
implementation of the original Project. The PCU capacity to implement relevant 
safeguards provisions was and will be further  supported through targeted capacity 
building and international advisors with extensive experience in environmental 
management and Environmental Impact Assessments that have been hired to assist the 
PCU in implementation of the major infrastructure components. All EIAs and EMPS for 
Category A sub-projects have been reviewed by the Bank and are of good quality. For all 
sub-projects under the CVCD Program -all of which are Category B classification- EIAs 
have been prepared.  
 
Page  9
Furthermore, extensive dialogue has been conducted with the GoA on the subject of the 
World Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement in the context of the Inspection Panel 
report. Continued engagement with the GoA in the context of implementation of the 
restructured project is expected to facilitate this dialogue. Resettlement of the families 
from the contaminated Porto Romano site has been completed, but the transfer of the 
titles is pending. The Ministry of the Environment is working with the municipality of 
Durres to facilitate the title transfer to the four eligible families. The progress on the 
actions taken by the Durrest Municipality and the Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Water Administration will be monitored during implementation. The Borrower will also 
prepare an abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan in accordance with the ESSF for the 
expropriation of the two plots of land in Bajkaj for the landfill construction. This Plan 
will be submitted to the World Bank for approval prior to the approval on any 
construction.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders at national level are are MoEFWA, MoPWTT and MoCYS.  The 
role and relevance of each national stakeholder vary depending on the Project issues to be 
consulted. However, the Project Steering Committee will serve as platform for exchange 
of stakeholder views and decisions on Project matters.  
 
The local stakeholders include Vlora Qark and the local government units - 
municipalities and communes, Regional Environmental Agencies in Vlora and Saranda; 
Local Environment Inspectorates in Vlora and Saranda and the Saranda Port Authority. 
Other stakeholders may be identified during implementation of project activities in 
conjunction with the Borrower.  
 
Local stakeholders also include NGOs active in the region, social associations, business 
community organizations such as local Chambers of Commerce, hoteliers associations, 
tourism associations, which have been consulted.  
 
The consultations for the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework were held 
on April 7, 2005 in Orikum and subsequently in Himare, and on April 8, 2005 in Saranda  
 
With regard to the specific investments:  
 
I. Solid Waste Management  
 
The draft Environmental Impact Assessment for the Landfill and Transfer station was 
disclosed in Albania on June 30, 2009 and in the Infoshop on September 14, 2009.  
 
The first public consultations were held in Himare and Saranda on May 13, 2009. The 
second public consultations were held on July 15, 2009 in Saranda. Additional meetings 
were held in Vergo Commune on June 15, 2009.  
 
II. Porto Romano  
Page  10
The Environmental Impact Assessment for the Porto Romano Remediation was 
disclosed in Albania on January 30, 2008 and in the Infoshop on August 14, 2009.  
 
The first public consultation meeting was held in Durres on February 15, 2007 and the 
second public consultation meeting was held in Durres on January 30, 2008.  
 
With regard to the Resettlement Action Plan, a meeting with families to be resettled was 
organized on April 4, 2005  
 
III. Port of Saranda  
 
The Environmental Impact Assessment was disclosed in Albania on May 28, 2007 and 
in the Infoshop on June 14, 2007.  
 
The first public consultation meeting was held in Saranda on March 8, 2007 and the 
second public consultation meeting was held on June 7, 2007  
 
IV. Saranda Water Supply and Sewer Project  
 
The public consultations were integrated as part of the overall program for the upgrade 
of the municipal water and wastewater for Saranda (Municipal Water and Wastewater 
Project and Integrated Water and Ecosystems Management Project). EMPs were prepared 
and for the outlet in the Cuka Channel, an EIA was prepared which was disclosed in 
country on February 28, 2007 and in the Infoshop on March 1, 2007. As the detailed 
design has been finalized already for some time, before the start of the construction 
works, a review of the EIA/EMP will be done.  
 
V. Coastal Village Conservation and Development Program  
 
Specific dates for the public consultations conducted for the small village investments 
are provided in the project implementation files.  All village investments under the 
CVCD program are identified and implemented through a highly participatory and 
inclusive process described in the Program Implementation Guidelines.  
 
VI. Butrint Park Management Plan  
 
The first meeting was held in the village of Mursi, Xarra commune on February 27, 
2009. A Second meeting was held in Mursi, Xarra on April 24, 2009. A third meeting 
was held on October 16, 2009. The Butrint National Park Management Plan remains in 
draft.  The BNP Management Plan will be supported by a social assessment to 
complement the social survey already carried out during the first phase of Butrint 
Management Plan preparation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2010 
 
Page  11
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/23/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/23/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  12
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
02/22/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
02/22/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/22/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/22/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
02/22/2010 
Comments:  Paula Lytle was replaced as Social Development Specialist in January 2010 by Eric 
Brusberg. 
