Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4358
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P078550 
Project Name:  Uttaranchal Decentralized Watershed Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Jordanova Damiano 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P112061 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (50%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Water resource management 
(P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.49 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
16.85 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund 
70.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
3.15
90.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional financing from GEF aims at scaling-up and mainstreaming the 
outcome of the activities under Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Management 
Project (UDWDP). The additional GEF activities will ultimately support enhancing the 
sustainability of watershed management activities by restoring and sustaining ecosystem 
functions and biodiversity while simultaneously enhancing income and livelihood 
functions, and generating lessons learned in these respects that can be scaled up and 
mainstreamed at state and national levels.  
 
This objective is fully consistent with the original objective of the UDWDP. The GEF 
project is linked to the World Bank supported Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed 
Development Project (UDWDP) that in turn draws on the positive experiences from the 
Integrated Watershed Development Hills-II project that was completed in 2005. The 
Page  2
added global development objective is an important element for deriving global benefits 
of the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will target 20 micro watersheds that have high erosion indices, 
which are left behind in terms of socio-economic and other criteria and are predominantly 
situated close to the agricultural frontier. With this targeted approach on the most 
vulnerable areas, the impact of the project will be positive both in socio-economic and 
environmental terms. The outcome of the additional financing project will be measured 
against the following performance indicators: (i) Sustainable Watershed Management 
mainstreamed into 20 local government plans including parts of watersheds for which 
two or more Gram Panchayats have shared governance responsibility; (ii) 
Implementation of alternative technologies and approaches for enhancing water 
availability for agriculture and other domestic use; (iii) reduction in community 
dependency of forest for fuel wood and entering markets with medicinal and aromatic 
plants; (iv) improved knowledge of the impact of climate change on mountain 
ecosystems translated into coping strategies; (v) new and innovative techniques and 
approaches for sustainable land an ecosystem management up-scaled within the 
Uttarakhand state. Performance will be monitored periodically through well defined 
indicators by external specialists.  
 
Project Activities  
 
a) 
Watershed planning through community participation- This component will 
involve Integration of Gram Panchayat level watershed plans at the micro-watershed 
level.  At the end of the process, 20 number of Micro Watershed Management (MWS) 
plans will be finalized for implementation.  
 
b)
Controlling land degradation through the SLEM (Sustainable Land and 
Ecosystem Management) approach at watershed level- The component will involve 
implementation of 20 MWS plans.  Activities  prioritized by the community including 
soil conservation works on arable non arable land, forest regeneration, pasture 
development, silvi-pasture development, soil erosion bunds, vegetative barriers, fire 
management, and water augmentation activities  would be taken up.  
 
c) 
Reduce pressure and dependence on the natural resource base through fostering 
markets for NTFPs- Under this component, up scaling of the pilot introduction of chir 
pine briquette making undertaken in UDWDP project will be done. The utilization and 
conversion of chir pine needles biomass into briquette can be used as fuel for meeting 
household and other energy requirements of community. The possible fuel switch from a 
traditional wood based fuel to a non wood based one will go a long way towards 
reduction of fuel wood consumption from the adjoining forest areas. In addition to above, 
pine briquette making can also be taken up as a viable income generating activity by 
Vulnerable Groups or SHGs functional in the project area.  
 
d)
Enhance biodiversity conservation and management through watershed planning 
and community participation- Under this component, domestication and cultivation of at 
least 5 local medicinal and aromatic plants by communities in 20 micro watersheds 
would be undertaken.  A cluster approach will be adopted so as to be able to produce 
marketable quantum  with viable linkages  
Page  3
e) 
Improve adaptation to climate change in natural resource based production 
systems - Under this component, a study for enhancing understanding of the impacts of 
climate change on natural resource based mountain economies and preparation of 
adaptation strategy will be carried out.  
 
f) 
Documentation of best (worst) practices to share them within the state as well as 
through the SLEM Partnership - Documentation of innovative practices will be carried 
out. These will be disseminated through a number of different media (Print as well as 
audio-visual).  
 
g) 
Project Management- Project management will include operating cost and the 
monitoring and evaluation for the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be undertaken in 20 MWS in the in four divisions under the 
Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project (UDWDP). UDWDP covers 
a
total of 238,400 ha in the middle Himalayas ranging from 700 m to 2,000 m above sea 
level and includes 451 Gram Panchayats spread across 18 blocks.  
 
The middle Himalayas are characterized by steep slopes and fragile soils prone to 
erosion. The project purposefully targets micro-watershed that have high erosion indices 
and which are considered backward in terms of socio-economic indicators. Overall the 
project impacts would be positive for the environment as the rates of the resource 
degradation would be reduced with likely reverse trends of ecosystem degradation over 
the life of the project.  This would be measured directly by improved conditions of 
resources such as increased biomass productivity, increased water availability, and 
indirectly by reduced pressure and dependence on natural resources in project 
communities.  
 
The project will utilize the process and requirements of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework of UDWDP which is under implementation. No additional 
safeguards will be triggered for the GEF additional financing is proposed and therefore 
the existing safeguards framework fully meets the requirements of the proposed GEF 
project. The ESMF includes ESA as tool for decision making to promote environmental 
and socially sound practices which process sis fully integrated in the sub-project cycle.  
 
The environmental screening category is “B” partial assessment, and safeguards 
screening category: S2 (limited Impacts).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yuka Makino (SASDI) 
Mr Pyush Dogra (SASDI) 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental and social impacts would arise mainly due to the special 
biophysical and socio-economic characteristics, such as fragility and inaccessibility of the 
project area.  A growing population is further stressing environmental resources like land, 
water resources, grasslands and forests. No significant, large-scale, irreversible impacts 
are envisaged due to the small scale of the proposed project interventions. If planned, 
implemented and designed with environmentally and socially sound practices, the project 
activities would result in positive impacts.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): Improperly planned, designed and/or 
implemented, watershed related interventions can adversely impact the hydraulic regime 
in the area. There may also be cumulative effects of several inter-related interventions in 
the watershed area due to village development activities proposed through participatory 
processes.  Temporary adverse impacts may also be caused due to improper construction 
or other practices leading to long-term slope instability, changes in surface water flow 
and blight due to improper disposal of debris, changes in water availability etc.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The development of NTFPs may lead to increased traffic into the 
forested areas and harvesting of forest products. The harvesting of NTFPs needs to be 
carried out taking into consideration the regeneration cycle and capacity of the forest. The 
cu
ltivation of medicinal plants will take place on farmer’s land and will be certified by 
the Forest Department and will not be carried out in the forests.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): Silvi-pasture activities may be carried out within protected 
areas or within areas which are habitats of important species.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09: Activities to improve farming systems will require pest 
management for crop protection. Inappropriate application of techniques available for 
pest management can cause harm to the environment, including humans.  IPM plan has 
been developed under the ESMF. The IPM is consistent with the correlated land use, 
Page  5
water, crop, animal, flora and fauna and linked to Integrated Crop management, 
Integrated Nutrient management and a strategy for livestock pest management. UDWDP 
is implementing systemic approach to discourage the use of pesticides and encourage the 
use of IPM technologies.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03): Village development plans need to be culturally 
sensitive
 to all groups of people.  In addition, “chance finds” of cultural properties are 
also possible during earthwork phase of construction.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) & Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20): Even though the 
local population will benefit from the project there may be some who could be adversely 
impacted, including tribals and transhumant for example, affected titleholders may lose 
part of their total holding or other structures or in the case of non-titleholders, there may 
be crop loss or affects on structures. The project will reach out to less than 4% of the 
tribal population out of the total population in the 4 divisions of the state, thus triggering 
the OP 4.10. An intensive sample-based Social Assessment has been conducted under the 
project, which included social, stakeholders and institutional reviews and analyses. The 
findings of the Social assessment indicate that while the proposed project interventions 
are expected to result in overall social empowerment and strengthening of the public 
institutions in the project areas.  Potential adverse impacts could occur if the interventions 
are not properly implemented and monitored. The Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Scheduled 
Castes (SCs) live in very difficult and challenging socio-economic and political 
environment and thus the results of the interventions may vary across the villages, blocks, 
districts and the divisions. The Social Assessment has also prescribed steps that would be 
appropriately incorporated in the Project Implementation Plan to respond specifically to 
such local contexts and ensure better results. The Social Assessment has identified ‘social 
exclusion’ of the poor people belonging to the STs and the SCs as the most significant 
social issue prevalent in the project districts.  
 
The Tribal and Transhumant Strategy will specifically help address issues highlighted in 
the social assessment mainly through the sub-project on enhancing biodiversity 
conservation and management through watershed planning and community participation. 
Specific strategies and activities will be initiated to build capacities of the project 
implementation agency (ies) through hiring skilled human resources and providing need 
based training to them. The core interventions at the village level would have its impact 
on overall well being of the members as well as others in their families and the 
households.  
 
It is recognized that the real benefit from this program is in its contribution to 
knowledge acquisition and thus it would study and document specific socially relevant 
thematic issues, viz., migration, changes in local labour market, food crisis, and so on, in 
the context of land degradation, biodiversity changes and conservation and adaptations to 
climate change. Similarly, it is proposed to build knowledge base on ‘good practices’ 
adopted by the project to overcome various social issues through its activities for wider 
dissemination and learning.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential long terms impacts may include changes in land use patterns and occupations of 
people. As no land will be acquired for any project purpose, voluntarily or involuntarily, 
and hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. The project will reach out to approximately 4% of the 
tribal population out of the total population in the 4 divisions, thus triggering the OP 4.10. 
The project, through Social Assessment conducted through comprehensive consultations 
and participatory processes has developed its Tribal and Transhumant Development 
Strategy.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The additional financing will finance activities that complement the on-going 
Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project (UDWDP). Therefore, the 
activities that will be implemented under the additional financing will be conducted under 
the guidelines that have been developed based upon the Environmental and Social 
assessment and the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of 
UDWDP.  
 
Environment Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests, Involuntary Displacement, Cultural 
Property: The project mainstreams environment and social criteria to assess safeguard 
issues at all levels of decision-making to promote environmental sustainability and social 
equity which are the envisaged project outcomes.  It aims to replace the concept of post-
design mitigation by an understanding of the use of Environment and Social Assessments 
(ESA) to select or reject sub-projects or modify their design. This decision making 
process not only applies to a particular intervention but also helps understand the 
cumulative or composite effect of several inter-related interventions in the watershed 
area.  
 
The use of ESAs has been operationalized by preparing an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and integrating it in the Operational Manual.  The 
ESMF includes Environment and Social Guidelines providing mitigation measures for 
adverse environment and social impacts of activities, and monitoring indicators that can 
be used at the local level by the Gram Panchayats.  These have been prepared, based on a 
review of the experience gained from the implementation of the Integrated Watershed 
Development Project 
–
Hills II (IWDP Hills II) and othersimilar projects, such as the 
Doon Valley Project, along with good practices based on experience and indigenous 
knowledge.  These guidelines and monitoring indicators would help identify and consider 
the potential social and environmental impacts of different interventions early in the 
decision making process during the preparation of Village Watershed Development Plans 
(VWDPs).  The laws and acts applicable for the mountain ecosystem in general, and the  
Uttarakhand region in particular including those pertaining to the tribal and transhumant 
Page  7
populations have also been integrated into the ESMF. This would promote the ability of 
communities to select a package of sub-projects and activities that will not only minimize 
or mitigate the negative environmental and social impacts but also enhance the positive 
ones.  
 
The project will also conform to the applicable GoI and GoUA environmental and social 
safeguards, such as the rules and regulations related to conservation of forests, wildlife, 
groundwater resources; guidelines related to aquaculture, biotechnology and transgenic 
resources, hazardous micro organisms; environmental protection norms related to air 
quality, surface water quality, bio medical and hazardous wastes, hazardous chemicals, 
pesticides and insecticides; and the applicable discharge and emission standards 
–
as and 
wherever applicable within the project.  
 
Pest Management: An Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Plan, consistent with GoUA 
policy and Ministry of Environment guidelines has been prepared.  The IPM is consistent 
with the correlated use of land, water, crop, animal, flora, fauna, and other resources. It is 
linked to ICM (Integrated Crop Management) and INM (Integrated Nutrient 
Management).  IPM has been mainstreamed into the VWDPs. All chemicals banned by 
the Indian Government or notified in the WHO list of hazardous chemicals have been 
removed from the Project’s requirements and recommendations. The project makes 
systematic efforts to discourage the use of pesticides and encourage the use of IPM and 
local technologies.  
 
Indigenous People: The project will conform to the federal and state policies such as 
resettlement, agricultural, forest and tribal policies; tribal laws and other relevant 
legislation for the tribal population; laws governing social issues such as protecting rights 
of women, child labour, equal wages, labour rights, local self government regulations; 
and the right to information (RTI). The specific project activities for the tribal population 
will be guided and implemented as per the Tribal and Transhumant Development 
Strategy document, wherein, an emphasis has been provided on protection of their 
livestock and their livelihoods as per law and their culture.  The process of developing 
VWDPs also ensures that the needs of the vulnerable groups, particularly the tribals 
(including the tribal transhumant population), are integrated.  
 
Implementation: Investments to be financed at the community level will be decided by 
beneficiary communities through an intensive participatory process including the 
application of ESMF. The Gram Panchayat watershed development plans will be 
approved by a general meeting of the Gram Sabha. Once approved, the investments will 
be physically constructed by user groups (sub-committees) and the finances and 
procurement will be managed by the Gram Panchayat.  Based on lessons learned from 
IWDP (Hills II) and other watershed projects in India, there is a high probability of 
investments being maintained if the planning is highly participatory and if 
implementation, operation and maintenance are controlled by the end users.  The project 
places the responsibility for approval of watershed plans with the Institutions at Local 
Level i.e., Gram Panchayats (GPs). It also places implementation responsibility with 
them and provides them with the financial resources to carry-out their responsibilities. 
Page  8
GPs in turn, can delegate some tasks to their Statutory Committees or sub-committees. 
Most of these institutions (except the sub-committees) are statutory bodies whose 
existence is enshrined in legislation and will therefore endure beyond the life of the 
project. The Watershed Management Directorate (WMD) in turn will include a core team 
to specifically monitor the environment and social dimensions, mainly inclusion of tribal 
community, of the project.  
 
The ESMF has outlined environmental and social monitoring parameters and 
arrangements. In addition, independent and external evaluation of the implementation of 
the ESMF and social/environmental outcomes will be conducted periodically during the 
lifetime of the project. A process of Social Audit, preceding the mid-term and final 
evaluations, will also be conducted to acquire feedback from the community.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include village communities, Panchayat Raj Institutions (Gram 
Panchayats, Van Panchayats), other village level institutions (Gram Resource 
Management Associations - GAREMA, Self-Help Groups - SHG), Van Panchayats, local 
NGOs, staff of Watershed Management Directorate and other line agencies.  
 
Stakeholder Workshops were held during project preparation and will be held during 
implementation as well.  Direct dialogue with different categories of stakeholders has 
been undertaken at the earliest stage of preparation to learn their views and objectives, to 
understand their assessment of the results of IWDP Hills II project in the State, and to 
assist in aligning the different roles and responsibilities of VPs and GPs.  Workshops 
have also involved key project stakeholders in discussions of how to improve the design 
of the project.  During implementation project interventions at the micro-watershed level 
will be defined by the communities themselves through preparation of their micro plans. 
Special mechanisms will further enhance involvement of vulnerable sections of the local 
population in planning, implementing, and benefiting from project interventions. Prior to 
appraisal, the ESMF, the operational manual, IPM strategy and the Tribal and 
transhumant plan will be disclosed in Hindi and English. A key element of the project is 
to implement a communications strategy that identifies specific audiences and develops 
targeted communications messages to increase general awareness, participation and 
enhance transparency.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  9
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2004 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/12/2004 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
Yes 
Page  10
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
04/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Yuka Makino 
04/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh 
03/31/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Pyush Dogra 
03/31/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/14/2009 
Comments:  cleared. See safeguards clearance memo dated 04/14/2009 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
04/22/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
Page  11
