Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/11/2010 
Report No.:  57904
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lebanon 
Project ID:  P103063 
Project Name:  LB- GREATER BEIRUT WATER SUPPLY 
Task Team Leader:  Parameswaran Iyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 9, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2010 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (80%);Other public sector governance (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
140.00
170.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase the provision of potable water to the 
residents in the project area, within the Greater Beirut region, including those in the low-
income neighborhoods of Southern Beirut, and to strengthen the capacity of the Beirut 
Mount Lebanon Water Establishment in utility operations.   
 
The key project performance indicators are:  
 
#
Volume of additional potable water distributed in the project area.  
 
#
Piped household connections benefitting from rehabilitation works undertaken under 
the project.  
 
#
New piped household connections for poor households resulting from the project 
intervention.  
 
#
Percentage of customers in project area receiving 24/7 water supply.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Greater Beirut Water Supply Project will comprise the following three components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Bulk Water Supply Infrastructure: Component 1 will comprise: (a) the 
construction and construction supervision of bulk water supply infrastructure consisting 
of (i) two water tunnel conveyors of 3 km and 21 km respectively and will include the 
intake, flow regulation and washout structures and related vent and surge shafts and a 
distribution chamber; (ii) two transmission twin pipelines of 7.6 km and 2.7 km 
respectively; (iii) three storage reservoirs of 35 ML, 50 ML and 20 ML capacity 
respectively; (b) design, construction and construction supervision of a water treatment 
plant (WTP) of 250,000 cubic meters a day capacity; (c) all related equipment including 
pumps and valves; and (d) support to CDR for Project management related to the above. 
 
Component 2: Supply Reservoirs, Distribution Network and Metering and will 
comprise (i) Design, construction and construction supervision of 16 supply reservoirs of 
storage capacities varying between 500 and 1,000 m3 each, dispersed within the project 
area, and associated pumping stations; (ii) design, construction and construction 
supervision  of water supply distribution network of about 187 km of pipelines across the 
project area in southern Beirut and parts of the Metn, Baabda and Aley areas; (iii) 
installation of 200,000 household meters in selected project areas; and (iv) installation of 
about 30 bulk water meters at reservoirs and distribution chambers. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Utility Strengthening and National Studies will 
focus on utility strengthening and will also strengthen the capacity of the MoEW for 
project oversight. It will comprise of: (i) setting up and operation of a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) consisting of key specialist staff to implement, monitor and 
report on project progress, and operating costs; (ii) capacity building and technical 
assistance for BMLWE, and MoEW#s capacity for Project oversight, and financing 
consultant services for BMLWE#s special purpose audits;  (iii) the procurement of utility 
strengthening systems, equipment and technical advisory services; and (iv) high priority 
national studies to be undertaken on key sector areas in alignment with the priorities set 
forth in the National Water Sector Strategy (NWSSS) currently under preparation by the 
GoL.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project has two main physical components reflecting Components 1 and 2 described 
above. Component 1 will comprise:  
 
o
Joun Regulation Structure: Set into the hillside by the existing adit access from the 
Joun tunnel to the hydro-electric power station.  
 
o
Joun to Ouardaniyeh Tunnel 3 km in length.  
 
o
Wadi Abou Yabes washout: For emergency discharge or routine maintenance.  
 
o
Ouardaniyeh Water Treatment Works: including tunnel inlet and outlet portals and the 
water treatment works. Sludge treatment and disposal facilities will be associated with 
this works. A washout will be provided for emergency discharge.  
 
o
Ouardaniyeh to Khalde tunnel: 21 km in length.  
Page  3
o
Inverted Siphon: in the Damour River with ventilation shafts at the hills to the south 
and north of the valley. A washout will be provided for use in emergencies and for 
maintenance.  
 
o
A
surge shaft in the hillside above Khalde: 2,800 mm diameter shaft in reinforced 
concrete with surface venting structure 7 m diameter in reinforced concrete, including 
improved access road.  
 
o
Outlet portal in the hillside above Khalde: termination structure in reinforced concrete 
and upgraded access road.  
 
o
Flow measurement and sampling chamber on the hillside above Khalde.  
 
o
Twin Pipeline from Khalde portal to Khalde distribution chamber: 1.9 km long and 
1,400 mm diameter.  
 
o
Khalde distribution and connection chamber: in reinforced concrete containing 
isolating and regulating valves. Provides washout to local stream.  
 
o
Twin Pipeline from Khalde distribution chamber to Hadath 90 and 125 reservoirs: 7.6 
km long, 1,400mm diameter pipelines in ductile iron with connections to Hadath 90 and 
125 reservoirs and local supply.  
 
o
Hadath 125 reservoir:  Storage reservoir, two compartments, effective volume 30,000 
m3 in reinforced concrete with isolating valves and small surface kiosk, including access 
road. Connection to local distribution system.  
 
o
Hadath 90 reservoir: Storage reservoir, two compartments, effective volume 50,000 
m3 in reinforced concrete with isolating valves and small surface kiosk, including access 
road. Connection to local distribution system.  
 
o
Pipeline from Hadath reservoirs to Hazmieh reservoir: 2.7 km long twin 1,300 
diameter pipelines in ductile iron, with option for further extension for supply of treated 
water to Beirut.  
 
o
Hazmieh 90 reservoir: Storage reservoir, two compartments, effective volume 20,000 
m3 in reinforced concrete with isolating valves and small surface kiosk, including access 
road.  Connection to local distribution system.  
 
Component 2 will comprise:  
 
o
The construction of 16 reservoirs (between 500 m3 and 1000 m3 storage capacity 
each) and associated pumping stations distributed across the various distribution zones in 
the project area.  
 
o
The replacement and/or installation of approximately 187 km of distribution network 
across the project area in Ein El Delbi, Southern Beirut and parts of the Metn area.  
 
o
Installation of 200,000 household meters to operate on a volumetric tariff basis.  
 
o
Installation of bulk meters at the reservoirs and distribution chambers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSSD) 
Ms Lene Natasha Lind (MNSSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
1.  The existing comprehensive EIA (dated April 1998) was revised and updated by 
GoL alongside previous studies, with special attention to rights of way, expropriation, 
and potential resettlement. The EIA was revised and updated into an ESIA and examined 
the potential impacts of the project on various parameters including: (i) ambient air 
quality; (ii) soil, landscape and visual amenity; (iii) water resources (groundwater and 
surface water bodies); (iv) biodiversity (fauna and flora); (v) noise and vibration; (vi) 
archeology; and (vii) socio-economic and public community. 
 
2. 
The Greater Beirut Water Supply Project will have significant long-term positive 
impacts on the economy, employment, infrastructure and services, water supply, 
environment and public health sectors among others. It will also have several negative 
impacts during implementation that can be minimized with the proper implementation 
mitigation measures described in the ESMP. The ESMP also includes: (i) references to 
control guidelines and standards; (ii) a description of the responsibilities for the 
implementation and supervision of the plan; (iii) verification, monitoring and training 
requirements, (iv) record keeping and documentation requirements; and (v) the level of 
funding required for implementing the plan. 
 
3. 
Public consultations were carried out as part of the 1998 EIA and the revised 2010 
ESIA. In both documents, the public feedback was documented and taken into account 
into the final report. 
 
4. 
The ESIA report has been widely disseminated, with copies kept publicly 
accessible at the CDR, MoEW, BMLWE, MoE, InfoShop, concerned municipalities and 
immediate stakeholders.  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Page  5
5. 
The project involves land acquisition as well as temporary restrictions on land due 
to the construction of water conveyors and pipelines: (i) full acquisition of land for the 
purpose of building surface structures (infrastructure related to the conveyor, WTPs and 
storage reservoirs); and (ii) establishment of easement right of ways (ROW) where the 
water conveyor will pass underneath the surface. The latter restrictions on the lots depend 
on the depth of the tunnel beneath, such as prohibition of placing deep foundation and 
prohibition of drilling wells. Apart from losses associated with a minor agriculture 
business (greenhouses), there will be no other impact on any other businesses, loss of 
income-generating activities, or physical relocation of people. A family of farmers 
working and residing at the greenhouse site at Ouardaniyeh will be offered alternative 
employment and housing at another location under similar conditions as currently 
provided by the owner. This arrangement has been confirmed in a letter to the World 
Bank that is attached to the RAP. 
 
6. 
A RAP was developed by GoL, reviewed by the Bank and was disclosed in the 
Infoshop on August 6, 2010. The RAP describes land acquisition issues and easement 
right restrictions under each project component and describes previous land acquisition 
undertaken by CDR for the purpose of this project as well as consultations with affected 
landowners, users and other stakeholders. Prior Bank engagement was later abandoned 
and the World Bank has not been involved with any of the previous expropriations. This 
has been confirmed in a letter to the Bank from CDR attached to the RAP. The letter also 
confirms that no pending appeals or otherwise outstanding claims are associated with the 
expropriations, and that they were all carried out in full compliance with Lebanese Law. 
The records of expropriations are filed with CDR.  
 
7. 
Lebanese Law has established general provisions for prior compensation of 
expropriated assets and easement fees for ROW restrictions imposed on property. The 
RAP establishes procedures and mechanisms to address gaps between Lebanese 
expropriation legislation and the requirements of OP 4.12, in particular as regards the 
mode of compensation payment for land acquisition and an affordable and accessible 
grievance mechanism for third-party settlement of disputes arising from resettlement. The 
institutional capacity of the RAP implementing agencies, CDR and BMLWE, and the 
Steering Committee has been reviewed by the Bank and are regarded as being adequate 
for implementation of the RAP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main potential indirect impact is associated with increased generation of wastewater 
and the production of sludge from the water treatment plant. The wastewater will be 
managed at the planned treatment plants planned in Ghadir and Dora which have a 
combined capacity to serve a population exceeding 3 million equivalent and 
accommodate the proposed project. The sludge will be dewatered and disposed of in a 
nearby existing landfill. The quantity of sludge generated will not compromise the design 
capacity of the landfill.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
9. 
The proposed tunnel configuration was justified through a series of alternative 
analyses that were examined in the EIA of 1998 and the revised ESIA of 2010 based on 
the feasibility studies presented at both occasions. The alternatives included: (i) the No-
project option; (ii) transmission options (tunnel with varied alignments and construction 
methods, pipeline with various materials (concrete, ductile, steel); (iii) treatment plant 
location and technology; and (iv) sludge management. The project does not intend to 
prejudge the sequencing of construction of the future reservoirs considered by the 
Lebanese authorities in order to enhance further the Greater Beirut water supply system 
although the greater likelihood for the construction of the Bisri Dam led to an increase of 
the design diameter of the water conveyance tunnel to be built under the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
10. 
A socio-economic survey of the impact of the project has been carried out by the 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) consultant including a 
comprehensive ESMP with mitigation, monitoring, and institutional 
strengthening/capacity building components. The GoL has been involved in the 
implementation of similar measures in several World Bank-funded projects and has the 
capacity to do the same on this project. 
 
11. 
MoEW will delegate implementation of Component 1 (excluding the 
Ouardaniyeh WTP) to CDR and manage implementation of Components 2 and 3 and the 
Ouardaniyeh WTP through the BMLWE#s PMU. The secretariat of the Steering 
Committee, which is part of the PMU, will be based at MoEW. The PMU will be headed 
by a Project Coordinator and will be responsible for the day-to-day and overall project 
management, monitoring and reporting, including the implementation of the Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) and the Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The 
PMU will have a Core Management Team and a Technical Team. 
 
12. 
The environmental and social specialists will be in charge of coordination, 
monitoring, and supervision of the ESMP as well as land acquisition and resettlement 
activities.  Further training will be provided to staff involved or in charge of social and 
environment management during project implementation. In coordination with various 
direct stakeholders, the PMU will develop a capacity building and training program. One 
component of the program targets on-site contractors and supervising consultants 
regarding the preparation of a Construction Environmental Management Plans to ensure 
the proper implementation of the ESMP. Another component targets on-site employees 
and introduce them to the ESMP and its requirements. 
 
13. 
A RAP has been prepared to ensure that all land acquisition and related measures 
are appropriately conducted with due resettlement assistance provided to owners and 
users of the land along the conveyor or distribution pipeline or on reservoir construction 
sites, and that potential adverse impacts are mitigated, in compliance with OP 4.12. 
 
Page  7
14. 
CDR's and BMLWE's capacity to plan and implement land acquisition is 
considered strong. Lebanese Law of expropriation has established general provisions for 
prior compensation of expropriated assets and easement right fees for restrictions 
imposed on affected properties. The RAP establishes procedures and mechanisms to 
address gaps between Lebanese expropriation legislation and the requirements of OP. 
4.12, in particular as regards the mode of compensation payment for land acquisition and 
an affordable and accessible grievance mechanism for third-party settlement of disputes 
arising from resettlement.  
 
15. 
The key institutions involved in this project are the independent Expropriations 
and Appeals Commissions, CDR, BMLWE and the Land Registry in the Ministry of 
Finance. CDR and BMLWE, as the Expropriating Authorities, will provide counseling 
and support to affected owners through their expropriation units and services. 
Replacement costs for resettlement and land acquisition as decided by Expropriation 
Commissions are being assessed based on the principle of equitable compensation 
interpreted to mean the applicable price on the day of the decision in accordance with the 
standards prevailing in the immediate neighborhood and taking into consideration 
whatever is necessary to restore the injured party to the state before the expropriation.  
Establishment of Right-of-Way (ROW) where the water conveyor is passing underneath 
the surface as well as restrictions on drilling on plots along the corridor of the conveyor 
will also be compensated as easement fees according to estimations by the Commission 
on a case by case basis depending on depth of tunnel and nature of restrictions. 
 
16. 
Overall coordination and supervision for the implementation of the RAP will fall 
under the responsibility of the project coordinating PMU. The PMU will have a social 
and environmental safeguards specialist who will supervise and monitor safeguards 
implementation, as described above, as well as any third party settlement of disputes 
arising from resettlement as described in the RAP 
 
17. 
There is also a consistently applied practice both within the CDR and the 
BMLWE, to make efforts to minimize expropriations and search for alternative sites, as 
expropriation costs for public works are considered high and in particular in prime 
property areas of Beirut.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Direct beneficiaries of the project include residents who directly benefit from increased 
access to reliable potable water supply, equivalent to approximately 1.2 million people 
living in the Baabda, Aley, parts of the Metn and Southern Beirut areas of the Greater 
Beirut and Mount Lebanon region; they include 350,000 low-income residents of the 
Southern Beirut suburbs. Indirect beneficiaries include residents of other Greater Beirut 
Mount Lebanon regions, whose water supply will no longer be diverted to the project 
areas. Half of the direct resident beneficiaries are expected to be women. Indirect benefits 
will also include an expected reduction in the number of unauthorized wells drilled and a 
reduction in coastal salt-water intrusion.  
 
Page  8
19. 
Extensive consultations with the affected communities, municipalities and 
stakeholders as described above have been undertaken by the consultant as part of the 
preparation of the ESIA, including individual face-to-face interviews and public 
consultations. Public consultations been undertaken in accordance with Lebanese legal 
requirements for such consultations in connection with public works on May 12 and July 
27, 2010. The consultant has also distributed flyers that summarize the project and 
informs the resident population and stakeholders of public consultation sessions. 
 
20. 
Consultations with directly affected landowners and users, will also be done by 
the Expropriation Commissions  in accordance with Lebanese law following the issuance 
of public expropriation decrees at the local court office housing the Commission in that 
sub-district. Any interested party may also consult the relevant documents at the relevant 
government offices, in this case CDR or BMLWE. 
 
21. 
The World Bank project team, including the social development specialist and 
representatives of the implementing agencies and involved consultants undertook field 
visits to the areas of project Component 1 (Awali-Beirut Conveyor, Ouardaniyeh Water 
Treatment Plant, transfer pipelines and storage reservoirs) where land acquisition will 
occur. Additional field visits to affected areas of Component 2 (distribution networks) 
were also undertaken during appraisal to screen for any additional resettlement issues. 
 
22. 
The RAP was publicly disclosed on August 6, 2010 on the Internet Websites of 
CDR, BMLWE and was submitted to the World Bank's Infoshop on August 6, 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/06/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/06/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
08/06/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/06/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/06/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  9
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parameswaran Iyer 
11/11/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/11/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
11/11/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/11/2010 
Comments:  clearance and approval by Email 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francis Ato Brown 
11/11/2010 
Comments:   
