Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
PROJECT RESTRUCTURING 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated: 05/30/2008 
Report No.: 
44130
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P050668 
Project Name: Mumbai Urban Transport Project  
Task Team Leader: Hubert Nove-Josserand  
Appraisal Date: March, 2002 
Board Approval:  June 18, 2002 
Restructuring  Board Approval: June 26, 
2008 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan ( SIL) 
Sector:  TU-Urban Transport  
Theme:  Transport 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
463 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
62.5 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Borrower (US$m.):        568
Environmental Category: A 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project Development objective is to facilitate urban economic growth and improve 
quality of life by fostering the development of an efficient and sustainable urban transport 
system including effective institutions to meet the needs of the users in Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region(MMR).   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1
 -- Rail Transport, the main activities of which are: (a) improvement of 
capacity and performance of the suburban rail network of the Central and Western 
Railways through provision of infrastructure, (track additions, signaling systems power, 
etc.), new rolling stock (101 9-car electric motor units); and (b) technical assistance. 
Component 2
 -- Road-based Transport, the main activities of which are: (a) area traffic 
control (250 junctions), selected traffic management infrastructure schemes (pedestrian 
crossings, station areas, over bridges, etc.) implemented by MCGM; (b) buses (644) 
procured by BEST; (c) road widening to facilitate two East-West linkages, the 
Jogeshwari-Vikhroli Link Road (JVLR) and SCLR, implemented by MMRDA/MSRDC; 
and (d) technical assistance.  
Page  2
Component 3
 -- Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R), comprising mainly: 
construction of housing, and provision of services for resettlement and rehabilitation of 
project-affected families, implemented by MMRDA and financed with an IDA credit. 
 
As a result of restructuring, several activities have been deleted from the project, 
including mainly the road over bridges, the station area traffic improvement schemes, 
several traffic management improvements, while investment in bus efficiency have been 
added. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis. 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) spreads over an area of 4,167 sq.kms. Mumbai is 
the largest city in India with a population of about 18 millions with contradictions of 
extravagant homes and large proportion of people
 living in slums. The nature of city’s 
geography, especially peninsular and existing development of the older parts of the city 
on southern tip of peninsula has led to the encouragement of new and diversified centers 
such as Bandra-Kurla and new Mumbai. More than 50% of the city population is staying 
in slums because of non availability or unaffordfability of housing. 
 
The project would affect about 20,000 households mostly those living slums. The socio-
economic characteristics of affected population indicate that more than two-third of 
population are Hindus and speak different languages like Marathi, Gujarati, Hindi, 
Telugu, and Tamil. The average size of population is 4.47 and average number of earners 
is 1.46. Only about 1% of affected population are tribal and do not exhibit the indigenous 
charterstics as defined in the Bank’s OP 4.12 “Indigenous Peoples”. About half of the 
workers have regular income who is working with government and private 
establishments, while another 30% engage in petty business and self employment having 
steady incomes and the rest (about one-fifth) work as causal laborers with uncertain 
earnings. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Mr. Sameer Akbar (SASDS) 
Mr. S. Vaideeswaran (SASDS) 
Mr. Satya Mishra (SASDS) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts: 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12):
 The project involves large scale displacement of 
population of 19,947 households. This magnitude of displacement is unprecedented in the 
urban context in India. In compliance with the World Ban
k’s OP on Involuntary 
resettlement, the Government of Maharashtra has adopted a project specific R&R policy 
to provide compensation and assistance to the affected people. A project Resettlement 
Action Plan summarizing the magnitude of impacts, results of baseline surveys and 
institutional armaments has been prepared. Further, a sub-project level Resettlement 
Implementation Plans ( RIPs) were prepared prior to considering the respective sub-
projects for Bank financing.  Some key features of the resettlement implementation are 
that the project has improved the quality of life and work for many residents and small 
business by resettling 17,248 households from squalid and dangerous environments to 
new apartment blocks. The resettlement has facilitated substantial improvements in 
transport connectivity with significant improvement in operational efficiency of the 
commuter rail system- as seen in a 4 to 9 minute reduction in travel time by trains per trip 
and an increase in peak time passenger capacity by 7 to 10 percent.  Currently, the 
implementing agency is focusing in strengthening the capacity of the PAP housing co-
operative societies for self management through various capacity building initiatives. 
 
The key issue encountered during the implementation of the project is resettlement of 
medium and large size shopkeepers and  the management of post resettlement issues such 
as  registration of co-operative societies, adequate water, transport,  schooling facilities, 
etc. The implementing agency has progressed a long way in improving these facilities 
with the active support and advise of Independent Monitoring Panel.   
 
On March 28, 2006, the Executive Directors discussed the findings of the Inspection 
Panel’s Investigation Report and the Management Report and Recommendations. The 
Management Report focused on implementation issues, including the resettlement 
Page  4
procedures for shopkeepers with medium- and large-size shops, restoration of incomes, 
post-resettlement services, baseline data, grievance redress mechanisms, and the quality 
of supervision. The Board endorsed the Management Report’s Action Plan that had been 
prepared in close consultation with the Government of Maharashtra (GoM) and agreed 
that an update report would be provided periodically on progress made in its 
implementation. 
 
The Bank Management presented twice to the Board progress reports on the 
implementation of the Action Plan. These reports were submitted in March and 
November 2007, and another progress report will be submitted to the Board in November 
2008. Last November report noted that MMRDA had made noteworthy progress in 
reaching mutually-acceptable and compliant solutions with the shopkeepers and recorded 
the clear progress on a number of management indicators related to shifting of small and 
medium size shopkeepers, registration of project affected people (PAP) co-operative 
societies, issuance of identity cards to PAPs, transfer of community facilities to co-
operative societies and strengthening of management capacity with the filling of key staff 
positions and sourcing of required specialized technical expertise for all resettlement-
related activities. The report noted also that the Independent Monitoring Panel (IMP) has 
played an important role in contributing to better outcomes, monitoring, and quality 
assurance. 
As a result of restructuring of the project, the Road Over Bridges and Station Area 
Improvement  schemes have been dropped. The implications of this  restructuring from 
safeguards point of view is that the resettlement implementation plans have been 
prepared  for ROBs and the implementation is under way with some 711 Project affected 
families out of 1,156 (62%) already resettled. For them the resettlement will be 
completed according to the MUTP procedures. For the people yet to be resettled, a 
specific procedure has been prepared by the implementing agency  and the key provisions 
of this procedures  includes that (a) All PAPs resettled to date will be considered as PAPs 
affected by MUTP and will be extended all post resettlement assistance as available to 
other PAPs; ( b)All remaining PAPs to be resettled from three ROBs will be given the 
choice for site selection depending on the availability among all MUTP/MUIP sites: (c) 
The payment of compensation for private land and properties will be carried out in 
accordance with the provisions of Land Acquisition Act and other applicable acts; and ( 
d) All the complaints and grievances including those pending will be dealt by MMRDA 
using the existing grievance redress mechanism available under
 
MUTP. MMRDA will 
carry out the process of resettling the balance PAPs of ROBs independent of World Bank 
supervision. MMRDA shall, however, act under the guidance of the Independent 
Monitoring Panel appointed for MUTP. 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).
 
The project was classified as category "A" project, 
largely on the basis of the large number of people requiring resettlement and 
rehabilitation.  Because of the large scale resettlement and the triggering of more than 
one safeguard policy the project was given a safeguard classification of “S1”.  A 
consolidated EA including a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) and sub project 
specific EAs and EMPs were prepared in compliance with this policy. 
 
Page  5
Wherever adverse impacts are unavoidable and likely to be permanent, effort have been 
made to mitigate and minimize their impacts. For example, emphasis is being given to 
noise barriers in the case of sub-projects that are close to sensitive areas such as schools 
and hospitals, so that noise pollution is mitigated. Similarly, the likely deterioration in air 
quality in the long-term has been addressed in the project by preparation of a Particulate 
Matter Reduction Action Plan for Mumbai, which suggests measures to be taken by 
different agencies to arrest the worsening in particulate matter air pollution.  The 
severance of communities living on either side of a major road was highlighted as an 
important issue at the public consultation on the environmental assessment, both in terms 
of social fragmentation as well as safety of pedestrians. This feedback was taken into 
consideration in the design of investment components wherever possible, with provision 
of footpaths and other pedestrian facilities (like subways or foot overbridges). 
 
Given the urban context, in all sub-projects emphasis has been placed on good 
construction management practices, reporting, and strict supervision, in order to ensure 
that the resulting environmental impacts are minimized. Even though there are many 
similarities across sub-projects, individual Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) 
were implemented to mitigate subproject-specific environmental impacts. Given the large 
scale resettlement of slum dwellers into built-up housing, Community Environmental 
Management Plans (CEMPs) have been implemented for all resettlement sites in a 
participatory manner to assist the communities to adjust to their surrounding without 
significantly impacting the environment and mitigating risks of health impacts.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP4.04).  
Mumbai’s notable natural habitat is limited to the 103 sq.km. 
National Park at Borivili, which is located in the northern part of the peninsula between 
the two rail corridors and the coastal wetlands in the eastern and western suburbs.  The 
National Park is protected under the Indian Forest Act whereas the coastal wetlands are 
protected by the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification of February 1991.  Short 
sections of two sub-projects pass through these areas.  A short section of the Bhayendar-
Virar Railway line crosses the Vasai Creek and the adjoining highly degraded wetlands.  
The area of the wetland directly affected is less than 5000 sq.m. out of a total extent of 
wetland of 48 sq.km.  Bridges traversing the CRZ are not prohibited but require 
environmental clearance under the CRZ notification, which has been obtained. The 
MRVC has undertaken compensatory plantation of mangroves affected by the project. A 
100 m section of the Jogeshwari-Vikroli Link Road (JVLR) also impacts some 1000 sq. 
m. of degraded mangroves, which have been restored by the project. The policy on 
Natural Habitats is therefore applicable. 
 
Efforts to provide immediate temporary transit accommodation for squatters, in response 
to a court order with stringent implementation schedule, resulted in an inadvertent breach 
of the CRZ notification at the transit sites of Mankhurd, and Turbhe Mandale. GOM had 
undertaken to move all squatters currently housed in this transit accommodation to their 
permanent accommodation on a priority basis within a period of not more than three 
years. Environmental audit of these transit camps has also been carried out, and 
restoration plans to restore the land under CRZ to its original status after the dismantling 
Page  6
of transit houses, were prepared. However there is delay in implementation of restoration 
plan, and the MMRDA has submitted an action plan for the same to the Bank.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 4.11):  
Mumbai with its history of nearly three hundred years is 
rich in cultural property particularly in the form of built heritage. GOM and MCGM are 
acutely aware of the need to conserve such heritage. GOM in 1995 with the involvement 
of NGOs listed over 600 buildings and precincts as of heritage significance. Development 
Control Rules 1967 govern the development of these listed buildings and precincts. GOM 
has also constituted a Heritage Conservation Committee in 1995 to advise the Municipal 
Commissioner regarding development permission to be granted in case of listed buildings 
and precincts. No development permission can be granted of the listed buildings or within 
the precincts without the consent of the Heritage Committee. 
 
None of the MUTP sub-projects, except selected pedestrian subways, were envisaged as 
directly or indirectly affecting the heritage buildings. However, these are no longer being 
supported by the project. 
 
During the execution of works if a “chance find“of archaeological significance occurs the 
contract requires the contractor to immediately inform the employer and stop further 
work. Employer will in turn inform the state Archaeology Department for further 
investigation.  
 
In addition to the listed buildings there are smaller common cultural properties like 
shrines, small temples or mosques within the project-affected communities. Thus this 
policy applies to the project.  These were identified during the BSES and the RIPs cover 
their resettlement. For example, in case of JVLR Phase I there were a number of small 
temples, which have been relocated according to the RIP prepared in consultation with 
the PAHs. In the case of SCLR some of these religious structures are yet to be relocated. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area: 
 
The long term impacts associated with resettlement will translate into positive impacts in 
the form of  secured housing with title and improved basics amenities which in turn 
improve the overall living standards of PAPs in the form of improving housing quality, 
access to running water, separate sanitation facilities, etc. One of the long term  impact is 
the increased  expenditures on recurring expenses of maintenance cost  and municipal for 
housing societies. To offset this impact, the implementing agency has  contributed 
Rs.20,000 (USD 500) for each households  as Maintenance Fund and the interest earned 
on this amount can used for payment of  taxes and maintenance.    
 
The shifting of  large number of affected people along the safety zone of railway tracks 
and slums had a significant impact in the form of  increased speed and frequency of local 
trains in Mumbai, besides reducing the accidents and improving the safety. 
 
Page  7
The potential long-term environmental impacts could be further congestion and 
deterioration in local air quality because of increase in volume of traffic, despite demand 
management particularly in the Island City.  Other long term impacts relate to possible 
change in land-use as an indirect impact of better access to areas which till recently were 
not as easily accessible. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts
:
Wherever possible, alignment modifications were considered in all road projects  to 
minimize the impacts of displacement.  
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. 
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described. 
 
The MMRDA ( implementing agency for R&R component) has developed  substantial 
capacity over the last 5 years to implement the resettlement related impacts. The R&R 
unit in MMRDA is headed by a Chief Officer reporting to the Project Director. The Chief 
Officer is  assisted by several specialists- Land acquisition, Environment, Registrar- Co-
operative societies, Legal, Planning, Social Development , Public Relations,  Estate 
Management, Database Specialist, etc. Recently with the increase work related to post 
resettlement, a new position- Chief Office (Post Resettlement) has been created and is a 
Senior Officer has been assigned to this position. The two NGOs having long experience 
of working in slums of Mumbai are providing complimentary support for the 
implementation of the Resettlement activities.   
 
In addition to the above arrangements, there is a functional and active Independent 
Monitoring Panel headed by a former Metropolitan and Municipal Commissioner and 
consisting of members from fields of journalism, legal and academics who regularly meet 
and review the progress in key activities and also undertake field visits to assess 
improvement in the resettlement colonies and to hear from PAPs. There are also 
Grievance Redress committees (Field Level and Senior Level), which handle complaints 
and grievances from Project affected peoples. These are independent persons not 
associated with the implementation.  
 
The environmental capacity at MMRDA has been strengthened, and the services of 
environment management and capacity building consultants retained to assist with 
supervision and training efforts. Significant capacity has also been built in the MRVC 
and MSRDC to ensure implementation of environmental safeguards. The most notable 
result of these efforts has been the successful tree plantation and compensatory 
afforestation activities carried out in the project, which is not easy in a densely populated 
city like Mumbai. 
 
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Consultations have been important input into the process of planning and designing the 
project. The affected communities are involved at different stages of project preparation 
and implementation. NGOs provide facilitation to this role on ongoing basis. MMRDA 
has held several meetings with shopkeepers to resolve their issues in the recent past. 
Public Information Centers (PICs) have been established at different locations in the 
project area where key documents and brochures are available. The key documents, 
Implementation Manual and list of Project affected people are also disclosed on 
MMRDA’s web site.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Expected  
Actual 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal? 
 
Yes 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
11/12/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
11/9/2001 
Date of submission to Info Shop 
 
12/10/2001
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
1/3/2002 3/5/2002 
Resettlement Action Plan/* 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal? 
 
Yes 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
10/08/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
10/16/2001
Date of submission to Info Shop 
 
11/09/2001
Indigenous Peoples  Development Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal? 
 NA 
NA 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
NA 
Date of submission to Info Shop 
NA 
NA 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. All the above documents will be reviewed and endorsed by 
RSA once the final draft versions are submitted to the Bank by IIFCL.
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
*
Subsequent to RAP disclosure, a number of sub-project specific Resettlement 
Implementation Plans  (RAPs) were disclosed both in the Bank’s Info shop and In- 
country by the borrower..  
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  9
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Info shop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Hubert Nove-Josserand 
June 4, 2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sameer Akbhar 
June 4, 2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
June 4, 2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr. S. Vaideeswaran 
Mr. Satya Mishra 
June 4, 2008 
June 4, 2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
June 4, 2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr George Tharakan 
June 4, 2008 
Comments:   
