                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA2395
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                             Project ID:    P127759
                            Project Name:       IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)
                            Task Team           Giuseppe Fantozzi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           02-Apr-2013                         Estimated   21-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSAR                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector:             Irrigation and drainage (90%), General energy sector (10%)
                            Theme:              Water resource management (70%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Rural
                                                services and infrastructure (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     37.50                         Total Bank Financing:         30.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                    Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          7.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                            30.00
                              Total                                                                            37.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is (i) to reduce the amount of energy used and to improve the irrigation conveyance
                           efficiency in targeted irrigation schemes; and (ii) to improve the availability and reliability of
                           important sector data and information for decision makers and other stakeholders.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project Components
                           Component 1. Irrigation System Enhancement (US$33.1 million). This component aims at lowering


                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                         the O&M needs of the conveyance section in selected irrigation schemes. It would finance the
                         following two subcomponents:
                         (a)      Subcomponent 1.1: Conversion of pump-based irrigation to gravity (US$ 24.7 million): The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rationale for this subcomponent is to lower the operating cost of water by converting pump-based
                         irrigation to gravity irrigation. The project would provide for the construction of four gravity systems
                         (in Meghri, Gegardalich, Baghramyan-Norakert and Kaghtsrashen); and
                         (b)      Subcomponent 1.2: Upgrading of outlet and other canals conveying pumped water (US$ 8.4
                         million). In this subcomponent, about 52 km of outlet canals in 13 selected pumping schemes would
                         be rehabilitated to minimize losses of high-cost pumped water.

                         Component 2. Management Information (US$1.7 million). This component has two subcomponents:
                         2.1 technical investigations; and 2.2 supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system
                         installation.
                         Subcomponent 2.1: Technical investigations (US$0.9 million). This subcomponent has two
                         activities: (1) analyses of O&M and EM needs (US$0.6 million); and (2) technical audit of irrigation
                         institutions (US$0.3 million).
                         Subcomponent 2.2: Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system installation (US$0.8
                         million).

                         Component 3. Project Management and WUAs’ Support Group and Institutional Activities (US$2.7
                         million). This component will finance two subcomponents: (i) project management; and (ii) WUAs’
                         Support Group (SG).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Bulk of the individual investments under the Irrigation System Enhancement Project (ISEP) will be
                         concentrated in Ararat, Armavir, and Aragatzon provinces (marzes) of Armenia. Two schemes
                         targeted for conversion from pumping to gravity system are located in Syunik marz (Meghri), and
                         Kotayk marz (Geghardalich).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The project will help to improve irrigation
                          BP 4.01                                             efficiency and to lower costs by converting three
                                                                              existing deteriorated pump irrigation schemes to
                                                                              gravity fed schemes. This would imply moving
                                                                              some water intakes from their current locations to
                                                                              new ones, construction of new sections of
                                                                              irrigation pipelines, and heightening of a dam of
                                                                              an existing water reservoir. No new irrigation
                                                                              schemes will be constructed and new agricultural
                                                                              areas will be covered with irrigation services.
                                                                              Conversion to gravity feeding will improve
                                                                              service provision to the areas currently covered
                                                                              and could allow service delivery to over 1,300 ha



                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                                                                     of areas previously served by the three schemes,
                                                                     but later having been cut-off due to deterioration
                                                                     of the infrastructure. The project will also finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     rehabilitation of some outlet canals of the existing
                                                                     pumping stations of several irrigation schemes
                                                                     across the country. Activities proposed for the
                                                                     Project support trigger OP/BP 4.01
                                                                     Environmental Assessment. Based on the nature
                                                                     and scope of the planned physical works, the
                                                                     project is classified through environmental
                                                                     screening as Category B. Its expected
                                                                     environmental impacts are low to medium. The
                                                                     project does not carry risks of destroying natural
                                                                     habitats, damaging forest stands, significantly
                                                                     altering hydrology of the natural waterways, or
                                                                     affecting other ecosystems in any tangible and/or
                                                                     irreversible ways.

                                                                     An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                     (EMF) is developed to cover all other investments
                                                                     under the project, because detailed designs and
                                                                     site-specific documents for them will be
                                                                     developed or finalized in the course of the project
                                                                     implementation. EMF provides sufficient
                                                                     information on the expected impacts and needed
                                                                     mitigation measures of all proposed investments,
                                                                     because all of them are identified, preliminary
                                                                     designs are redeveloped, and baseline
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     environmental studies are available for them. A
                                                                     site-specific EIA report, including an
                                                                     Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) is
                                                                     available for Meghri scheme, as the design work
                                                                     is most advanced for it. Similar documents will
                                                                     be produced for Gegardalich and Bagramyan-
                                                                     Norakert schemes later, while preparation of
                                                                     simple EMPs using Environmental Management
                                                                     Checklist for Small Construction and
                                                                     Rehabilitation Activities is likely to be sufficient
                                                                     for the works planned on the outlet canals.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes             The project aims at improving water availability
                                                                     for the serviced areas and, possibly, restoration of
                                                                     over 1,300 ha agricultural areas back to irrigation.
                                                                     It is anticipated that because of improved


                                                             Page 3 of 10
                                                                         irrigation services agriculture will intensify in the
                                                                         coverage areas and higher value crops may be
                                                                         cultivated, which could entail more intensive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         usage of pesticides. Hence, OP 4.09 Pest
                                                                         Management is triggered. While there is no need
                                                                         of developing a Pest Management Plan,
                                                                         promotion of good pest and pesticide
                                                                         management practices is included into the project
                                                                         design. A library of brochures, fliers, and posters
                                                                         on the sound and safe handling of pesticides,
                                                                         including information on the Integrated Pest
                                                                         Management, has accumulated as a depository of
                                                                         outputs from a number of rural development
                                                                         projects implemented in Armenia with support of
                                                                         the Bank and other international/bilateral
                                                                         financiers. This material is readily available for
                                                                         reproduction for the needs of ISEP. Water User
                                                                         Associations will play pivotal role in promotion
                                                                         of good agricultural practice to farmers.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              There are no known historical/cultural sites
                         BP 4.11                                         located along the irrigation schemes selected for
                                                                         conversion and rehabilitation under the project.
                                                                         Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural
                                                                         Resources is not triggered. Further site-specific
                                                                         environmental work to be undertaken in
                                                                         preparation for works on Gegardalich and
                                                                         Bagramyan-Norakert schemes, as well as for the
                                                                         repair of outlet canals of the other selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         schemes will verify currently available
                                                                         information. As the Project implementation
                                                                         implies conduct of earth excavation works,
                                                                         occurrence of chance finds cannot be completely
                                                                         excluded. EMF carries provisions for the course
                                                                         of action in such cases, which call for immediate
                                                                         suspension of activity by works contractor and
                                                                         notification of the State Agency for Protection of
                                                                         Historical and Cultural Monuments by the PIU.
                                                                         Further action will follow the national legislation
                                                                         and the main principles of OP/BP 4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is
                         4.12                                            triggered, because construction of new irrigation
                                                                         pipelines, as well as rehabilitation of the existing
                                                                         ones - to lesser extent - may cause a need for land
                                                                         take or temporary restriction of land use. No
                                                                         physical relocation or large scale land acquisition


                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                                                                   is likely, though, because rehabilitation of the
                                                                   existing schemes usually does not cause such
                                                                   impacts, and construction of the new sections of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   pipelines is planned along the right-of-way of the
                                                                   existing communications.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes             OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams is triggered,
                                                                   because conversion of Gegardalich pumping
                                                                   scheme to gravity implies switching of water
                                                                   abstraction from Azat reservoir to the
                                                                   Gegardalich reservoir and expansion of the latter
                                                                   to be achieved by increasing the height of the
                                                                   existing dam from 13.9 m to 15.5 m. A Dam
                                                                   Safety Plan was prepared for the existing
                                                                   Gegardalich dam with the Bank support under the
                                                                   Dam Safety Project and accepted by Vorogum
                                                                   (the former irrigation agency, predecessor of the
                                                                   Water Supply Agencies) on February 12, 2003.
                                                                   As the detailed design works for the dam
                                                                   heightening will evolve, the Dam Safety Plan,
                                                                   including emergency preparedness plan, will be
                                                                   updated as required. The design, selection of
                                                                   works provider, construction quality supervision,
                                                                   and operation and maintenance arrangements will
                                                                   be subject to the review and oversight by the
                                                                   panel of experts to be established by the
                                                                   Borrower prior to recruiting of a design
                                                                   consultant.
                         Projects on International   Yes             Meghri scheme abstracts water from the Meghri
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      and Araks rivers, the former being tributary of the
                                                                   latter. River Araks is an international waterway
                                                                   shared by Armenia, Turkey, Iran, and Azerbaijan.
                                                                   An agreement on Araks water use was made in
                                                                   1972, as amended in 1985 (between the Union of
                                                                   Soviet Socialistic Republics (USSR) and Turkey).
                                                                   An agreement also exists between Armenia
                                                                   (USSR) and Iran on the joint utilization of the
                                                                   border areas of the river Araks for irrigation,
                                                                   power generation and household use. The project
                                                                   will support conversion of the existing Meghri
                                                                   scheme from pumping to gravity flow focusing
                                                                   on the decrease in power consumption and
                                                                   increase in efficiency of the scheme operation.
                                                                   Based on the design documents and data on the
                                                                   actual water intake by Meghri scheme over the
                                                                   years of operation, the designed water intake
                                                                   capacity of the scheme after conversion will be
                                                                   less than of the original designed capacity of the


                                                           Page 5 of 10
                                                                                pumping scheme, while actual water abstraction
                                                                                after the project implementation will remain the
                                                                                same as it had been before the project launch.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Therefore, while OP/BP 7.50 Projects on
                                                                                International Waterways is triggered,
                                                                                communication between the riparian states on the
                                                                                project interventions is deemed unnecessary. A
                                                                                memorandum granting a waiver on notification
                                                                                had been submitted the project team and was
                                                                                endorsed by ECAVP.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project does not carry a risk of large scale and/or irreversible impact on the human health
                              and the natural environment The proposed construction activities will cause temporary and
                              localized impacts at the construction stage. Most damage to the environment may occur in the
                              course of works in the waterways and while laying new sections of pipes. Arrangement of the new
                              hydraulic structures for water intake and construction of one section of the Meghri pipeline will
                              have temporary impacts on the water flow in river beds and will require strict adherence to the
                              prescribed mitigation measures to avoid lasting damage to the aquatic life. Construction of new
                              pipelines over the terrestrial areas will require clearing of vegetation and earth excavation,
                              associated with threats of soil erosion and damage to the aesthetic appearance of the sites. Works
                              near the settlements may cause nuisance to local residents through traffic congestion, blocked
Public Disclosure Copy




                              access, noise, dust and vibration. Deployment of construction machinery will carry common risks
                              of operational spillage of fuel and lubricants, and will generate some noise, dust, and vibration.
                              Transportation of construction materials and removal of waste with heavy vehicles may cause
                              inconvenience for local dwellers, through most part of the construction sites are not within densely
                              populated areas and the potential impact of moving and operating machinery can be easily
                              mitigated through adherence to the good construction standards. Location of work sites in
                              proximity to rivers carries temptation of on-site excavation of sand and gravel by construction
                              workers. Unauthorized borrowing will be banned and excluded by close supervision of
                              contractors’ performance. Purchase of aggregate material from registered suppliers is highly
                              recommended, but in case contractor insists on mining for sand and stone – that would be allowed
                              exclusively upon obtaining of a resource use license.

                              Possible negative impacts of operation phase may come from poor maintenance of the provided
                              infrastructure leading to congestion of schemes, flooding and waterlogging. The risk of pollution
                              of agricultural fields from the contaminated irrigation water is marginal, as no large industrial
                              facilities are located upstream of the water intake points.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:




                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                             Conversion of the selected pumping irrigation schemes into gravity fed schemes will improve
                           water availability for the currently serviced areas and will also provide opportunity to bring over
                           1,300 ha of formerly irrigated agricultural fields back to irrigation. It is anticipated that because of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improved services agriculture will intensify in the service areas and higher value crops may be
                           cultivated, which could entail more intensive usage of pesticides. Risks associated with this
                           possible indirect impact of the project will be mitigated through a public awareness campaign for
                           the safe and optimal use of pesticides to be delivered with active participation of the Water User
                           Associations (WUAs). Along with basic rules and recommendations, the disseminated material
                           will carry information on the Integrated Pest Management.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Environmental and social aspects were built into the process of selecting schemes proposed for
                           reconstruction and rehabilitation in addition to the economic and engineering criteria. No works
                           implying evident significant impact on the environment or requiring considerable take of private
                           lands have been included into the project design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Conversion of Meghri, Gegardalich, and Bagramyan-Norakert pumping schemes into gravity fed
                           schemes was initially planned under the MCC financed program. The Borrower prepared an
                           Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of the Meghri scheme and did baseline environmental
                           studies for the other two. The Meghri EIA report was then re-worked to reflect recent changes in
                           the design and in the source of funding. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was
                           prepared to cover all other investments under the project, because detailed designs and site-
                           specific documents for them will be developed or finalized in the course of the Project
                           implementation. EMF provides sufficient information on the expected impacts and needed
                           mitigation measures of all proposed investments, because all of them are identified, preliminary
                           designs are redeveloped, and baseline environmental studies are available for them. Investment-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specific EIA reports, including Environmental management Plans (EMPs) will be developed for
                           Gegardalich and Bagramyan-Norakert schemes later, according to the EMF, while preparation of
                           simple EMPs using Environmental Management Checklist for Small Construction and
                           Rehabilitation Activities is likely to be sufficient for the works planned on the outlet canals.

                           The project will be managed by the Water Sector Development and Institutional Improvements
                           PIU, established under the State Committee for Water Management, which has extensive
                           experience in implementing water projects mainly financed by the Bank. Safeguards compliance
                           under the previously implemented projects had been generally satisfactory. To keep good
                           environmental performance under the new Project and to ensure due sensitivity to the social and
                           gender implications of its implementation, the PIU shall maintain a safeguards specialist
                           responsible for coordination, quality control, and reality check of the work delivered by
                           monitoring and supervision consultants. Safeguards Specialist of the PIU will also organize
                           keeping of monitoring records and reporting on the safeguards work delivered by PIU through its
                           staff and consultants. The national legislation of Armenia requires that technical supervision of
                           works is performed by a licensed entity. PIU will ensure that TOR for a works supervision
                           company(ies) include explicit provisions for monitoring implementation of EMPs, reporting on
                           any environmental damage incurred in the course of works as a result of accidents or bad
                           construction practice, and recommending to the client corrective actions in case of such
                           occurrences.


                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key beneficiaries of the project are the regional water supply agencies, WUAs receiving
Public Disclosure Copy




                           irrigation water from the schemes selected for the project intervention, and rural communities
                           cultivating land within the areas irrigated from these schemes. The State Committee for Water
                           Management (SCWM), as well as ministries of Regional, Agriculture, and Nature Protection are
                           also the project stakeholders.

                           The EMF and RPF prepared by PIU for the purposes of the ISEP implementation were disclosed
                           in-country through the web page of the SCWM and a public consultation meeting on these
                           documents was held in Yerevan on February 25, 2013. A report on the EIA carried out for works
                           envisaged on the Meghri scheme was also disclosed on March 28, 2013 and will be discussed with
                           local stakeholders in a meeting to be held in the Meghri area on April 5, 2013. Representatives of
                           the central and local governmental agencies, academic circles, NGOs, and WUAs were given
                           opportunity to place questions/comments pertaining environmental and social implications of the
                           Project as described in the EMF and received explanation on the issues of their interest. The same
                           procedures of disclosure and consultation will be applied to the site-specific environmental
                           documents to be produced later for individual schemes covered by the Project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       26-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    26-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                           26-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Draft final EMF was disclosed on February 19, 2013, and the final EMF was
                                         disclosed on March 26, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       27-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                           26-Mar-2013
                           Comments: Draft version was disclosed in country in January and through Infoshop (January 30,
                                         2102), on which public consultation was held in February. The current version
                                         reflects the consultation and design updates.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Giuseppe Fantozzi


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)         Date: 01-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)   Date: 01-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 10 of 10
