                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET


                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA626
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P121185
                            Project Name:      National Highways Interconnectivity Improvement Project (P121185)
                            Task Team          Pratap Tvgssshrk
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Apr-2012                       Estimated   29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Administrative and
                                              civil service reform (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    1151.75           Total Bank Financing:                500.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                651.75
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   500.00
                              Total                                                                                  1151.75
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to improve the National Highway network connectivity
                           to less-developed areas and low-income states and enhance the institutional capacity of MoRTH to
                           better manage the non-NHDP network
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         The project has three components: (i) Road Improvement and Maintenance; (ii) Institutional
                         Development; and (iii) Road Safety.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         These are briefly described below:

                         Road Improvement and Maintenance Component: The project will upgrade about 1,120 km of
                         existing single/intermediate lane National Highways in three low-income states (Bihar, Orissa and
                         Rajasthan) and less developed regions in two middle-income states (Karnataka and West Bengal).
                         All these highways, falling under 11 sub-project roads of the non-NHDP portion of the primary
                         network, will be upgraded to two-lane standard, through 15 civil works contracts. Of these, five
                         contracts will be procured as traditional item-rate contracts and the remaining will be based on
                         Engineering, Procurement and Contracting (EPC) mode, wherein the design and implementation
                         risks will be transferred to the contractors, thereby minimizing the risks of cost and time overruns.
                         All contracts – both traditional BoQ and new EPC mode - will include Defects Liability and
                         maintenance of the assets for 5 years post-construction, with appropriate incentives and penalties to
                         ensure adequate attention to maintenance and thereby encourage cost-optimization over the contract
                         life cycle. Also, all the contracts will be monitored through independent engineers (supervision
                         consultants) and subjected to third-party audit.

                         This component would include (a) construction of civil works for widening and upgrading of about
                         1,120 km of existing National Highways to two-lane standards, (b) maintenance of assets during the
                         maintenance period of 5 years post construction, (c) consulting services for supervision of
                         construction, (d) consulting services for supervision during maintenance period, and (e) land
                         acquisition, resettlement & rehabilitation, shifting of utilities, implementation of Environmental
                         Management Plans, tree cutting and afforestation costs and agency charges.
                         The civil works contracts will be taken up for procurement based on a set of Readiness Criteria to
                         avoid a variety of slippages that have been routinely affecting similar projects. Use such a filter is
                         expected to minimize delays in sub-project implementation in the post-award phases and also serve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as an incentive to participating states to expedite various preparation and pre-construction activities
                         under their jurisdiction. The Readiness Criteria includes a combination of techno-economic,
                         environmental, social and statutory requirements/clearances, which would have to be met prior to
                         key procurement events, i.e., invitation of bids and award of contracts, as detailed below.
                         Prior to Invitation of Bids:
                         (1)      3D notification for acquisition of land is published.
                         (2)      All estimates of the line agencies for shifting of utilities are approved by MoRTH
                         (3)      Public Hearing is completed for obtaining environmental clearance
                         (4)      Application for Forest Land diversion is submitted to the Forest Department
                         (5) Final Detailed Project Report (DPR) is approved by MoRTH
                         (6)      General Arrangement Drawings for RoB (if any) is approved by the Railways

                         Prior to Award of Contract
                         (1)      Safeguard documents, cleared by the Bank, disclosed 120 days before award of works
                         (2)      Environmental Clearance and clearance for forest land diversion are obtained
                         (3)      Compensation for land owners and R&R assistance to eligible PAPs paid for milestone 1
                         stretch
                         (4)      Milestone 1 stretch is made encumbrance-free
                         (5)      Supervision consultancy/Engineer contract is awarded and its personnel mobilized
                         (6)      Consultancy contract for RAP-implementation awarded and its personnel mobilized


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         Institutional Development Component: The project seeks to enhance the institutional capacity of
                         MoRTH to better manage the non-NHDP network through supporting specific intervention in five
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas, viz., process improvements, network monitoring & management, financing, governance &
                         accountability, and training.
                         (i)      Process Improvements: The project will support (a) the roll-out of Enterprise Resource
                         Planning (ERP), which is currently under procurement; (b) development of standard manual(s) with
                         clear delineation of the roles, responsibilities and process interfaces between MoRTH and its
                         implementation partners (state works departments) during each key stage of the project life-cycle,
                         viz., that is, identification, preparation (detailed project reports, Land Acquisition, R&R,
                         environmental management and statutory clearances), procurement and contract monitoring; the
                         manual(s) are expected to provide a clear and concise framework for works “execution and
                         delegation” between MoRTH and the state works departments; and (c) updating of various standard
                         reference material including ‘costs-database’ (for NH works) and ‘Data Book’ (for analysis of rates
                         of items of work), and make it available in a format that will be easily accessible as well as amenable
                         for periodic revisions.
                         (ii)     Network monitoring & management: An IT-based Road Information System will be
                         developed and populated with the inventory of road assets over the entire non-NHDP portion of the
                         primary network. Drawing upon this information, a comprehensive Asset Management System
                         (AMS) – covering all non-NHDP National Highways in three of the project states – will be
                         implemented to demonstrate its utility in aiding decisions related to network planning, prioritization
                         of interventions and funds allocation.
                         (iii)    Financing Study to review the existing policies and practices for financing and allocation of
                         funds for the construction and maintenance of non-NHDP network and suggest improvements and
                         options for mobilization of additional finances.
                         (iv)     Implementation of a Governance & Accountability Action Plan.
                         (v)      Training: Structuring and conducting training program(s) for the staff of MoRTH, its
                         implementing partners (National Highway wings of the Works Departments in states) and key sector
                         institutions such as Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE) and Indian Road Congress
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (IRC). The scope of the training programs will include existing and emerging areas of importance
                         covering policy, technical, financial, procurement and contract management aspects.

                         The aforementioned activities will be implemented in tune with the ongoing initiatives such as, for
                         example, implementation of ERP, so as to avoid duplication. The component will include (i)
                         consulting services, and training; (ii) IT equipment and software; and (iii) goods (e.g., equipment).

                         Road Safety Component: This component will pursue the objective of improving road safety through
                         (i) updating Indian standards and regulations related to road safety; (ii) improving road accident data
                         collection and analysis at central and state levels through implementation of the Road Accident
                         Database Management System (RADMS) in project states; (iii) strengthening road safety capacity at
                         the central level, and (iv) training. The component will support:
                         (i)      Review and updating road safety standards and codes of practice maintained by the Indian
                         Roads Congress (IRC) including improving of standards and regulations for work-zone safety,
                         mainstream their implementation in the road sector and integrate those aspects fully in contract
                         management framework. In addition, the existing codes on regulating vehicle axle-loads and
                         institutional arrangements for monitoring and enforcing them will be reviewed and recommendations
                         will be made for their revision/ improvement. The component will also support a series of central and
                         state-level workshops covering road safety matters.
                         (ii)     Implement the Road Accident Database Management System (RADMS) in the project states,

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         by replicating the successful experience in Tamil Nadu.
                         (iii)   Strengthening road safety capacity at the central level through capacity building and advisory
                         services for the Road Safety Cell at MoRTH, improving road safety related policy, legislative and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulatory framework, developing models for enforcement and emergency care, mainstreaming road
                         safety monitoring and evaluation systems, carrying out social marketing and educational
                         interventions, and supporting eventual establishment of the proposed National Road Safety and
                         Traffic Management Board.
                         (iv)    Training. The component will support structuring and conducting road safety training
                         programs for the staff of MoRTH, its implementing partners (National Highway wings of the Works
                         Departments in states) and key sector institutions, particularly on safe road design, engineering
                         countermeasures, Road Safety Audit, and construction zone safety. Furthermore, as part of building
                         capacity of engineering staff of MoRTH and NH Wings of State PWDs, the project will support
                         developing 3-star rating designs for a few selected roads that were surveyed by the International
                         Road Assessment Program (iRAP) (Rajasthan NH-11C, NH-11A Ext., and Karnataka NH-218) and
                         developing capacity for assessing designs from safety star ratings perspective.

                         This component will finance: (i) technical advisory and consulting services, training costs and fees,
                         logistics, consumables and publications; and (ii) software, goods and equipment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As part of project preparation, MoRTH has screened several candidate roads for financing under the
                         project. However, not all proposed roads would be financed under the World Bank project. The sub-
                         project candidate roads will move to contracting process, and benefit from financing under the
                         project only after they meet the Readiness Criteria agreed with MoRTH. The Criteria include techno-
                         economic, social and environmental requirements, including regulatory clearances from the relevant
                         authorities.

                         Based on the findings from the screening exercise, MoRTH has proposed eleven sub-projects/roads
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in three low income states (Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan) and in less developed areas of two middle
                         income states (Karnataka and West Bengal). The socio-economic analysis confirms that the districts
                         traversed by the project roads have below-average development indicators (health, education and
                         income). The proposed roads for Bank funding have different configurations. Each highway consists
                         of stretches with single lane, intermediate lane, and non-standard two lanes. Most sections of these
                         roads have poor horizontal and vertical geometrics, distressed or weak pavements, inadequate
                         capacity, narrow or weak cross-drainage structures, poor riding quality and accident black spots.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                         Dora Nsuwa Cudjoe (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The environmental screening exercise and the
                          BP 4.01                                             environmental assessments have identified some
                                                                              potential adverse impacts on road-side tree
                                                                              plantations, water bodies, local drainage, public
                                                                              water supply sources, material sources, sensitive


                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                                                                         receptors, religious sites and common property
                                                                         resources located along the road.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             To avoid adverse environmental impacts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         critical natural habitats and wildlife, the project
                                                                         will not finance roads in ecologically sensitive
                                                                         habitats such as sanctuaries or national parks.
                                                                         However, reserved/protected forest areas that
                                                                         include natural habitats have been identified
                                                                         along/close to some potential sub-projects (NH
                                                                         201; NH 234 and NH 200) during the
                                                                         environmental screening and assessment
                                                                         exercises. In some cases wildlife crossing/
                                                                         movement outside of designated protected areas
                                                                         along/close to the road has also been identified.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Some forest land diversion in sub-projects such
                                                                         as NH 200, NH 217, NH 234 and NH 201 will be
                                                                         required to construct the road to a standard
                                                                         configuration. In most of the other cases, the road
                                                                         side/avenue plantation is declared as ‘protected’
                                                                         forest, which would be affected in the process of
                                                                         road widening. However, the project is not likely
                                                                         to have a significant impact the health and quality
                                                                         of forests. The project will also not impact the
                                                                         rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                         dependence upon the forests; or aims to bring
                                                                         about changes in the management, protection or
                                                                         utilization of natural forests or plantations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                         reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Implementation of sub-projects is likely to affect
                         BP 4.11                                         religious structures of local significance. Also,
                                                                         since civil works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at
                                                                         work sites is a likely impact that would have to be
                                                                         managed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Some sub-projects pass through tribal dominated
                                                                         districts in the participating states.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The project will require land acquisition for road
                         4.12                                            widening and construction of bypasses, leading to
                                                                         involuntary resettlement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         there is no construction of new dams or activities
                                                                         that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                         existing dams




                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                            Projects on International           No               OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                there are no interventions planned/proposed over
                                                                                or around an international waterway that could
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                                activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                                waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                            7.60                                                not proposed in any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The proposed project will contribute to positive economic growth both locally in the project area
                              and at the regional level by removing barriers to connectivity. Local businesses and inhabitants in
                              the area of influence of the project roads as well as users of the project roads are expected to be
                              direct beneficiaries of the project. These people will have improved access to higher service level
                              highways and transport services. Benefit will also accrue from the savings in travel time and
                              transportation costs. Other expected positive outcomes of the project include improved access to a
                              larger number of economic opportunities, better health services, facilities and higher levels of
                              education, and improved road safety. However, the proposed expansion of the project roads and
                              associated rehabilitation works is likely to create adverse environmental impacts as well,
                              particularly in case of road corridors that will involve realignments and bypasses, requiring land
                              beyond the existing right of way (RoW).
                              However, the proposed expansion of the project roads and associated rehabilitation works is likely
                              to create some adverse environmental and social impacts as well, particularly in road corridors that
                              will involve realignments and bypasses, requiring land acquisition and/or diversion of forest land
Public Disclosure Copy




                              beyond the existing right of way (RoW).

                             Key Environmental Issues. The direct, indirect and induced adverse impacts resulting from the
                             widening of the sub-project roads (including construction of bypasses) may cause some adverse
                             environmental impacts in their area of influence. In view of the project’s potential impacts on the
                             environment, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment has been triggered, and the
                             project is designated as Category A. Project activities, if not properly managed and mitigated,
                             could have adverse environmental impacts. These include: (i) felling of roadside trees; (ii) adverse
                             impacts on water resources; (iii) impairment to or worsening of the local/regional drainage; (iv)
                             construction phase impacts, including those related to camp site operation, dust generation, and
                             pollution from plants, machinery, and vehicles and disposal of debris and other construction
                             wastes; (v) potential indirect impacts on biodiversity rich areas or ecologically important features
                             in some cases; (vi) impact on environmentally sensitive receptors (such as schools and health
                             facilities) located along the road corridors from increased noise and air pollution during the
                             construction and operation stages; and (vii) the potential for poorly planned or managed
                             development induced by the improved roads.
                             More so, diversion of forest land is required for widening of the road for sub-projects such as NH
                             200, NH 201, NH 11B, NH 113 and NH 234. For the other sub-projects (NH 30A, NH 106, NH
                             104 and NH 98), plantation along the avenue declared as ‘protected forest’ will also be affected
                             due to cutting of trees for road expansion. In case of NH 201 and NH 234, the impact of the

                                                                        Page 6 of 13
                           existing road and the likely impact from future development on wildlife in forest areas along/close
                           to the road (but not within a designated protected area) is also a cause of concern
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social Impacts. The project will entail some adverse impacts on land, public and private structures
                           located along/close to the road resulting in need for land acquisition and resettlement. Heavier
                           traffic and increased speeds is likely to increase risks on safety for local residents and road users.
                           The project is also likely to expose road side communities and workers to vulnerabilities
                           associated with spread of HIV/AIDS. The social impact assessments conducted for candidate
                           roads suggests that the project is expected to have land acquisition of about 250 hectares and may
                           impact about 10,000 households, including some in tribal inhabited areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The reduced travel time and freight cost is expected to spur an increase in vehicles plying on the
                           roads with a potential risk for pedestrian safety and increased frequency of vehicle collisions.
                           Increased road use could also spur growth of commercial activities along the highway and some
                           changes in land-use. This may also expose the road side communities, specifically vulnerable
                           groups such as tribals and women to adversities linked to spread of HIV/AIDS, migration and
                           inadequate levels of safety.
                           From the regional context, road expansion has the potential to increase economic growth by
                           enhancing connectivity with markets, urban centers and tourist sites. It is also expected that the
                           improved road conditions will create opportunities for livelihood and will specifically reduce dust
                           pollution that is currently arising due to poor road conditions and insufficient road width.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             As part of the project preparation process, the Bank jointly with the MoRTH launched a two
                           stage environmental and social screening process for the identified/potential sub-projects. This
                           screening allowed identification of the key environmental (such as critical natural habitats, wildlife
                           presence) and social issues early-on. The time required to carry out proper assessments, designing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of appropriate measures for avoidance and management of the identified issues and to obtain
                           regulatory clearances was also analyzed in detail.
                           Based on economic, environmental and social screening criteria, about 1120 km of highways have
                           been identified by MoRTH as candidate roads for improvement under the project. The candidate
                           roads have been/are being further assessed to determine their readiness to proceed to contracting
                           process and to be formally included under the project for funding based on agreed Readiness
                           Criteria. This ensures that all required regulatory clearances are obtained for the sub-project in
                           question prior to the invitation of bids. It further ensures that land acquisition is completed for
                           milestone 1 (as defined in the contract document for the concerned sub-project).

                           Further to avoid and minimize adverse environmental and social impacts at sub-project level, the
                           following principles have been/are being adopted for alignment finalization:
                           •       The proposed right of way for bypasses will be 30 meters if the projected traffic is less
                           than 15,000 Passenger Car equivalent Units (PCUs) in 2030 and 45 meters if the traffic is more
                           than 15,000 PCUs in 2030.
                           •       The corridor of impact (CoI)/proposed cross-section would be restricted within the
                           existing right of way in forest areas. In case of exception, both options (within the existing right of
                           way and the alignment proposal with forest land diversion) would be analyzed before a final
                           decision is made.
                           •       The corridor of impact (CoI) for the project would broadly range between 15 m to 18 m to

                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                          fit the typical cross sections, space for drains, roadside furniture and utilities. However, in specific
                          locations, CoI of less than 15m would also be considered to minimize the impact on properties and
                          environmental features. Whereas, in urban areas, if the available land width is found more than the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          required to fit the cross section, entire available space may be paved from building line to building
                          line to facilitate pedestrian movements, parking etc.
                          •         Decision on bypasses and realignments will be taken based on a comparison of options
                          with or without the proposed change in design on a case-to-case basis.

                           Since the operation does not involve construction of new roads, alternative measures to manage
                           adverse impacts for roads focus on reducing the total land area for both forest and private land to
                           be converted beyond the existing Right of Way. To further address potential impacts on
                           biodiversity and natural habitats, the project’s screening mechanism was designed to identify and
                           avoid impacts on critical/ecologically significant natural habitats; and where forest diversion and/
                           or some wildlife corridors are involved beyond the limits of designated protected areas,
                           comprehensive assessment and appropriate designs have been/are being used. Project management
                           has ensured that no such road traversing through or located along a designated protected area is
                           included in the project.
                           Further, engineering design incorporates feedback from consultations with concerned state
                           departments (including officials from Forests and Wildlife, Tribal Welfare and Public Works
                           Department), project affected people, Community Based Organizations and other key
                           stakeholders. Analysis of alternatives, formal consultations, and joint verification exercises have
                           been/are being carried out as part of the environment and social assessment studies for the sub-
                           projects proposed to be covered under the project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environment Management and Safeguard Policy Issues

                          The over-all environment management strategy for the project involves: (i) preparation of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environment Management Framework (EMF) for the over-all project; (ii) Environment Screening
                          to identify key issues including those related to biodiversity/wildlife and consider those in the
                          selection and design of sub-projects and; (iii) preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment
                          (EIA) along with preparation of Corridor-specific Environment Management Plan (EMP) for each
                          sub-project to be financed under the project. An independent review of these documents has been
                          conducted concurrently by the Project Coordinating Consultants (PCC) in order to ensure
                          compliance with the World Bank Safeguards policies.
                          As part of the project preparation process, the Bank jointly with the MoRTH carried out an
                          environmental screening exercise for the identified/potential sub-projects. Screening reports have
                          been prepared for all 11 sub-projects. The screening helped finding the key environmental issues
                          early-on and helped in shaping-up the EMF.

                          In addition to the environment and social screening exercise and the design interventions to avoid
                          and minimize safeguard issues (as explained above), an Environmental Management Framework
                          (EMF) has been prepared for the project. The framework has been prepared to guide the over-all
                          sub-project selection, screening (including on biodiversity/wildlife issues); carrying out of EIAs,
                          preparation of EMPs for project roads, institutional arrangements, and monitoring to facilitate
                          compliance with the requirements specified in the World Bank Operational Policies and GOI/state
                          regulations. The framework will help in addressing environmental risks and issues in a structured
                          and systematic manner.


                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                         Biodiversity protection and management also forms the core of the over-all environment
                         management approach in the project. There are two key elements of this strategy: (i) avoidance of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts on critical/ecologically significant natural habitats through a carefully designed screening
                         mechanism and; (b) comprehensive assessment and appropriate design of remaining sub-projects
                         in cases where some diversion of forest land is required and/or where some wildlife corridors are
                         involved beyond the limits of designated protected areas. Following this approach, it has been
                         ensured that no such road traversing through or located along a designated protected area is
                         included in the project.
                         Corridor specific EIAs and EMPs have been prepared and finalized for four roads, in accordance
                         with Bank requirements. Draft EIAs and EMPs are ready and disclosed for NH 98, NH 217, NH
                         200 and NH 104. Draft reports for NH 11B and NH 106 would be ready by May 15, 2013.The
                         same is in advanced stages for the other sub-projects that would be subsequently taken-up under
                         the project. All remaining sub-project specific environment safeguard documents would be ready
                         for disclosure before/by July 31, 2013. All final reports will be ready and re-disclosed 120 days
                         prior to award of civil contracts.

                         More so, Readiness Criteria have been agreed with MoRTH for sub-projects to proceed with
                         contracting process and receive financing under the loan. The main purpose is to ensure higher
                         level of readiness before contracting process begins so that contract execution will be faster and
                         will help avoid the usual delays associated with contracts that have been let before regulatory
                         clearances are obtained and an encumbrance free construction site is available. The framework
                         will provide incentive to participating states to expedite preparation and meet readiness criteria in
                         order to be able carry out road works under the project.

                         The management measures are being appropriately incorporated in the engineering design and
                         bidding documents. Slope stabilization measures using vegetative material have been proposed as
                         part of design interventions to reduce soil erosion, siltati on of water bodies and road maintenance
                         cost apart from improving road aesthetics In addition to this, the EMPs address construction-stage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts such as: (a) air and noise pollution including dust generated from material transport,
                         crushers, and asphalt plants; (b) water and soil pollution from spills of fuel, lubricants, and
                         construction camp wastes; (d) operation and rehabilitation of borrow pits, quarries, and
                         construction camps; (e) traffic safety and management; (f) worker’s health and safety and; (g)
                         debris management. EMPs also include monitoring plans and reporting arrangements for various
                         environment related activities.

                         Regulatory Clearances. For sub-projects for which environment, forestry and or wildlife regulatory
                         clearances apply, these would have to be secured prior to the award of works to comply with both
                         the World Bank’s and GoI’s requirements. It has been confirmed that two out of the 11 sub-
                         projects, namely NH 200 and NH 217 do not require Environmental Clearance from MoEF. For
                         sub-projects that require clearance for diversion of forest land and tree cutting permissions,
                         application packages have been submitted to the appropriate offices and are being processed along
                         with processes for advancing site readiness actions.

                         Social Safeguards

                         For the potential sub-projects, the social screening exercise has been completed and the results/
                         findings have been used to determine the scope of the Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessments. Social Impact Assessment (SIA), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Tribal

                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                         Development Plans (TDPs), as applicable, have been/are being prepared for proposed sub-projects
                         in line with guidance provided in the RPF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social Impact Assessment and Draft Resettlement Plans are ready for NH 98, NH 217, NH 200
                         and NH 104. Tribal Development Plans required for NH 217 and NH 200 have been prepared
                         along with Resettlement Action Plans. Draft Resettlement Plans including Tribal Development
                         Plans for NH 11B and 113 are being reviewed and expected to be disclosed by mid-May 2013.
                         Resettlement Plans for the remaining fivesub projects are under preparation. Land acquisition plan
                         is ready for all 11sub-projects and acquisition process is progressing.
                         Institutional Capacity and Arrangements for Environment and Social Safeguards

                         Institutional Capacity. The project design duly recognizes that institutional structures and
                         capacities for environmental management are non-existent at MoRTH, the nodal implementation
                         agency, and fairly limited in the State PWDs, the executing agencies. State PWDs in Bihar and
                         West Bengal, which have no prior transport sector engagement with the Bank, are not familiar
                         with the environment safeguard and management requirements/ procedures set-out in the WB’s
                         Operational Policies. Intensive support and training have therefore been identified as critical in
                         order to achieve a minimum level of implementation capacity. Other states like Karnataka, Odisha
                         and Rajasthan have implemented in the past or are currently implementing road development
                         projects under Bank funding. Even there, the overall capacity of these participating state PWDs
                         remains insufficient in terms of availability of qualified staff. Nonetheless, the capacity of the
                         PWDs of these states vary and will require constant oversight to achieve acceptable levels of
                         quality for implementation of EMF/EMPs.

                         Institutional Arrangements. Towards delivering of environment and social policy and procedural
                         requirements and keeping in mind the institutional capacity issues, three levels of institutions -
                         central, state, and sub-project/site level will be involved in the project.

                         Central Level Implementation Arrangements. The MoRTH will be the implementing agency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the Externally Aided Project Cell (EAC) which is already established in the Ministry’s
                         Roads Wing and will be adequately staffed with professionals/senior government officials from
                         the required disciplines, including those responsible for management of environment and social
                         aspects of the project. In addition to fiduciary, procurement and contract management, the PIC as
                         the implementing agency will have the overall environmental and social responsibility to ensure
                         thatproject design and implementation comply with the relevant GoI and World Bank legislations
                         for environment, forest, social safeguards and land acquisition issues.
                         To support the PIC, MoRTH will contract a Project Management Consultant (PMC) to provide
                         administrative, technical assistance and advisory services to the EAC. Designated environment
                         management, social safeguards/land acquisition, highway engineering and civil works experts in
                         the PMC will work jointly with the PIC, providing ready guidance, training and recommendations
                         for handling policy and implementation issues at the state and sub-project levels. The PMC will
                         also facilitate cross learning between states and at sub-project levels. The EAC in liaison with the
                         PMC will also be responsible for monitoring, auditing and reporting aspects. MoRTH is also
                         designing a training program to help develop capacities of its staff, PIUs and consultants.

                         State Level Implementation Arrangements. The States involved in this project have shown strong
                         commitment to the project. State governments are key actors during project preparation and
                         implementation. Within the state PWD NH Wing, a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be
                         appointed to oversee and coordinate project implementation at the state level. In addition, the PCU

                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                          will co-ordinate with other state-level agencies in charge of forestry, wildlife, land acquisition,
                          tribal welfare and public utility agencies.
                          The state-level PCU to be headed by a Nodal Officer at the level of Superintending Engineer will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          comprise staff dealing with financial and procurement management, environment management and
                          social safeguards, land acquisition, contracting management, etc. PCU will serve as the primary
                          communication link between the project site teams and the central cell. PCU could hire individual
                          consultant(s) to supplement PCU staff in the areas that would require strengthening.

                          Sub-project Level Implementation Arrangements. For each sub-project road, the PST will oversee
                          day-day implementation of the contracts and, will be headed by an Executive Engineer, who will
                          be the client’s representative at the field level. PST will guide and oversee the Contractor and the
                          Construction Supervision Consultant to ensure compliance with contractual agreements, including
                          those on environment and social safeguards. Staff will be designated for handling environment and
                          social safeguards, including grievance redress, land acquisition etc. In a similar fashion, a
                          Construction Supervision Consultant (or Independent Engineer for EPC contracts) will be
                          contracted for each project road to directly oversee the civil works and site management. The CSC
                          will report routinely to the PST. NGOs will be hired to facilitate implementation of RAP and/or
                          TDPs.

                           Third Party Performance Monitoring and Auditing. The project will hire independent multi-
                           disciplinary performance auditors to conduct independent assessment covering technical aspects,
                           fiduciary and safeguards compliance, including periodic compliance with quality of outputs and
                           statutory regulations by the contractors/consultants and periodic verification of employer's
                           responsibility/obligation towards agreed contractual provisions, including on availability of
                           encumbrance free site/s. The auditors will review, appraise and assess performance of the
                           activities accomplished every six months. The auditors will report to the Project Implementation
                           Cell and the Project Management Consultant and recommend measures to be taken to improve
                           performance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders related to this project include: (i) the road-side
                           community residing along the sub-project/road; (ii) road side shop owners/vendors; and (iii) road
                           users. The secondary stakeholders include officials from Land Administration, Forestry and
                           Wildlife, Tribal Welfare, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and other Community Based
                           Organizations (CBOs).

                          Consultations: A consultation framework has been laid out in EMF and RPF to ensure proper
                          stakeholders consultation at all key stages of sub-project preparation and implementation. The
                          framework provides for encouraging participation of women in the consultation process. Similarly,
                          a supplementary consultation strategy for tribal areas has been presented in the RPF to ensure that
                          proper consultation mechanism is followed in tribal areas. Once the project commences
                          implementation, the project team is expected to have regular consultations with local stakeholders
                          on environmental and social issues. The project will also establish a Grievance Redressal
                          Mechanism (GRM) at the sub-project level, state level and at the central level. A framework for
                          GRM is presented in the RPF. Consultations on environmental and social issues and design
                          propositions, including bypass proposals, with both primary and secondary stakeholders have been
                          conducted during the screening exercise and as part of the EIA/SIA process for the sub-projects.



                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           Consultations with both primary and secondary stakeholders on design proposals were conducted
                           and suggestions/views were sought on environmental and safety issues as part of the
                           environmental screening and assessments for individual sub-projects. State level consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           workshops with both primary and secondary stakeholders on the EMF have also been completed
                           in four participating states (Bihar, Odisha, West Bengal and Karnataka). For sub-projects requiring
                           environmental clearance, district level public hearing sessions have been/are being organized as
                           part of the country’s environmental clearance process. Such public hearing sessions have been
                           organized for 9 out of 11 sub-projects as part of the country’s environmental clearance
                           requirement. To strengthen management of environmental aspects, the screening results, EIA
                           findings and feedback from officials from Forests and Wildlife, Public Works Department have
                           been/ are being integrated into the engineering designs/DPRs.

                           Safeguard documents, including the Environment Management Framework (EMF) and
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the over-all project have been disclosed in the Bank’s
                           Infoshop and GoI’s website (http://morth.nic.in) in February 2012. For the individual sub-projects,
                           the draft environment safeguard reports (EAs and EMPs) and draft social safeguard documents
                           (SIAs, RAPs and TDPs, as applicable) for four sub-projects, namely NH 98, NH 200, NH 217 and
                           NH 104 have also been disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop and GoI’s website before/by March 8,
                           2013. Safeguard documents for two other sub-project roads (NH 113 and NH 11B) have been
                           prepared, which are currently being reviewed and expected to be disclosed by mid-May 2013.
                           Disclosure of final version of all safeguards documents shall be ensured 120 days prior to award of
                           civil contracts in Project Authority’s website as well as World Bank’s website (InfoShop).

                           All safeguard documents for remaining sub-projects will also be disclosed in Project Authority’s
                           website as well as World Bank’s website (Infoshop). The executive summary of the safeguard
                           documents are being translated in local/native language for information and use of key
                           stakeholders and will be placed in locations accessible to public. Further, the full document is
                           being/will also be made available at project offices for reference.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      09-Sep-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            08-Feb-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Pest Management – Not Applicable
                         Physical Cultural Resources – Covered under EMF
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

                                                                                         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Pratap Tvgssshrk
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                            Date: 07-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                            Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
