Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5658 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/06/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P104015 
Project Name: Nepal: Enhanced Vocational Education and Training 
Task Team Leader: Venkatesh Sundararaman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Vocational training (75%);Public administration- Education (20%);Other industry 
(5%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (60%);Improving labor markets 
(33%);Managing for development results (7%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.00
9.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objectives are to: (i) expand the supply of skilled and 
employable labor through policy reforms and strengthening of technical and vocational 
education, and (ii) improve access to Technical Education and Vocational Training (TEVT) 
services for labor force participants and potential entrants.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The development of a high quality TEVT sector is a long-term agenda that involves the creation 
of an effective policy/regulatory environment and the strengthening of the nation#s capacity to 
deliver high quality, market-relevant training.The proposed project aims to support long term 
development of the TEVT sector by supporting policies of the GON as expressed in several 
national TEVT policy documents and the proposed amendments to the CTEVT Act.  
Simultaneously, the project will support the strengthening of select institutions providing 
technical and vocational education, and delivering short-term market-relevant vocational training 
Page  2
in key sectors through institutions chosen in a competitive manner. The project will comprise of 
the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Implementation Support for the Nepal TEVT Plan:  This component will support 
the development of the necessary institutional structures to create an effective policy and 
regulatory environment for the long term.  The GON has established a set of policy objectives it 
wishes to implement under the new National TEVT policy and the amendments to the CTEVT 
Act which include inter alia:  
 
i. 
Establishment of a high level multi-party Committee on Education and Skills which will 
also include private sector and civil society stake-holders as members.  
 
ii. 
Support for the development of a comprehensive National Strategy for TEVT.  
 
iii. 
Preparation of a white paper for the restructuring of CTEVT, establishment of a 
Qualifications Authority for Education and Skills, and adoption of a National Qualifications 
Framework.  
 
iv. 
The development of a draft plan for establishment and operation of an Employment Fund.  
 
v.
Development of a framework for the delivery of vocational educational and training 
services by the private sector.  
 
Disbursements under this project will be linked to reform targets being met by GON and 
implementing agencies. The targets will be developed to be measurable and verifiable and under 
the jurisdiction of the implementing agencies.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Technical and Vocational Education: This component will focus 
on improving the quality and relevance of training imparted at the technical education and 
Diploma levels, these are typically longer term programs. Eligible public and private institutions 
will be competitively selected on the basis of well-defined criteria to be provided with support 
under this component. Disbursements under this component will be made on the basis of 
measurable and verifiable performance of the selected institutions.  
 
Component 3:  Ensuring Employment through Short-term Vocational Training Programs in 
Domestic and Overseas Markets:  The component will support two types of short-term training 
programs to increase employability of Nepalese youth in domestic and overseas markets.  
 
i. 
Vouchers for Jobs: This sub-component will support a voucher program for those who 
wish to obtain short-term training in select number of trades and areas. The specific trades to be 
supported will be decided during project preparation. Voucher payments will be in two parts # 
unit cost to the training provider and stipend to the prospective trainee. Payment to the training 
provider will be staggered and made conditional upon meeting key requirements such as 
attendance rates, academic performance, maintenance of program and fiduciary records and 
placement performance. Beneficiary trainees will be given a stipend. Unit cost of training, 
selection criteria for the beneficiary trainees and the stipend amount will be determined during 
project preparation.  
 
ii. 
Pilot of Recognition of Prior Learning: This sub-component will pilot the development of 
a
system to recognize and certify prior learning. It aims to not only increase the market value of 
Page  3
valuable, but informally learnt, skills but also enable workers with such training to upgrade their 
skills through formal TEVT programs. Such certification will provide skilled workers a portable 
certificate that can increase their marketability.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Institutional Capacity Development (Total=IDA=USD 
4
million): This component will focus on (a) establishing a sound structure for project 
management and implementation, including monitoring and evaluation, and providing it with 
appropriate technical assistance, staffing and logistical support; and (b) build capacity for policy 
development, planning and delivery of improved quality vocational training. In addition, this 
component will also support the Government in improving its ability to develop labor demand 
trends by sector so that at the policy level training resources can be increasingly channeled to 
support these growth areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented centrally with respect to the policy and regulatory reform 
components, and nationwide in selected public and private institutions offering TSLC, Diploma 
and short-term training. Participation in the project is optional and depends on the individual 
institutions, which would be interested in and willing to improve quality and relevance of 
training. Only those institutions fulfilling eligibility criteria will only be considered for selection 
into the project. The exact location of the institutions will be known only during the 
implementation of the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The responsible ministry has experience in implementing World Bank projects and is familiar 
with the Bank#s safeguard requirements. At present the responsible Ministry is implementing 
two other Bank supported projects.  However, it is critical that safeguard implementation be 
strengthened even in these existing projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Minor works are anticipated under Component 2 and this triggers OP/BP 4.01.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project will develop a vulnerable community development plan and include key features 
to support access to the most vulnerable groups.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/28/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared- 28 October 2010  
 
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS.  
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  A simple Environmental Management Framework will be prepared in October 2010 
to describe the process of environmental screening for any small scale physical up-gradation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Venkatesh Sundararaman 
09/03/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
09/13/2010 
Comments:  cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
09/03/2010 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
