Report No. 24013
Report No: I074726 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/10/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: COLOMBIA        Project ID: P074726
Project: Colombia Bogota Urban Services          Task Team Leader: Thakoor Persaud
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 15, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: August 15, 2002 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFU     Sector: UU - Urban Development Adjustment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the proposed program is to assist the Municipality of
Bogota in implementing a strategic portion of its comprehensive and
integrated development plan, in which it seeks to: (i) improve urban
livability by increasing access, coverage, quality, reliability and
inter-agency coordination in the provision of water, sanitation, transport
and related basic services, particularly for residents in low-income
areas; (ii) improve mobility in terms of access to the public transport
system, security, coverage and level of service; and (iii) strengthen and
improve the sustainability of the system under which such services are
provided.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The components in the proposed project are:
a) Upgrading. Upgrading of approximately fourteen Unidades de
Planificaci6n Zonal (UPZs or planning units) which have been prioritized
according to poverty indices and occurrence of service deficiencies.
Works include land titling, new or improved access roads, bikepaths,
sidewalks, storm water drainage systems, water and sewerage systems, solid
waste review, parks and open spaces, along with participatory planning and
activities promoting community identity and development.
b) Improved Mobility in Bogota. Construction of trunk lines, improving
feeder routes to the Transmilenio system from selected UPZs and other key
locales, traffic management actions, preparing and implementing street
maintenance programs via "maintenance zones" under private sector
contractors, expansion of the bikepath network in the city, consolidation
of institutional reform measures and implementation of studies and related
works initiated by the Urban Development Institute-IDU, the Transit and
Transport Secretariat-STT and Transmilenio under the Bogota Transport
project.
c)    TA, Studies and Institutional Development.    TA and policy reform
analyses and studies to assist the SecretarUa de Hacienda de Bogota-SHB,
the City Planning Department-DAPD, IDU, STT, the Environmental Management
Agency of Bogota-DAMA, Transmilenio and the Caja de Vivienda Popular-CVP



(in charge of low-income housing) to improve operations and address
various development and planning issues raised in the nine-year spatial
plan (POT) and the current administration's development plan (PD).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Bogota. Under Component A, urban upgrading will be carried out in 14 of
the city's poorest UPZs (Lucero, Ismael Perdomo, Gran Yomasa, La Flora,
Patio Bonito, Tibabuyes, San Isidro-Patios, El Tesoro, Lourdes, Bosa
Occidental, Verbenal, San Blas, Diana Turbay and Jerusalen).
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Under the upgrading component, the project's investments will
construct/improve basic urban infrastructure in approximately fourteen
UPZs. This will basically include laying pipes for water supply and sewer
collection, and construction of access roads, parks and open spaces.
Appropriate and low-cost technical alternatives will be used. As such, no
significant environmental impacts are expected. Most impacts will be
associated with construction nuisances in populated areas. The
resettlement component will be designed to provide a safe and healthy
housing solution, within the same improved UPZs, for vulnerable groups
living in high risk areas. In this respect the resettlement component is
integral to the overall objective of improving the living conditions in
these low-income neighborhoods. To ensure compliance with the Bank's
environmental and resettlement safeguards policies, environmental
specifications for contractors will be included in the bidding documents
and work-specific environmental management plans, subject to the
implementing agency's approval before works begin, will be prepared by the
contractors (as is the current practice by the implementing agencies
involved), and a Resettlement Framework will be prepared for Bank
clearance prior to appraisal.
Under the mobility component, one to two trunk lines may be constructed.
A screening of the potential impacts will be carried out prior to
appraisal to ensure adequate mitigation of potential impacts is taken into
account. A plan to manage potential risks will be included in the
borrower's Environmental Management Plan, as well as Operational Manual,
for the project.
For these types of activities, a Category B environmental rating is
considered appropriate.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
-2 -



*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project triggers OP 4.01. The impacts, as described above, are not
expected to be significant, or irreversible. Cumulative and site-specific
impacts will be analyzed prior to appraisal.
The project intervention triggers OP 4.12, the Resettlement Policy. An
appropriate resettlement framework will be prepared for Bank review and
clearance. The resettlement component aims to provide safe housing
solutions for families living in risk-prone areas.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No significant adverse environmental impacts are expected. The cumulative
impacts from the interventions in the UPZs are expected to be wholly
positive.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
No significant adverse environmental impacts are expected. The long-term
impacts from the interventions in the UPZs are expected to be wholly
positive.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Recommendations for mitigation measures for the identified impacts will be
included in an Environmental Management Plan, to be incorporated in the
project's Operational Manual.
Resettlement, carried out in accordance with the Bank's Resettlement
Policy, will be an opportunity for improving the living conditions of
families living in the UPZs, since they can not afford the costs of
building a safe and titled house.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project's key stakeholders responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the project's works (such as IDU) have environmental
management guidelines and include provisions in their bidding documents,
that require the contractor to prepare an environmental management plan as
well as call for periodic audits to ensure the plan is carried out.
The preparation of the resettlement framework, as well as resettlement
planning and implementation, will be overseen by the Caja de Vivienda
Popular (CVP), which has more than ten-years experience in this area.
- 3 -



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are municipal government institutions (including IDU,
CVP and DAMA), as well as community leaders and existent community based
associations. The UPZ communities will be consulted, in a timely and
appropriate manner, on the project planning and execution plans. The
preparation of the resettlement plans include a sound consultation process
involving families living in risky areas.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      5/8/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop 5/10/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      4/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop 5/10/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Thakoor Persaud April 5, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Angela Armstrong        April 5, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
-4-



Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:          Juan David Quintero      April 10, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:          Danny Leipziger April 10, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



