Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2446
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P088966 
Project Name:  BR Municipal APL: Teresina Enhancing Municipal Governance and 
Quality of Life Project 
Task Team Leader:  Martin P. Gambrill 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 19, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S);Natural disaster 
management (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
31.13 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
13.34
13.34 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the project are to (i) modernize and improve the management capacity 
of Teresina Municipal Government in the financial, urban, environmental, service-
delivery, and economic development fields; and (ii) improve the quality of life of the 
low-income population of the Lagoas do Norte region of the city. The first objective will 
be attained through: (i) key capacity building and technical assistance activities for those 
PMT entities involved in financial and budget management, in environmental licensing 
and control, and in ur
ban planning and development; (ii) supporting PMT’s compliance 
with the new federal WSS law/1, including the preparation of a municipal WSS plan, the 
creation and strengthening of a municipal WSS regulating body, and the formalization of 
a
service delivery mechanism consistent with federal law; (iii) improving the efficiency 
of education services delivery through policy and strategy review, technical assistance, 
and capacity building activities; and (iv) providing technical assistance in the elaboration 
and implementation of a local economic development (LED) vision and strategy for 
Page  2
Greater Teresina. The second objective will be attained from the preparation and 
implementation of physical, environmental, social and service delivery activities in the 
low-income Lagoas do Norte region of the city.  
 
Footnote 1:   The recently approved federal WSS law (11.445, January 5, 2007) brings 
long-awaited clarity to the institutional, regulatory, planning and service provision 
aspects of the sector   
 
3. Project Description 
The identification of the Project’s interventions, while based on the objectives and 
description provided in PMT’s federal government approved Carta Consulta, were 
refined as a result of the detailed discussion between PMT and the Bank during Project 
preparation. As a result of this process the Project was divided into the following three 
components: (i) Municipal Management Modernization, City Development, and Project 
Management; (ii) Integrated Urban-Environmental Development in Lagoas do Norte; and 
(iii) Social and Economic Development in Lagoas do Norte.  
 
Component 1 groups the Project activities that are directly related to the first part of the 
PDO, namely modernization of municipal administration, while Components 2 and 3 
encompass activities directly related to the second sub-objective of the PDO, improving 
the quality of life in the Lagoas do Norte region of the city. Nevertheless, the ambitious, 
integrated investment program that the Project will support under Components 2 and 3 in 
the Lagoas do Norte region, with the overarching objective of transforming the quality of 
life in this area, will also bring much valuable experience to the municipal government on 
how to work in an integrated manner – with numerous entities within PMT as well as 
with civil society and the private sector – in the improvement of municipal service 
provision and outreach to disadvantaged communities, the lessons learned from which 
will themselves make important contributions to the process of municipal modernization 
and management improvement.  
 
Component 1: Municipal Management Modernization, City Development, and Project 
Management (US$ 4.37 M)  
 
This component includes activities to consolidate PMT’s recent efforts to improve its 
financial and budget management processes and capacity, to improve service delivery (in 
water supply and sanitation and in education, amongst others); to improve urban and 
environmental management capacity and processes, and to lead the process and dialogue 
of the city’s local economic and social development vision and strategy. Details of the 
sub-components and their activities are given in Annex 4. Component 1 is divided into 
the following sub-components.  
 
Financial and budget management modernization This sub-component will provide the 
technical assistance and capacity building necessary to consolidate and improve PMT’s 
financial and budget management processes.  
 
Water supply and sanitation service delivery modernization This sub-component will 
assist PMT as it advances to comply with the new federal WSS law, including the 
Page  3
preparation of a municipal WSS plan, the creation and strengthening of a municipal WSS 
regulating body, and the formalization of a service delivery mechanism consistent with 
federal law.  
 
Education management modernization Includes activities to assist PMT in the 
elaboration and implementation of a new education polity for the municipality, prepared 
in collaboration with the state government, with a view to rationalizing and bringing 
more efficiency to education services in the municipality.  
 
Urban and environmental management modernization This sub-component will assist 
PMT in its planning and control of the urban and environmental sectors in Teresina. 
Under urban management the Project w
ill provide support to the preparation of the city’s 
municipal urban master plan, municipal transport master plan, municipal drainage master 
plan, and municipal solid waste management master plan. It will also assist PMT in 
elaborating the new/updated laws to accompany the finalization of these different urban 
planning instruments. It will provide analytical and TA support to PMT to assist in 
developing consolidated strategies for enforcing existing legal and administrative 
mechanisms required to regularize slums, and for facilitating access to land. With regard 
to environmental management, the sub-component will seek to increase the PMT’s 
institutional capacity in this field with a view to introducing an environmental licensing 
and enforcement/inspection control system, thus improving PMT efficiency.  
 
LED Strategy development and implementation This sub-component will assist PMT in 
the development and implementation of local economic development (LED) strategy for 
Greater Teresina, using as a starting point the economic and social development 
recommendations that were established in PMT’s ‘Teresina – Agenda 2015’.  
 
Project management This sub-component will support PMT in the structuring and the 
operationalization of the project management unit (PMU). It will finance the costs of 
selected individual consultants to support implementation in areas of Bank specialization 
such as procurement, financial management, safeguards, etc. It will also finance key 
consultancies for assisting in the Project’s monitoring and evaluation, as well as 
financing Project audits.  
 
Component 2: Integrated Urban-Environmental Development in Lagoas do Norte (US$ 
36.07 M)  
 
This component encompasses the undertaking of the following activities in the thirteen 
neighborhoods which constitute the Lagoas do Norte region of the city: (i) interventions 
to optimize and expand water supply delivery; (ii) implementation of wastewater 
collection, transmission and treatment systems; (iii) execution of critical urban macro and 
micro-drainage interventions; (iv) actions to recuperate the natural environmental aspects 
of the region’s lagoon and canal network, and the adjacent banks of the Parnaíba and Poti 
rivers; (v) interventions in urban upgrading, and the rehabilitation and construction of 
green spaces, parks, and leisure and community spaces; (vi) interventions to improve the 
local road network, to improve traffic flow, access and safety in the region (including for 
the ubiquitous bicycles); (vii) undertaking resettlement of beneficiary families from areas 
Page  4
of risk, and implementing housing improvements for other eligible households; and (viii) 
undertaking engineering design and works supervision.  
 
Component 3: Social and Economic Development in Lagoas do Norte (US$ 1.91 M)  
 
This component comprises complementary interventions to Component 2 in the Lagoas 
do Norte region, including: (i) actions to strengthen community associations and other 
community groups in order to improve the access of eligible families to the Project’s 
social programs, crèches, basic health and education services, etc; (ii) undertaking of 
environmental and sanitary education and promotion activities in the region; (iii) 
promoting employment and wealth creation programs locally; (iv) renovation/expansion 
and construction of community facilities (health posts, schools, etc); and (v) analysis of, 
and support to, ‘social control’ of public service provision (a ‘watchdog’ function) in 
Lagoas do Norte, including community mobilization and participation for works 
interventions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Teresina municipality, Piaui State, Brazil.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) The overall environmental (and other safeguard-
related) impacts of the proposed Project will be positive in nature since Project activities 
include: (i) capacity building for PMT’s regional environmental divisions within the 
Urban Development Superintendency (SDU) and the Regional Development 
Superintendency (SDR) such that it undertakes its role of environmental licensing, 
environmental control, and related activities, more effectively and efficiently; (ii) support 
Page  5
to help PMT comply with the requirements of the new federal WSS law; and (iii) urban-
environmental interventions in the Lagoas do Norte region of city which are designed to 
improve the local environmental conditions of this region, and consequently improve the 
quality of life of its low-income residents, through integrated interventions in water 
supply, wastewater collection and treatment, drainage, housing improvements, road 
system improvements for better traffic flow, improved public transport circulation and 
improved cycle ways (for a city where many of the poor use this mode of transport), 
creation/rehabilitation of green and leisure spaces, as well as activities involving recovery 
of areas of permanent environmental preservation around the lagoons and along the 
adjacent  river banks.  
 
Natural habitats (OP 4.0
4)
This safeguard was triggered for the Project’s proposed 
interventions in the lagoon and river ecosystems (the group of lagoons and their areas of 
permanent preservation, APPs, protected by law). These interventions will consist of 
activities to revitalize the natural environments, mainly by recovering the water quality of 
the heavily-polluted lagoons and re-establishing lagoon- and river-side flora. Those 
families living around the banks of the lagoons – where they are subject to perennial 
flood risk – will be resettled, thus enabling the surrounding lagoon habitats, including the 
water bodies themselves, to be rehabilitated. The full rehabilitation of this and the other 
lagoons will be achieved through drainage interventions which will allow the lagoons to 
revert to their original, natural state, and wastewater and solid waste collection 
interventions which will minimize their pollution – thus allowing the lagoon environment 
to stabilize and improve, and allowing the reestablishment of a permanent stretch of 
water in each lagoon without overflow and flooding in the rainy season. The 
environmental control program related to the interventions, described in the EMP, will 
ensure that activities are undertaken in a way to secure maximum positive environmental 
impact for each of the lagoons.  
 
Involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12) Families living in APPs and in areas of permanent 
flood risk around the lagoons and alongside the rivers will be resettled – currently some 
1,288 families. A smaller number of families, 302, will also need to be resettled or 
compensated for in areas where the road system will be improved and where wastewater 
pumping stations constructed. The most substantial civil works intervention under the 
wastewater system, construction of the ‘ETE Norte’ wastewater treatment plant, will be 
built on vacant land and will therefore not require any resettlement. No resettlement will 
take place during the first year of Project implementation – during this first year the 
detailed engineering designs and their respective Involuntary Resettlement Plans (IRPs) 
will be prepared. Each IRP will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank before related 
works can commence. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by 
PMT, which is summarized below, and can be found in the Project Files. The final 
version of the RPF has been publicly disclosed by PMT since March 2007 both 
electronically on their website and in printed form at the Project’s PMU in the municipal 
buildings. Further, the RPF has been presented at all public consultations on the Project 
as well as in a meeting of the Municipal Housing Committee in January 2007. The RPF 
has been developed so that the number of resettled families and businesses are kept to a 
minimum, thus promoting the preservation of the network of social, cultural and 
Page  6
economic relationships that exist in affected areas, and so that essential urban and social 
services are provided for the relocated families in their new areas. The RPF will guide the 
preparation of the IRPs and the related engineering designs during sub-project 
preparation.  
 
Dam Safety (OP 4.37) Even though the flood control dikes lining the rivers Parnaíba 
and Poti in the Lagoas do Norte region are low-lying structures, the Dam Safety 
safeguard was nonetheless triggered. Furthermore, the drainage modeling analyses 
undertaken during Project preparation recommended that a safety assessment of the 
existing dikes be undertaken. The dikes safety assessment report can be found in Project 
files, the main conclusion of which is given the stability of the slopes of the dikes, the 
risks of rupture were nonexistent. During the elaboration of the study, maintenance works 
were being carried out by the Army Engineering Division and these were also taken into 
account. Short and medium-term measures were recommended such as: (i) modifying the 
municipal urban zoning law to prohibit occupation of the sloping side strips of the dikes; 
(ii) preparation of, inter alia, a physical registry; and (iii) preparation of an analysis of the 
costs for expropriating and relocating the homes situated near to the dikes.  
 
Protection of Physical Cultural Resources (OP 11.03) Restoration of the Teatro do Boi 
theater forms part of the Project, as does the integration and enhancement of the Parque 
Cabeça de Cuia municipal park located at the confluence of the Poti and Parnaíba Rivers. 
The activities and works proposed under the Project will not interfere with any 
archaeological sites.  
 
RPF Summary Based on feasibility technical studies and the social analyses carried out 
for preparing the Resettlement Policy Framework, the Project will require: (i) 
resettlement of about 1,590 families; (ii) expropriation of about 500 houses; and (iii) 
acquisition of thirteen urban titled areas for the construction of about 1,600 resettlement 
housing units. The families to be resettled are in large part very poor (monthly family 
income below three minimum salaries, or some US$ 1.5/person/day). The quality of their 
current housing is extremely precarious and insalubrious, and frequently affected by 
flooding. Most of the houses are built in unregulated settlements and are not titled. 
Families renting houses affected by resettlement will also be entitled to resettlement in 
new housing. Poor families living in unregulated housing and land plots will also be 
entitled to cash compensation. This modality will also benefit the owners of unregulated 
rented houses. Expropriation will apply to regular titled land. Thirteen of the sixteen 
areas identified for constructing the new housing units for resettlement are regular titled 
private properties. The following resettlement alternatives are proposed:  
 
•
New housing units The Project will build approximately 1,600 housing units to be 
offered at no cost to the families affected by resettlement. The areas are located within 
the neighborhoods from where the families will be resettled, meaning they are close to 
their respective areas of removal. Sixteen areas have been selected for the construction of 
approximately 1,500 housing units. Three of the sixteen areas are publicly owned, 
facilitating initiating the housing construction activities. Since the new housing units will 
Page  7
have a market value significantly superior to the value of the houses to be removed, it is 
expected that most of the families to be resettled will prefer this option.  
 
•
Existing houses Through a cash compensation mechanism, families benefit from a 
very favorable evaluation of the affected house value, including compensation for the 
land (even though the land is not titled). The families to be resettled will have the option 
of accessing the existing housing market. During this process, families will be carefully 
assisted by social worker in order to ensure that socially and financially appropriate 
solutions are found in each case.  
 
•
Interchanging housing units Based on best practice resettlement approaches used 
in other Bank-financed projects in Brazil, the families to be resettled will have the option 
of interchanging housing units with families that do want to move to a resettlement 
housing unit, although their houses will not be removed. This approach contributes to 
resettlement solutions that provide for flexible social arrangements. To be successful, this 
methodology requires close and careful assistance from social workers.  
 
•
Cash compensation This methodology will be available in the following 
situations: (i) to benefit those families living in unregulated settlements where land is not 
titled – although living in irregular conditions, the families will receive an amount 
corresponding to both the house construction and the land plot; and (ii) to constitute a 
mitigation alternative for some of the limited number of income generating activities 
currently found in areas to be affected by Project interventions, such as a small number of 
informal grocery shops and other types of informal commercial activities.  
 
The housing units average estimated cost is R$ 12,000 (approximately US$6,000). Two, 
single-storey family housing models are foreseen: with one or two bedrooms, 
respectively, in addition to each model having kitchen, laundry, living room, and one full 
bathroom. The average house size is approximately 33 m2, and the average land plot size 
approximately 160 m2 (20x8m), thus allowing for future expansion of the built area. 
Resettlement compensation alternatives, as well as expropriation, are fully supported 
under national and municipal legislation, and are consistent with Bank policy. Population 
resettlement activities will be coordinated by SEMPLAN’s PMU , and execution will be 
the responsibility of the ‘Superintendencia de Desenvolvimento Urbano e Meio Ambiente 
–
Centro Norte’. The municipal team will be assisted by consultant specialists in 
resettlement as integral members of the PMU during project execution, as required.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The environmental and social impacts of the Project are overwhelmingly positive in 
nature, as would be expected of a project whose main outcomes include: (i) the collection 
and treatment of 100 percent of the wastewater in the Lagoas do Norte region of the city; 
(ii) the recuperation of the quality of the water of all of the lagoons in the Lagoas do 
Norte region of the city – reducing the wastewater, solid waste and sediment pollution 
loads entering the lagoons; (iii) the recuperation and optimization of the micro and macro 
drainage system in Lagoas do Norte such that flood events are minimized; (iv) the 
Page  8
recuperation of natural vegetation along the banks of the lagoons and the adjacent rivers; 
(v) improving the immediate local environment of families through new housing and 
improvements to existing housing; and (vi) the recuperation and construction of green 
spaces, parks and other community leisure equipment in the region.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
With regard to alternatives considered for the Project, during preparation a series of 
studies was conducted with a view to deciding on the appropriate technical, economical, 
social and environmental interventions for the municipal modernization interventions and 
for the physical and social activities in the Lagoas do Norte region.  
 
Concerns regarding a shortage of financial resources prompted consideration 
–
as an 
alternative for resolving the clean-up of the lagoons – of the establishment of sewerage 
networks only in the immediate areas surrounding the lagoons, so that the direct 
discharge of wastewater into the lagoons would be avoided (as currently practiced by 
households near the water edge). This alternative, leaving other parts of the region with 
septic tanks, was rejected since the water quality modeling exercise demonstrated that it 
would not guarantee the de-pollution of the lagoons. The high groundwater level and the 
soil conditions in the region do not permit the use of septic tanks as an appropriate 
solution for dealing with wastewater. The conceptual design of the wastewater treatment 
works was developed using water quality modeling techniques to ascertain the impact of 
different levels of treatment on the receiving water bodies.  
 
By using hydraulic models to simulate flood conditions and the behavior of the rivers 
and lagoons, it was possible to identify safe limits for human occupation at the edges of 
the lagoons. Raising the maximum water level in the lagoons (to 56 m), to increase their 
absorption capacity during floods, was rejected since it was decided that this solution 
would lead to a very high level of resettlement.  
 
All the other physical interventions proposed under the urban-environmental upgrading 
activities of the Project were also subject to the usual analysis of alternatives in order to 
find optimum intervention solutions based on economic, financial, environmental, social 
and technical considerations.  
 
It is also worth considering the ‘without project’ scenario: If the Project does not go 
ahead, the Lagoas do Norte region will continue to deteriorate environmentally and the 
lagoons will be fully transformed into a depository for untreated wastewater and garbage, 
full of diseasing-causing organisms and disease-carrying vectors. The population living at 
the edges of the lagoons (or sometimes actually within them) will continue to suffer 
periodic floods and risks to their homes, health, lives, livelihoods and quality of life, and 
will continue to have no access to alternative employment and income opportunities. 
Effectively, they would continue to live in a situation of social exclusion. In this respect, 
the Lagoas do Norte region would become even more isolated from the rest of the city, 
with limited public sector intervention available to improve the quality of urban life and 
of the local environment.   
Page  9
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment Report and a Ressetlement Policy Framework have been 
prepared by the Borrower, making full reference to, and taking full account of, the 
safeguards triggered under the Project. Following the Borrower’s successful experience 
of preparing this complex Project, and of using the associated PHRD grant to so do, th 
Borrower has demonstrated adequate capacity to plan and implement the Project 
components and the EMP actions taking full account of the Bank’s safeguards 
requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
1. Municipal Government of Teresina (PMT) and its agencies responsible for 
environmental licensing and control  
 
2. Residents and civil society organizations of the target Lagoas do Norte region of city. 
Consultations carried out with civil society, generally, and with focus groups of residents 
in the Lagoas do Norte regions specifically, following prior disclosure of Environmental 
Assessment Report.  
 
Public Consultations were carried out involving the population who will be directly 
affected by the interventions, the communities that would be subject to resettlement and 
the entities involved in undertaking Project interventions. These consultations have fed 
into the design of the Project components. In order to undertake the public consultation 
exercise and disseminate information about the Project, PMT undertook a series of public 
meetings: twelve meetings took place with a wide range of members of the public and of 
civil society – ranging from community leaders to local and state politicians. At all these 
events a video presentation of the proposed Project was shown and a description given of 
the various Project components, together with details of all the proposed interventions 
and activities to be implemented. The questions raised and suggestions made by the 
audiences were taken into account in the project design and summarized in the EAR. 
Records of the meetings (attendance lists, publicity material, documentation, 
photographs, summaries of debates, etc) are held on file in PMT’s project preparation 
unit.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/16/2007  
Page  10
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  11
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Martin P. Gambrill 
07/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes 
07/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
07/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
