Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5995
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P124109 
Project Name:  Kenya Transport Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Josphat O. Sasia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (75%);Aviation (19%);General transportation sector (6%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (25%);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (25%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Regulation and 
competition policy (15%);Administrative and civil service reform (15%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
80.48 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
97.54
178.02 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are to:  (a) Increase efficiency of road transport 
along the Northern Corridor and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; (b) Enhance 
aviation safety and security to comply with international standards; and c) Improve 
institutional arrangements in the transport sector.  
 
The PDO outcomes will be measured by (a) a reduction in travel time (40%) on the 
selected road sections; (b) KCAA cleared for International Aviation Safety Assessment 
(IASA) Category 1 safety status for direct flights to/from US airports; and (c) a 
Regulatory mechanism for the construction industry operational.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project activities will support: (a) deepening of policy and institutional reform in the 
transport sector; (b) enhancing the capacity of institutions providing oversight and 
regulatory functions to support the delivery of transport services; (c) supporting 
Page  2
governance, accountability and integrity improvements in transport sector; and (d) 
financing infrastructure improvements necessary to support Kenya#s long-term 
development strategy (see Annex 2 for details).  
 
Project Components  
 
Component A:  Rehabilitation and improvement of roads, roadside facilities and road 
safety interventions (total US$265.90 million, of which IDA US$202.23 million).  The 
selected road sections are among the top priorities in the RSIP.   This component will 
comprise:  
 
(a) 
Rehabilitating the Kisumu - Kakamega - Kitale section (147 km including 10km 
of new second carriageway) of the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor by widening the 
road carriageway and constructing service roads and non-motorized traffic facilities at 
market centers to improve road safety;  
 
(b) 
Constructing a second carriageway on Athi River-Machakos road (21 km) on the 
Northern Corridor as well as service roads (originally to be done under NCTIP but 
dropped due to inadequate funds and later transferred to the proposed Nairobi Urban Toll 
Road project which has since been terminated);  
 
(c) 
Rehabilitating the Maji ya Chumvi-Bachuma Gate road section (53 km) on the 
Northern Corridor, including strengthening and widening of the existing road 
carriageway, provision of service roads and non-motorized traffic facilities;  
 
(d) 
Constructing the four critical interchanges at Nakuru-Nyahururu turnoff; Nakuru-
Njoro turnoff; Mau Summit-Kisumu turnoff and Ahero-Kisii Turnoff; and  
 
(e) 
Supervising the construction works.  
 
The rehabilitation works will include:  (a) provision of roadside facilities, including 
lorry and bus parking, seasonal markets, and road-user services; (b) enhancement of road 
safety through improvement of hazardous locations, traffic calming measures, pedestrian 
crossings, improvement of major junctions, and so forth; (c) provision of measures to 
address Human Immune Deficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
(HIV/AIDS); and (d) access roads to public facilities.  
 
Component B:  Institutional strengthening and capacity building in the transport sector.  
(Total US$69.70 million, of which IDA US$62.48 million):  
 
Sub Component B-1:  Support to KeNHA, KURA and KeRRA (Total US$41.70 
million, of which IDA US$ 36.47 million).  This will involve:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening KeNHA, KURA and KeRRA, including modernization of 
management information systems, financial planning, contract management and related 
operational capacities, to enhance delivery of services;  
 
(b) 
Training road-sector manpower, particularly in areas related to management 
information systems and private sector participation in service delivery;  
 
(c) 
Construction of a single office block for the headquarters of KeNHA, KeRRA, 
KURA, ERB, KRB and the proposed NCA;  
Page  3
(d) 
Completing feasibility and detailed engineering designs and studies for 
developing and managing the road network, including particularly: (i) the Mombasa 
Western By-pass; (ii) conversion of the Northern Corridor Road into a multi-lane facility; 
(iii) the Nakuru-Loruk-Marich Pass; (iv) the Lake Victoria ring-road; (v) the Ahero-Kisii-
Isebania road-segment; (vi) the Nakuru-Nyahururu-Nyeri road segment; (vii) the Kisian-
Busia road segment; and (viii) Malindi-Garsen-Madogo-Garissa road segment; and  
 
(e) 
Marking the boundary and demarcating the Right of Way to secure KeNHA road 
assets.  
 
Sub component B-2:  Support to the KRB and MoR (Total US$ 8.90 million, of which 
IDA US$ 8.54 million).  This will involve:  
 
(a) 
Study of the impact of the new constitution on the responsibilities and functioning 
of KeRRA and KURA, and the role of KRB;  
 
(b) 
Support to enhance the operational capacities of NCA, ERB and KRB;  
 
(c) 
Study of the role of MoR, and provision of technical assistance to implement its 
new functions and strengthen the Material Department, Mechanical Transport 
Department, Kenya Institute of Highways and Buildings Technology (KIHBT) and 
External Resources Department of the Ministry of Finance;  
 
(d) 
Inventory of unclassified roads and recommendations for their maintenance and 
management;  
 
(e) 
Project monitoring and sector coordination; and  
 
(f) 
Training of manpower in KRB, ERD and MoR.  
 
Sub component B-3:  Support to the Ministry of Transport (MoT) (Total US$19.10 
million, of which IDA US$17.47 million).  This will involve:  
 
(a) 
Support for implementing the integrated national transport sector policy, 
including the: (i)  Setting up of the National Road Transport and Safety Authority and 
support for the National Road Safety Program; (ii) setting up of Nairobi Metropolitan 
Transport Authority; (iii) establishing the legal and regulatory framework for Railways; 
and (iv) setting up the Maritime Search and Rescue Unit.  
 
(b) 
Support for strengthening oversight functions in the maritime sub-sector;  
 
(c) 
Strengthening of air accident investigation capacity, including construction of a 
hangar at JKIA;  
 
(d) 
Development of navigation charts for the Kenyan Coastline, and enhancing search 
and rescue capability of Kenya on Lake Victoria;  
 
(e) 
Improvement of the maritime training facilities at the Port of Kisumu;  
 
(f) 
Transport sector studies, including, among others, the development of an urban 
transport sector strategy;  a study on the development of airstrips and air transport 
services at the county and regional levels and concessioning of Kisumu Port; and  
 
(g) 
Training of manpower in MoT  
 
Page  4
Component C:  Support to KAA (total US$120.14 million, of which IDA US$15.04 
million).  This component will comprise of the following:  
 
(a) 
Reconstruction of MIA#s runway, taxiways and apron, and modernization of its 
airfield ground lighting systems;  
 
(b) 
Upgrading and modernizing power supply to MIA, and connection to KCAA 
facilities and equipment;  
 
(c) 
Provision of a new baggage-handling system at JKIA;  
 
(d) 
Capacity building and training of manpower in safety, security and airports 
management; and  
 
(e) 
Augmenting water supply to JKIA and MIA.  
 
Component D:  Support to the KCAA (Total US$23.07 million, of which IDA 
US$21.05 million).  This component will involve the following:  
 
(a) 
Provision of technical assistance for safety and security oversight;  
 
(b) 
Technical assistance to support the restructuring of KCAA;  
 
(c) 
Construction of an office block for KCAA headquarters at JKIA;  
 
(d) 
Upgrading KCAA#s ICT facilities;  
 
(e) 
Provision of equipment to upgrade and modernize air navigation systems; and  
 
(f) 
Training manpower in safety, security and oversight in the civil aviation industry.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The major civil works involved in the project, namely rehabilitation of the Kisumu-
Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road (150 km) on the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; 
the Maji ya Chumvi - Bachuma Gate section (60 km); construction of a second 
carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos Junction section on the Northern Corridor, and 
four interchanges on the Northern Corridor, all confined largely to the existing Right-of-
Way (RoW) and following the existing alignment.  Except for the construction of the 
three interchanges and the construction of a second carriageway on the Athi River-
Machakos Junction road section, all other works involve rehabilitation or reconstruction 
of existing roads under stable environments.  The longest road, namely the Kisumu-
Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road section is in the Western region of Kenya, starting at the 
northeastern shores of Lake Victoria, passing through rolling and some steep terrain and 
ending at about 400 km to the border of Kenya with South Sudan.  There is no sensitive 
vegetation or wildlife sanctuary within the zone of influence of the road and the entire 
road has been in existence for over 40 years.  However, in the Malaba area, there is a 2 
km stretch of highway cutting through a forest.  This road will be widened for the project.  
Similarly, rehabilitation of works envisaged at Moi International airport Mombasa is 
limited to the existing runway.  No physical resettlement of residential homes is 
expected, though there is likely to be compensation and resettlement assistance paid to 
stall-owners within the right of way along the interchanges who will have to be relocated.  
EIA reports for the project have been prepared by consultants and reviewed by the 
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and the World Bank. The 
Page  5
Reports have been disclosed to the public, both in the country and in the Bank#s 
InfoShop.  
 
The improvement of the road is expected to have both positive and negative impacts on 
the environment and local communities. The EIAs show that there are no significant 
irreversible damages to the environment and the negative impacts are confined largely to 
the construction phase requiring timely mitigation measures to minimize the effects.  The 
likely impacts and suggested mitigation measures are detailed in the EIA.  Several 
consultation sessions have been held with local communities and their views incorporated 
in the final designs.  Despite the disruption and negative impacts of some limited land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement, there is overwhelming support by local 
communities for the project.  Overall, there are no major resettlement issues that are 
envisaged.  The construction of interchanges and rehabilitation of the road sections 
identified will be within the existing RoW. The major civil works involved in the project, 
namely rehabilitation of the Kisumu-Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road (150 km) on the 
Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; the Maji ya Chumvi - Bachuma Gate section (60 
km); construction of a second carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos Junction section 
on the Northern Corridor, and four interchanges on the Northern Corridor,  all confined 
largely to the existing Right of Way and following the existing alignment.  Except for the 
construction of the three interchanges and the construction of a second carriageway on 
the Athi River-Machakos Junction road section, all other works involve rehabilitation or 
reconstruction of existing roads under stable environments.  The longest road, namely the 
Kisumu-Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road section is in the Western region of Kenya, 
starting at the northeastern shores of Lake Victoria, passing through rolling and some 
steep terrain and ending at about 400km to the border of Kenya with South Sudan.  There 
is no sensitive vegetation or wildlife sanctuary within the zone of influence of the road 
and the entire road has been in existence for over 40 years.  However, in the Malaba area, 
there is a 2 km stretch of highway cutting through a forest.  This road will be widened for 
the project.  Similarly, rehabilitation of works envisaged at Moi International Airport in 
Mombasa is limited to the existing runway.  No physical resettlement of residential 
homes is expected, though there is likely to be compensation and resettlement assistance 
paid to stall-owners within the right of way along the interchanges who will have to be 
relocated.  EIA reports for the project have been prepared by consultants and reviewed by 
the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and the World Bank.  The 
various safeguards documents (ESIAs, EMPs, and RAPs) for the roads and airport 
structures have been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.  The ESIA and RAP for the 
Athi and Machakos Turnoff-Ulu, prepared and disclosed in 2004, have also been 
updated.  The Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project (NCTIP) RPF has been 
updated to address any potential land acquisition/involuntary resettlement issues arising 
from the civil works at the airports.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS) 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Any potential environmental safeguard concerns related to the project are minimal, given 
that the project is largely confined to rehabilitation of existing roads and runways. 
Environmental issues include water abstraction and erosion control during construction, a 
2km wildlife corridor in the Kakamega forest, at Malaba and occupational health and 
safety, and road safety management.  These issues can be handled with simple and 
inexpensive mitigation measures.  
 
With regard to OP 4.12, the bulk of impacts will be along the Kisumu-Kitale road in 
Kakamega town which has congestion of hawkers, traders with moveable kiosks who 
will need to be compensated mostly for disruption of work as well as some congestion 
and structures in the four interchange.  No involuntary resettlement issues are expected to 
arise with regard to the Aviation Component, given that the proposed structures to be 
built will be on secured government land and no additional land acquisition is envisaged. 
The RPF for NCTIP has been updated to address any potential resettlement issues, should 
they arise during project implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given that the project does not open new routes or runways and is largely limited to 
rehabilitation of existing roads and an existing runway as well as construction of 
interchanges within a confined area, no indirect or long term environmental impacts are 
expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The chosen project minimizes adverse impacts. Any project alternative would lead to an 
increased environmental and/or involuntary resettlement impact.   
 
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has more than sufficient capacity to address the environmental safeguards 
issues identified.  The Borrower is familiar with the standard measures needed to address 
impacts in a transport project (erosion control measures, water conservation, dust control, 
occupational health and safety, rehabilitation of borrow pits, etc). The District Engineers 
without prompting, expressed concern for the safety of small mammals using a 2 km 
stretch of the Malaba forest route as a wildlife corridor, and suggested various innovative 
ideas to protect them (an overhead wire mesh passage, speed bumps/ramps, and signs for 
motorists).  Local engineers also suggested the construction of a dedicated path for 
cyclists and pedestrians.  
 
Draft Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and/or abbreviated RAPs have been prepared 
by KENHA for the various road sections to ensure appropriate measures are taken to 
consult and compensate project affected peoples. KENHA is familiar with the OP4.12 
and has the capacity to oversee the implementation of the safeguard instruments.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework  for the Kenya Transport Sector Support Project 
(KTSSP) (the same one as for the  Northern Corridor transport Improvement Project 
(NCTIP) is to be updated to accommodate  the structures to be built in the Aviation 
Component and this updated framework will apply should there an unforeseen 
resettlement issue arise.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the communities adjacent to Moi Airport and along the roads and 
interchanges.  Detailed consultations at local level have been held with stakeholders and 
are documented in the EIAs and RAPs.  Key issues raised by stakeholders along the 
Kakagema-Webuye-Kitale road related to safety, the need for adequate erosion control, 
and appropriate drainage to prevent flooding (in cases where drainage run-off might 
create water channels through their private property.  Stakeholders also mentioned their 
concern that they be adequately compensated for gravel used in road projects.  In 
response to these concerns, a separate track for two-wheeled transport, and where 
necessary, pedestrian pavements, have been incorporated into project design.  The EMPs 
incorporate mitigation measures for erosion and drainage control.   Provision of adequate 
PPE equipment will be made compulsory in construction contracts.  Market prices will be 
paid to local stakeholders for gravel used in road projects.  No key environmental issues 
were highlighted by stakeholders in other project components.  With regard to the RAPs, 
main concerns related to the timing and amount of compensation, and the concern for 
tenants living in properties on the road reserve about compensation for improvements 
made in these rented residences.  It was explained to the PAPs that they will be 
compensated for any investment in non-movable assets and loss of crops planted on their 
rented property, and that a grievance mechanism exists for them to voice any concerns 
about compensation payments.   
 
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/18/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  9
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Josphat O. Sasia 
03/07/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
02/18/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi 
02/18/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/11/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
03/11/2011 
Comments:   
