                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1019
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Serbia                              Project ID:    P152018
                            Project Name:      Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P152018)
                            Task Team          Claudia Ines Vasquez Suar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Aug-2014                         Estimated   03-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General energy sector (70%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                               (20%), Flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       300.00           Total Bank Financing:  300.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        300.00
                              Total                                                                                        300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (i) help restore power system capability to reliably
                           meet domestic demand; (ii) protect livelihoods of farmers in flood affected areas; (iii) protect people
                           and assets from floods; and (iv) improve the Borrower’s capacity to respond effectively to disasters.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         The project consists of four components: (1) Energy Sector Support; (2) Agricultural Sector Support;
                         (3) Flood Protection; and (4) Contingent Emergency Response
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 will help (A) improve the available electricity supply over the 2014-2015 winter
                         season through power imports, (B) improve the reliability of the power system by carrying out urgent
                         investments in the distribution system and energy efficient lightning program, and (C) helping restore
                         strategic energy assets through dewatering of the Tamnava West open pit mine.

                         Component 2 will support the ongoing Government program of financial incentives for agriculture
                         and rural development in the 49 municipalities affected by the floods. The objective is to help the
                         Government to sustain the program, thus facilitating gradual recovery of the farmers’ income from
                         agriculture to pre-floods level.

                         Component 3 will (A) support urgent rehabilitation of the flood protection and drainage control
                         infrastructure, and (B) strengthen the technical capacity of the government agencies for improved
                         flood prevention and management.

                         Component 4 will provide for a mechanism for emergency response following an adverse natural or
                         man-made event that causes a major disaster; the Government may request the Bank to re-allocate
                         project funds to this component to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This
                         component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of
                         the emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be undertaken nation-wide. However, location of all sub-projects is not known at
                         present. Current level of information indicate that locations are likely to include:
                         •        for Component 1: Tamnava West Open Pit Mine nr. Kolubara River, where mine dewatering
                         activities will be taking place. Other activities, including purchase of energy, installation of metering
Public Disclosure Copy




                         devices, procurement of mobile sub-stations (truck mounted), will have country-wide impact ;
                         •        for Component 2: support to farm incentives program for farmers in 49 municipalities
                         affected by floods will be organized on country-wide level .
                         •        for Component 3: although the complete list of investments has not been finalized it will
                         likely include, among others, the following locations/areas:
                           1) Novi Pazar
                           2) Aleksinac
                           3) Smederevska Palanka
                           4) Donji Ljubes
                           5) Negotin
                           6) Belgrade
                           7) Sava River (left bank, Province of Vojvodina)
                           8) Danube River (left bank, Province of Vojvodina
                         •        for Component 4: this is a contingent component and locations of sub-projects is not known
                         at present.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Naima A Hasci (GURDR)
                         Bekim Imeri (GURDR)



                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         Nikola Ille (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           For the dewatering of Tamnava West Open Pit
                         BP 4.01                                         Mine, an EMP has been prepared and will be
                                                                         included in the dewatering contract. Other
                                                                         subprojects have not have been fully identified or
                                                                         prepared at the onset of the Project as they will
                                                                         be decided based on demand. For these aspects
                                                                         the appropriate instrument of OP 4.01 is an
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework (ESMF). ESMF identifies the policy
                                                                         triggers for the Project, the screening criteria for
                                                                         subprojects, the environmental and social risks for
                                                                         the likely subprojects and the potential mitigation
                                                                         measures to mitigate the identified risks,
                                                                         assessment of the institutional capacity of the
                                                                         implementing agency and measures for capacity-
                                                                         filling gaps, and an estimate of the budget needed
                                                                         for the implementation of the ESMF and related
                                                                         instruments. The ESMF will directly provide a
                                                                         list of activities that can be financed, and screen
                                                                         out activities that correspond to Category A
                                                                         projects, or that may trigger additional safeguards
                                                                         policies. ESMF will also provide guidance for
                                                                         preparation of sub-project specific ESIAs and/or
                                                                         EMPs.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The rehabilitation works will not be carried out
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         within or adjacent to any nature protected sites,
                                                                         nor natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Component 2 (support to Farm Incentives
                                                                         Program) could lead to increased use of
                                                                         pesticides. The EMF will indicate what measures
                                                                         will be in place to promote an Integrated Pest
                                                                         Management Approach and to help ensure
                                                                         appropriate selection and safe use of pesticides
                                                                         when they are needed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Activities on rehabilitation and reconstruction of
                         BP 4.11                                         infrastructure will not lead to change of the
                                                                         existing footprint. The EMF will include
                                                                         screening criteria to ensure that no works are
                                                                         undertaken at locations where registered or other
                                                                         important physical cultural assets would be
                                                                         impacted.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No


                                                                 Page 3 of 11
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The Bank Operational Policy on Involuntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           Resettlement (OP 4.12) has also been triggered in
                                                                        view of the fact that the flood protection
                                                                        infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction
                                                                        works under Component 3A (floods protection
                                                                        investments) in some cases may lead to possible
                                                                        land acquisition. Land requirements are expected
                                                                        to be minor as the rehabilitation investments will
                                                                        be carried out mainly on government owned land.
                                                                        However, restoration and/or rebuilding of
                                                                        damaged facilities might to some extent have
                                                                        adverse social impact if the works require some
                                                                        temporary acquisition of private land for securing
                                                                        the right-of-way. Since the size, scale and
                                                                        location of subprojects cannot be determined at
                                                                        the project preparation stage, the Resettlement
                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) and Environment and
                                                                        Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                        prepared to mitigate potential environmental and
                                                                        resettlement impacts.
                                                                        No resettlement or land acquisition will be
                                                                        required to carry out activities under Components
                                                                        1 or 2.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                         Projects on International        Yes           Project activities under Component 1C
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           (Dewatering of the Tamnava West Open Pit
                                                                        Mine) will trigger O.P. 7.50 for Projects on
                                                                        International Waterways. Water from the open Pit
                                                                        mine will be discharged into the Kolubara River
                                                                        which is a tributary of the Sava and by extension
                                                                        the Danube Rivers. In accordance with OP7.50
                                                                        the notification letter has been prepared by the
                                                                        Ministry of Mining and Energy and submitted to
                                                                        the riparian countries through the Danube River
                                                                        Basin Commission on July 31st, 2014 and
                                                                        additional information on the scope of the
                                                                        activities to be undertaken under the project was
                                                                        provided on a subsequent letter on August 4,
                                                                        2014. Adequate provisions will be made in the
                                                                        ESMF to ensure that the project financed
                                                                        activities do not adversely impact the quality or
                                                                        quantity of water to riparian countries. Proposed
                                                                        Project activities however only entail
                                                                        rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing
                                                                        infrastructure.


                                                                Page 4 of 11
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Because the project is being prepared as an Emergency operation, the ESMF is not required to be
                              disclosed prior to Appraisal. An Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) has
                              been prepared, setting out the actions (including preparation of Safeguards instruments) and
                              timeframe for ensuring that project implementation is consistent with WB Safeguard policies.

                             In respect to Component 1: The planned activities including purchase of electricity and installation
                             of metering devices to replace the flood-damaged ones will be environmentally neutral.
                             Procurement of mobile sub-stations (truck mounted) to ensure adequate back-up capacity during
                             expected flood-related breaks, will have neutral to slightly positive impact, as these will likely
                             cause reduction of emergency fossil fuel use by affected households, thus reducing pressure on
                             non-renewable natural resources. The activities on dewatering of Tamnava West Open Pit Mine
                             will have to be undertaken with due regard to its environmental implications – in particular to
                             water quality & quantity in the recipient river (Kolubara River) and sludge/mud management in
                             order to avoid negative effects on river morphology and aquatic biota. Provided that the actions, as
                             described further in section 4 below (and included in the EMP), are undertaken, there will be no
                             large or significant negative impacts.

                             In respect to Component 2: the activities proposed to be funded under the Project will provide
                             support to farmers under the Government’s farm incentive program, which is well established in
                             the country for over 5 years. These activities are carried out at already anthropogenically-modified
Public Disclosure Copy




                             environment and are environmentally-neutral in most cases. However, in some cases, like
                             incentives provided for environmentally-friendly practices (autochthonous plant species and
                             animal breeds preservation program; application of the code of good agriculture practice; organic
                             agriculture) they have a positive impact to enhancing the existing environmental status. At the
                             same time, it is recognized that agricultural subsidies can also lead to agricultural practices that are
                             environmentally damaging. Information received to date indicates that no strategic EA or EIA
                             have been prepared for the Government’s incentive program. The ESMF, to be prepared for the
                             Project, will call for specific actions to review overall environmental and related social impacts of
                             the Government’s program.

                             In respect to Component 3: rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure will be undertaken without
                             change of the existing footprint, and by using the same type of material as the structures were
                             made from (earth, clay, stone block, geotextile). The expected environmental impacts are generally
                             related to handling of construction material, construction waste, servicing and maintenance of
                             construction machinery and the health and safety of workers and general population that need to
                             be close to the construction area. Mitigation of negative impacts related to these activities will be
                             undertaken using well known methods contained in the code of the good construction practice,
                             which will be applied on all construction sites, which will be detailed in ESMF and site-specific
                             EMPs, as appropriate. Hazardous materials are unlikely to be found at any site. No other large,
                             significant or potentially irreversible environmental impacts have been identified, nor are they


                                                                         Page 5 of 11
                         expected during the execution of the civil works. The ESMF, to be prepared for the Project, will
                         review the current practices against WB policies, including EHS Guidelines, identify gaps and
                         suggest actions to ensure full compliance with WB policies. The infrastructure rehabilitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reconstruction works under Component 3A (flood protection infrastructure) in some cases may
                         lead to small amounts of land acquisition. Land requirements are expected to be minor as the
                         rehabilitation investments will be carried out mainly on municipally owned land, or other
                         government owned land.

                         In respect to Component 4: sub-projects eligible for financing under this component will be
                         identified in case of a new disaster/emergency and will be agreed between the Borrower and the
                         Bank. The ESMF will be updated if required in order to cover any new types of sub-projects.

                         Based on the above, the project itself is not expected to have significant direct negative
                         environmental or social impacts. However, the dewatering and restoration of flood protection
                         infrastructure for the mine represents support for general restored/continuing operation of the
                         mine. Therefore, from a “due diligence” perspective, project preparation included a review of
                         existing environmental and social issues relating to the Tamnava West Open Pit Mine (and more
                         broadly, the Kolubara coal district) to which the project could be linked in public perception,
                         resulting in obstacles for project implementation and/or reputational risks for WB. For example,
                         while no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement is required to enable the activities or achieve
                         the objectives of Component 1 of the proposed project, there have been substantial complaints
                         regarding resettlement carried out in the context of recent expansion of other nearby lignite mines
                         in the Kolubara complex. Based on advice of the RSA, this mine expansion is not considered to be
                         an associated activity as defined in OP 4.12, as it is not “directly and significantly related to the
                         Bank-assisted project,” nor “necessary to achieve its objectives as set forth in the project
                         documents.” Similarly, while environmental (particularly air) pollution is a significant general
                         concern for residents of the Kolubara district, the dewatering and resumed operation of the
                         Tamnava West Open Pit Mine would not make a substantial change in this aspect.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To obtain a better understanding of the local context , a WB Social Scientist and a Senior
                         Communications Officer visited the project site and its surroundings, specifically to those areas
                         where there have been specific concerns relating to resettlement, to assess the current situation.
                         This included both complaints regarding the way in which some resettlement was carried out (e.g.
                         insufficient notification, destruction of a cemetery without adequate provisions for re-interment,
                         etc.), and complaints that people have had to wait too long for promised relocation (away from the
                         polluted areas). Based on the information available from the site visit and interviews with relevant
                         authorities, the Team was able to determine that many of the problems have been resolved or are
                         in the process of being resolved. About 1000 (1/3) of the households involved have either been
                         resettled or are in the process of signing relocation contracts. About 86% requested and received
                         straight cash compensation for their property while the remainder are receiving new plots in
                         serviced urban areas as well as the means to build new houses. For the remaining ca. 2000
                         households who would like to be relocated, there is no imminent need to resettle them as the land
                         they occupy will not be required for mining for a number of years. Nevertheless, EPS has
                         informed these households that they will accommodate the resettlement requests as soon as funds
                         are available. With respect to environmental pollution aspects, the Team reviewed and reported on
                         recent environmental monitoring reports for the Kolubara region (covering calendar year 2013),
                         which indicate that (i) for air quality monitoring – concentrations of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen
                         oxides did not exceed the maximum allowable daily values; while daily concentrations of soot and
                         suspended solids did exceed maximum allowable daily values; (ii) for wastewater monitoring –

                                                                   Page 6 of 11
                           treated wastewater at the outlet of WWTP is characterized by high turbidity, increased
                           concentrations of suspended solids, organic substances, iron, phenol and arsenic; for noise levels –
                           daily operation did not exceed limit noise level, while night time operations did exceed prescribed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           noise limit level. The mining complex Kolubara has an Environmental and Social Action Plan -
                           prepared in February 2012, revised in October 2013; and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan-
                           prepared in February 2011. Reportedly, the actions are being implemented in accordance with the
                           plans.

                           The conclusion from the environmental and social “due diligence” carried out to date is that no
                           urgent environmental urgent environmental or social issues have been identified that would be
                           exacerbated by the project or are likely to present an obstacle to project implementation. During
                           project supervision the Team will continue to seek and review other information on these aspects
                           and report any significant findings to Management for discussion with the Borrower. This includes
                           verifying that the mining complex and power plant are operating in compliance with national laws
                           and regulations, including regular monitoring of air and water quality. If it is found that the mine
                           is not operating in compliance with applicable laws, or environmental quality is not meeting
                           required standards, the WB will discuss with the Borrower what measures can be taken to improve
                           the situation.

                           Finally, there is a risk that some stakeholders might seek to oppose the project not on the basis of
                           its direct environmental or social impacts, but on the grounds that it supports continued reliance of
                           lignite coal for energy production in Serbia. However, the project is consistent with the World
                           Bank’s energy strategy, in that it would not support development of greenfield coal-based power
                           generation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long term negative impacts are envisaged if the Project is implemented with due care and
                           observing the relevant procedures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The nature of the Project is to provide for emergency rehabilitation of flood-impacted
                           infrastructure, thus reducing threat to life, property and livelihood in case of future similar events.
                           As such, long-term alternatives to suggested measures have not been discussed in detail. However,
                           whenever possible, these will be considered during future stages of Project implementation –
                           which particularly relate to Component 3 and coordination with other donors that are planning to
                           get involved in the water sector.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In respect to the Project: Given the emergency response nature of the Project, in order to facilitate
                           the project processing, the World Bank team has prepared an Environmental and Social
                           Safeguards Framework (ESSF) that will help guide the Client in preparing the ESMF and
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), including specific provisions of the safeguards related
                           exclusions. The ESSF sets out how the safeguard policies will be applied during the preparation
                           and implementation of the project, including the deferring the requirement for preparation and
                           disclosure of the ESMF and RPF into the project implementation stage. Preparation and disclosure
                           of the ESMF and RPF will be a condition for disbursement of project funds under Components 1
                           and 3, except on energy imports - where the condition will not apply. As per the ESMF,


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                         subsequent Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared, with disclosure and
                         public consultations in accordance with the Bank policies at national and local levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In respect to Component 1: EPS has already obtained the water permit with conditions related to
                         allowable quantities for water pumping/dewatering of Tamnava West Open Pit Mine. Several sets
                         of water quality testing have been performed in June 2014, which indicate that water in the mine
                         belongs to 2nd or 3rd class of water in accordance with the national legislation (According to
                         Serbian law, surface water quality is divided into four classes, class 1 being the best water quality
                         and class 4 being the worst) - which corresponds to the same as in Kolubara River at that reach.
                         The Serbian Environmental Protection Agency in June 2014 prepared and issued a "Program for
                         Extraordinary Monitoring of Water Quality from Tamnava Mines", which determines a
                         comprehensive monitoring system to be implemented during the dewatering operation, and list the
                         remedial actions in case of any issues related to water and/or mud quality. The Program also
                         identifies parties responsible for monitoring per specific test and measuring point – National
                         Laboratory of Serbian EPA; Laboratory of RB Kolubara Lazarevac – Vreoci Coal and Wastewater
                         Center, and Republic Hydro Met Institute. The Program also contains overall cost associated for
                         performing the monitoring. The responsibility to provide funding and ensure implementation of
                         the remedial actions (if determined to be necessary) lies with EPS. The Client has confirmed that
                         dewatering activities will be undertaken fully in line with the national legislation and WB
                         Safeguard policies, as set out in the EMP that is under preparation for this activity and will be
                         incorporated in the dewatering contract. The main issues covered in the site-specific EMP are (1)
                         water quantity and its impact downstream from point of discharge into Kolubara River; (2) water
                         quality and mode of control/monitoring; (3) mud/sludge quality and its impact on the Kolubara
                         River water quality – and impact of suspended matter that will be pumped out with water into the
                         river; (4) mud/sludge management and disposal arrangements, with provisions for both
                         "unpolluted" and "polluted" material ( the majority of mud will stay in the “dead area” of the mine,
                         while some, located around flooded equipment and on mine’s slopes will be transferred to either
                         mine’s dead area or to the local landfill if not polluted. If polluted material is found the EMP will
                         be updated to address actions which will be taken prior to removal of any polluted material; (5)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bank stability downstream of the water discharge point; (6) health and safety at work -
                         arrangements; (7) restoration of the embankments from damage caused by dewatering activities,
                         upon their completion.

                         In respect to Component 2: the actions will be undertaken fully in line with the national
                         legislation. The ESMF, which will be prepared for the Project, will call for review of issues related
                         to potential environmental and social impacts of the farmer subsidy program, including issues
                         relating to pest management and use of pesticides, and, as appropriate, identify mitigation
                         measures to be undertaken under the project and/or longer term actions to be discussed with
                         Government.

                         In respect to Component 3: The site-specific EMPs will be prepared for each particular site, to
                         cover the relevant issues, in line with the ESMF. These EMPs will be part of the bidding
                         documents and resulting contracts.

                         In respect to Component 4: sub-projects eligible for financing under this component will be
                         identified in case of a new disaster/emergency and will be agreed between the Borrower and the
                         Bank.

                         In respect to Borrower’s capacity: The Project will be implemented through two PIUs. Component

                                                                   Page 8 of 11
                           1 will be implemented by the EPS, who has a good track record of implementing World Bank
                           projects and is familiar with the provision of Bank’s safeguards policies. The PIU to be established
                           in the Directorate of Water Management will, to extent possible, hire staff that worked under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank’s recently completed Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation Project – which are familiar
                           with the Bank’s requirements. This PIU will be responsible for implementation of component s 2
                           and 3. Funds will be provided for capacity building for any new staff engaged in the PIU, as well
                           as for ensuring that the PIU improves the knowledge and skills needed for project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Disclosure of ESMF and site-specific EMPs will be carried out in line with the Bank’s OP 4.01 for
                           Category B projects. The EMP for dewatering of Tamnava West Open Pit Mine will be disclosed
                           for a period of 5 working days followed by public consultations. The short period for disclosure of
                           the EMP prior to the public consultation meeting is justified by the emergency nature of the
                           operation and by the fact that the EMP focuses on the relatively straightforward risks and
                           mitigation measures associated specifically with the dewatering activity. While some stakeholders
                           may wish to raise broader environmental or social issues during the consultation meeting, longer
                           access to the EMP document is unlikely to result in their being better informed on those matters.
                           The EMP will be revised to reflect the conclusions of the disclosure and consultation process as
                           needed, and the final version will be incorporated in the dewatering contract.

                           The project is expected to result in significant social benefits through reduced electricity shortages,
                           increased security of domestic food supply and improved floods prevention and management.
                           According to the Rapid Needs Assessment, the recent disaster had a disproportionate impact on
                           the poor and vulnerable population. It is estimated that 125,000 persons fell below the poverty
                           line, resulting in an increase of nearly 7 percent over last year’s poverty headcount. The negative
                           impact on livelihoods and employment was also more acute in vulnerable groups such as persons
                           with disabilities, women, Roma, and among rural population. The rural poverty rate in Serbia is
                           9.4 percent, twice as high as the urban poverty rate (4.7 percent). Among the rural poor, elderly
Public Disclosure Copy




                           farmers represent one of the most vulnerable PAPs. Around 35 percent of all farm holdings are run
                           by farmers older than 65 years. The proposed operation is therefore expected to have positive
                           effects on the poor by providing rapid rehabilitation and recovery to ensure the continuity of
                           access to basic services such as electricity, and a secured financial support to farmers through a
                           stable farm incentives program.

                           As noted above, some land acquisition may be required for the infrastructure rehabilitation and
                           reconstruction works under Component 3A (flood protection infrastructure). While the land
                           requirements are expected to be minor, restoration and/or rebuilding of damaged flood
                           infrastructure may to some extent have adverse social impact if the works require some temporary
                           acquisition of private land for securing the right-of-way. Since the size, scale and location of sub-
                           projects cannot be determined at the project preparation stage, the Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF) and Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to mitigate
                           potential environmental and resettlement impacts.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           30-Nov-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        30-Nov-2014



                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Serbia                                                            30-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    30-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    30-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         In keeping with the policy on Emergency operations, in-country and Infoshop disclosure will take
                         place, but will be done during project implementation, in line with the Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguards Framework rather than prior to Appraisal. Therefore, items relating to document review
                         and disclosure in the following Section are marked as “Not Applicable”.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?



                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Claudia Ines Vasquez Suar
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                       Date: 03-Sep-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
