                                                                                                                                                                                                         43565


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 12/14/2006                                        Report No.: AC2462
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Argentina                              Project ID: P099051
                                                                                                            Project Name: AR Santa Fe Road Infrastructure
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Tomas S. Serebrisky
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: December 18,          Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007
                                                                                                            2006
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: LCSFT                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                            Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and
                                                                                                            civil service reform (S);Debt management and fiscal sustainability (S)

                                              Public                                                        IBRD Amount (US$m.):            126.70
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER                                                             46.40
                                                    Authorized                                                                                                                           46.40
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                           Simple []              Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)            Yes [ ]       No [ ]
                                                              Disclosure

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                        Public                              The overall purpose of the project is to improve transport conditions along a strategic
                                                                                                            road corridor that links the Province of Santa Fe with regional and international markets.
                                                                                                            Adding capacity to National Road 19, a key component of a major bi-oceanic corridor
                                                                                                            that links the PSF and the Center Region with Chile and Brazil will reduce logistics costs,
                                                                                                            facilitate access to major regional consumption and export markets and foster the
                                                                                                            effective economic integration of the Center Region provinces.

                                                                              Authorized                     The project also aims at providing institutional support to the Province of Santa Fe to
                                                                                                            achieve the following specific objectives: (a) improve road safety by implementing pilot
                                                                                                            interventions capable of providing valuable qualitative and quantitative information to the
                                                                                                            comprehensive road safety action plan elaborated by the Province of Santa Fe in 2005;
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            (b) identify transport infrastructure and trade facilitation constraints by setting up a
                                                                                                            system to measure logistics costs in the Province of Santa Fe; (c) reinforce the Province?s
                                                                                                  Public    planning capacity to foster economic growth; (d) strengthen the provincial capacity to
                                                                                                            assess and manage of environmental and social impacts of large civil works; and (e)
                                                                                                            create provincial capacity to monitor and evaluate large infrastructure projects

3. Project Description
To meet the proposed Development Objective, two main components were preliminarily
identified:
 Component 1. Upgrading of National Road 19 (Estimated cost, including contingencies,
US$167.2 million). This component will transform 130 kilometers of National Road 19
in the PSF into a four lane highway (Autovia) with separate two lane carriageways in
each traffic direction to expand the capacity and road safety of this heavily traveled
corridor. This is the first stage in upgrading the corridor, which DNV plans to transform
into a limited access freeway in the future. The component entails building: (i) a two lane
carriageway within the ROW that will serve East-West traffic, which in the future will
become one of the main carriageways of the freeway; (ii) three four-lane bypasses of the
towns of San Jer?nimo del Sauce, Sa Pereyra and Frontera (and its twin city San
Francisco) within the PSF; (iii) alignment improvements for three sharp curves (about
4.7km in total) on the existing two lane highway; (iv) grade separation interchanges at
intersections with high traffic National Roads 34 and Rosario Santa Fe Freeway and
overpasses for railroad crossings; (v) ground-level interchanges at intersections with
provincial and rural roads; (vi) conversion of the existing sections of Nartional Road 19
crossing the towns of San Jer?nimo del Sauce and Sa Pereyra in urban boulevards for
motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians; and (vii) turn lanes and returns at intervals of
about 6 kilometers to facilitate safe access to properties along the corridor. DNV will also
finance the upgrading of 6 kilometers of National Road 19 in the Province of C?rdoba
(from the border with PSF to National Road 158), using the same design standards
applied to the upgrading of this road in the PSF
 Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Estimated cost US$5.2 million, all Bank-
financed). This component will consist of four subcomponents:
 Sub Component 2.1- Road Safety
 Sub Component 2.2: Systemic measurement of logistics costs in the PSF
 Sub Component 2.3: Strengthening the planning capacity of the PSF to elaborate a new
strategic development
 Sub Component 2.4: Strengthening DPV capacity to enhance environmental and social
management
 Sub Component 2.5:Design a capacity building program to incorporate monitoring and
evaluation analysis in infrastructure projects

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The road infrastructure will be located alongside the existing alignment requiring only the
expansion of the right of way and acquisition of additional land. Most of the impacts
identified will be managed through sound engineering design and construction practices.
In addition, the project includes significant environmental enhancement measures such as
a comprehensive landscaping and re-vegetation program. The area of the project is
heavily developed with extensive and intensive cattle ranching and high-value crops such
as soy and corn. There are no natural habitats or critical natural habitats along the existing
or future right of way. However, there still remain some patches of native vegetation,
especially in river and creek crossings that still harbor some native species albeit without
any significant biodiversity value. There is no evidence of paleontological or

archeological resources along the corridor. There are no indigenous peoples in the area of
influence of the project. Although noise impacts from the highway was identified as not
significant, special barriers and re-vegetation programs will be implemented in those
household that will now be located closer to the highway (because of the expansion of the
right of way). This program is included in the Resettlement Action Plan.

 Special attention was given in project design to the management of hydraulic and
hydrological interactions along the right of way. Adequate longitudinal and lateral drains
and culverts will channel run-off to existing water courses and channels. Bridges over
two sensitive creeks were over dimensioned in order to allow movement of local fauna.
Bridges in the existing road will also be expanded in order to eliminate existing flow
back-up conditions in some areas. All in all, the road will not exacerbate existing
hydrological conditions and flood in its area of influence but rather improve existing
conditions.

 The project will include three major by-passes, two around rural communities and a
major one in the city of San Francisco/Frontera. These by-passes will intersect an
important network of rural and local roads with an important traffic of local goods and
machinery, especially during harvest time. The restoration of such networks and the
construction of safe crossing points will be part of the project design.

 The proposed Project will have positive social impacts. Among the major benefits the
following should be highlighted: employment creation during project construction, urban
improvement programs in San Jer?nimo del Sauce and Sa Pereyra, improvement in road
safety conditions along National Road 19 and in Provincial Road 21.

 The road infrastructure will be located alongside the existing alignment requiring only
the expansion of the right of way and acquisition of additional land. The expansion of the
road affects 1,196.61 hectares. Of them, 475.74 (39.8%) were acquired in the early
1970s. The hectares to be acquired (701.43) are located in 234 properties along the road .
A total of 19 houses (7 with business), 6 businesses and one school will be physically
displaced. Given that most of these properties will be affected partially, 13 of the 25
houses and business will be relocated into the same property. A Resettlement Plan
accordingly with OP 4.12 has been prepared. The Plan is comprised by the following
programs: (i) Information and communication, (ii) land acquisition and compensation,
(iii) effectiveness of former expropriations, (iv) assistance for socioeconomic restoration,
(v) assistance for partial affected properties, (vi) relocation of school General San Martin,
and (vii) grievance mechanisms. The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan will be
implemented in the Provinces of Santa Fe and Cordoba. An inter-institutional committee
comprised by DPV, DNV and Provincial Land Office in the Province of Santa Fe
(Direcci?n de Tierras Provincial) will be established. The cost of the Plan is
approximately $2.9 million which will be incorporated in the cost of the project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASEN)
   Mr Fernando J. Brunstein (LCSFE)

   Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                             X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project has been assigned a Category B according to OP 4.01. Most impacts will be
circumscribed to the right of way and no significant, region-wide or precedent-setting
impacts are envisioned. Most of the current and future traffic consists of long-distance,
international trucks and very little incremental local traffic is expected. No major land use
changes are expected in the region. The existing two-lane road was built over 7 decades
ago.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No major changes in land use are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Right-of-Way alignment was subject to localized analysis to minimize resettlement.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on in-situ screening exercises, a comprehensive and detailed Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared in accordance with Bank policy.The
ESMP evaluates the existing conditions, identifies the potential environmental and social
issues of concern and proposes adequate mitigation measures for each negative impact
identified; as well measures for enhancing each identified positive impact. The ESMP
includes a comprehensive set of programs that will address all major environmental and
social issues identified along the right of way (ROW). Most of the programs will be
included as part of the engineering design and construction documents.

 -     Landscaping and Re-vegetation Program: this major environmental enhancement
program will include reforestation and re-vegetation of ROWs including separators, with
native species, restoration and augmentation of existing native-forest patches, and the
construction of rest and recreation areas along the ROW. Re-vegetation with native
species will create ecological corridors between two watercourses that still harbor some
natural vegetation.
 -      Community Road Safety: complementing the engineering road safety design (bus
stops, special crossings), this program will implement road safety education in
communities along the ROW.
 -      Restoration of Rural Road Network: includes the construction of special
crossings, returns, and feeder roads to allow connectivity of the existing rural road
network
 -      Improvement in Urban Segment of Santo Tome: potentially perhaps the most
challenging segment of the project, this heavily urbanized segment will be subject to a
special urban restoration program including specific designs for boulevards, bicycle
paths, parking spaces and traffic management measures.
 -      Urban Restoration in By-passed Towns: road segments that will be abandoned
because of the construction of by-passes will be reconstructed as urban boulevards, with
special archways at the entrance points, reforestation, illumination, and special signs that
will direct traffic to use businesses and facilities in those towns.
 -      Environmental Management of Construction : In order to adequately control
impacts during construction, a rigorous environmental set of good environmental
practices will be applied to the project. These specifications are based on the existing
Environmental Specifications for Road Construction designed by the Federal Road
Agency under road programs financed by the Bank. In addition to these specifications
site specific guidelines and restrictions have also been incorporated such as prohibitions
for construction camp and asphalt location in or near sensitive watercourses, demarcation
of trees and patches of vegetation that need to be protected during construction, special
traffic restrictions during harvest time, etc. Chance finding procedures for archaeological
and paleontological artifacts are part of these specifications. All critical points along the
ROW (either environmentally or socially) have been identified and applicable preventive
and corrective actions were produced. Compliance of environmental specifications during
construction will be part of the engineering supervision and will be monitored by the
Environmental unit of the Provincial Road Agency.

 The above programs will be complemented by:

 Institutional Strengthening in Provincial Road Agency: the environmental management
capacity of the existing Environmental unit if the Provincial Road Agency will be
improved in order to increase monitoring and supervision of this project.It will also
include an Strategic Environmental Assessment at the regional road network level.(Sub
Component 2.4)
 Social Communication Program:as a continuation of the consultation efforts already
carried out during project preparation, a social communication and public participation
program will be implemented during project construction, and Project Information
Centers will be installed in key locations.

 All programs included in the RESMP have been designed to great detail, including
associated costs, responsibilities and schedule. Project bidding documents will include all
specifications regarding these programs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The road infrastructure will be located alongside the existing alignment, requiring only
acquisition of land for the expansion of the ROW. National Road 19 is located in an area
characterized by low density population and intensive agricultural and livestock
productive activities. The average size of the affected properties is 100 hectares and in
fifty percent of the properties less than 4 hectares will be acquired to expand the ROW.
The expansion of the road affects 1,196.61 hectares. Of them, 475.74 (39.8%) were
acquired in the early 1970s. The hectares to be acquired (701.43) are located in 234
properties along the road . A total of 19 houses (7 with business), 6 businesses and one
school will be physically displaced. Given that most of these properties will be affected
partially, 13 of the 25 houses and business will be relocated into the same property, 4 will
have to be displaced in a different plot and the remaining 8 cases are still under analysis
to determine whether it is possible to relocate within the same plot.

 Consultation with affected people
 The consultation process began on April 10, 2006 and is continuing at present. In order
to receive comments and suggestions from the potentially affected communities, public
consultation meetings were carried out in all communities located near the ROW. The
key issues raised at the consultations included: (i) the amount of land that would be
expropriated and the process the PSF would put in place to undertake the expropriation;
(ii) access to properties along the road; (iii) preservation of existing trees; and (iv)
construction of bicycle paths, among others. These consultations have been critical in the
decision-making process, including road alignments of bypasses, location of road
crossings and returns, the need for special safety measures such as bus stops, and the
definition of the types of restoration programs to be carried out in urban areas. The case
of Estaci?n Josefina and the location of the bypass of Frontera is an example of how the
engineering design was changed to accommodate a community?s concerns. Estaci?n
Josefina, according to the first design, was supposed to be outside the bypass but after a
series of consultations, it was decided to change the bypass? location leaving Estaci?n
Josefina inside the bypass to maintain its connectivity with the city of Frontera. By
accepting this change, the cost of the project increased as the size of the bypass had to be
increased. The final draft ESMP and RAP were also presented to and discussed with
these communities. The issues raised in the consultations are summarized in the ESMP
report, which also includes a complete list of participants. The ESMP presents an annex
with an explanation of all changes in the engineering designs that resulted from
suggestions of the affected population.
 In addition to direct participation and consultation, all interested parties were provided
two other means to submit concerns or comments: (i) an electronic mailbox
(inforuta19@santafe.gov.ar); and (ii) mailboxes placed in 15 localities along the road

corridor. Each communication received, electronically and in writing, was documented in
the ESMP.

 Requests for Inspection before the World Bank Inspection Panel

 On September 11, 2006, the Inspection Panel registered a first Request for Inspection,
IPN Request RQ06/05, related to the Argentina: Provincial Road Infrastructure Project
which is being financed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(the Bank) through Loan No. 7301-AR, and the proposed Argentina: Santa Fe Road
Infrastructure Project. A second Request related to the same two projects, IPN RQ06/05-
2, was registered on September 27, 2006. Both Requests concern improvement of
National Road 19 in the PSF. The main concerns raised by the First Requesters can be
summarized as: (i) objection to the construction of an overpass of National Road 19
where it intersects Provincial Road 6 and (ii) objection to the amount of land to be
expropriated, location of land to be expropriated and compensation to be paid. The
Second Request objects to the same issues listed under (ii) in the First Request. The
Requests contains claims that the Panel has indicated may constitute violations by the
Bank of various provisions of its policies and procedures, including the following: OP/BP
4.01, Environmental Assessment, January 1999; OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement,
December 2001; OP/BP 13.05, Project Supervision, July 2001; and World Bank Policy
on Disclosure of Information, September 2002. On October 18, 2006 Bank Management
submitted its Response to the Panel. The Panel issued its report on November 16, 2006.
Said report concludes: ?The Requests and Management Responses contain conflicting
assertions and interpretations about the issues, the facts compliance with Bank policies
and procedures, and harm. The Panel can only address these issues during investigation.
While the Requesters are otherwise eligible to submit a Request for Inspection, the
procedural criterion of paragraph 9(c) requiring that the Requesters have brought the
?subject matter (?) to Management?s attention and that, in the requester?s view,
management has failed to respond adequately demonstrating that it has followed or is
taking steps to follow the Bank?s policies and procedures? has not been fully met.
Therefore the Panel cannot make a recommendation on whether to investigate the subject
matter of the Requests for Inspection? .

 A project preparation Bank Mission conducted in November 2006 had an opportunity to
meet with Requesters that have presented Requests for Inspection before the World Bank
Inspection Panel, as well as with Mr. Hector Jullier who sent a letter to the Bank Office
in Buenos Aires during the mission. These meetings were chaired by the Provincial
Government of Santa Fe and served as a useful forum to better understand the claimants
concerns.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/11/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/11/2006

  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12/13/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/11/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/11/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12/13/2006
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?          Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential        N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes

  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the          Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Tomas S. Serebrisky
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Juan D. Quintero
Social Development Specialist     Ms Elena Correa
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen
 Comments:

