INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR1 153
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:  P096021
Project Name: Andhra Pradesh Road Sector Project (P096021)
Task Team       Sri Kumar Tadimalla
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Apr-2009                Estimated    15-Oct-2009
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%), Urban Transport (5%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Trade facilitation
and market access (25%), Public expenditure, financ ial management and
procurement (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
0
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     645.86            Total Bank Financing:  320.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
o           Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       325.86
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          320.00
Total                                                          645.86
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Since this is the second roads project in AP, the main objective would be to further improve the state
Page 1 of 11


﻿road network by providing better quality and safer roads                    to the users
in a sustainable manner.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Since this is the second roads project in AP, the main objective would be to further improve the state
road network by providing better quality and safer roads                    to the users
in a sustainable manner.
3. Project Description
As of now, it is proposed that the project would include three components, namely:
(i)   Road Improvement Works component (about 90-92% of loan size): This component will
primarily focus on (a) widening, upgrading and strengthening of key road corridors with moderate to
high traffic (about 800-850 km); (b) maintenance of previously improved key road corridors through
long term performance-based contracts(about 1500 km); (c) supporting road development and
management contracts/concessions through Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) with the viability gap
funding support. Funding for this component will include works, goods and consultant and NGO
services required for monitoring, supervising and preparing the designs and bidding documents
wherever Bank-financed.
(ii)  Institutional Strengthening component (about 4% of the loan size): The previous project had
undertaken studies and initiated actions for institutional strengthening and capacity building of the
RBD and RDC. Many of these actions could not be completed during the life of the project and
some were taken up by the GoAP/RBD later after the project closed. The proposed project will focus
on completing some of the remaining actions like (a) ensuring proper management of the core road
netwrok (CRN)- either by fully operationalising the RDC or as a fallback option by creating a
separate division in the RBD to manage the CRN;(b) strengthening RBD since the larger part of the
road network (non-core) would still be with its responsibility; and (c) finalizing and passing of the
AP State Road Act consistent with the policy developed in 2005 to give a legal basis to the road
agencies to manage the roads. Consultant services and any goods and equipment required will be
financed under this component.
(iii)  Safe Roads component (about 4% of the loan size): The option of merging this component
with either or both the above components, as appropriate, will be considered during the preparation
of the project. This component will strive to make the road corridors safe for its users and other
beneficiaries and will cut across various departments of the State like the Police, Health, RBD and
Transport and the Road Safety Council/s. The approach here would be two pronged - (a) making
effective contributions to improve the road safety aspects on the core network which can then be
scaled up to the remaining state roads; and (b) spreading awareness about spreading and prevention
of HIV/AIDs and other sexually transmitted diseases focused specifically on populations by the side
of roads and users. Small works, consultant services, goods and equipment could be financed under
this
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in India. These areas represent varying environmental
settings including forested areas, dry lands, plains and hilly areas. Relevant analysis has been carried
out as part of safeguard documentation at the time of project preparation which continues to hold
good.
Page 2 of 11


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
I. U. B. Reddy (GSURR)
Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
O
Environmental Assessment    Yes
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
For restructured project, no new safeguard policies are triggered.
The summary of safeguard policy issues and their management, as presented at the time of
appraisal, continues to be relevant and the issues thereof are being addressed in line with the
agreed measures during the project implementation, with appropriate changes confirming to state
bifurcation and project restructuring, as explained below
The Project is Category A for Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project has triggered
six safeguards policies as indicated above. The physical interventions proposed under the project
could result in environmental and social impacts including tree cutting, forest land diversions,
impact on community and cultural resources, land acquisition and involuntary resettlement of local
population, and impacts on local communities, particularly indigenous peoples (referred as tribal)
in certain stretches. As part of the project preparation, social and environmental assessments were
undertaken to identify and assess the impacts associated with the proposed project activities, and
develop mitigation measures and plans.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). Complying with Category A Full Assessment, and
the country systems, the EA undertaken included: (i)Environmental Screening carried out in
Page 3 of 11


﻿parallel with the engineering feasibility study; (ii) Environmental Assessment to prepare EMPs as
an integral part of designs; and (iii) Environmental and Social Management Framework for
Maintenance Roads. A concurrent independent review of the environmental assessment process
and outputs has been conducted by APRDC through an independent consultant. The outcomes of
O
EA process, in the form of EMPs have been integrated with relevant implementation mechanisms
including project implementation contracts, and institutional set up for implementation of the
project. These arrangements are proposed to be continued as part of the restructured project, in the
respective states with relevant implementation arrangements.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Some of the project roads pass through the forested areas.
However, the project roads do not pass through any designated wildlife sanctuaries and do not lead
to any conversion or degradation or adverse impacts on natural habitats. The EA process adopted
included systematic stakeholder consultations in determining the impacts on forest areas. The
project specific EMPs include, detailed management measures, and exclusion principles
prohibiting construction related activities such as construction camp sites, location of plant and
machinery, disposal of debris, extraction of construction material, night time construction, etc in
the forest areas.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The corridors under Road maintenance (OPRC) and PPP components
entailed limited acquisition of forest land. Of the total 2Ha of diversion of forest land required, 1.2
Ha has been completed (in case of PPP road) and is ongoing for the balance 0.8 Ha (in case of
Phase 2 OPRC roads). The forest land acquisitions are marginal and the impacts on the quality of
forested areas is insignificant. Land for compensatory afforestation has been delineated with
necessary provision for afforestation. The road side plantations are regulated under Water Land
and Tree Act (WALTA) with a provision for compensatory plantation in 2:1 ratios for each tree
cut. The EMP me assures include sufficient provisions and budget to meet the requirements.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The proposed roads under the project have several
religious structures along the sub-project roads. Some of these could be affected physically or
access to such properties could be affected. All such areas of cultural and religious importance
have been identified as part of EA/SA for specific measures. All these measures are effectively
integrated in to implementation plans and are implemented in consultation with and close
involvement of local communities. There are no known archaeological sites affected by any of the
proposed project corridors.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project involves acquisition of land and road side
structures for the proposed improvements, alignments and by passes. Encroachment of the RoW is
the main issue. Based on the findings of SIA, an R&R entitlement framework has been developed
to ensure that those affected by project interventions are helped to enhance, if not at least restore
their livelihood. RAP for the first year packages of upgrading component have been prepared.
Preparation of RAP for the subsequent year packages is under progress. Adequate institutional
mechanism will be in place to implement RAPs. This includes a Social Management Unit at the
project level, Nodal NGO, Package Management Unit and Package levelNGO.
In the restructured project, the RAPs will be implemented by the successor states, i.e. Government
of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) will implement for 5 roads (CP, MJ, KD, KR, and PNR roads) and
Government of Telangana (GoT) for JP and KS roads. The magnitude of land acquisition is about
500 acres and about 60% is completed to date and 40% of road length is not yet handed over to the
contractors due to land acquisition and resettlement related encumbrances. . The R&R impacts
Page 4 of 11


﻿include about 3000 families and of which about 35% have received R&R assistance to date. Due
to enactment of new land acquisition and R&R legislation in India which came into force from J
anuary 01, 2014, the provisions of this act will retroactively apply for all those lands where
compensation awards are not announced as of December 31, 2013. In addition, the project is also
O
facing the challenges such as ownership claim of Government waste lands by the affected people
in one of the sub-project and difficulties in identifying suitable alternative house sites for a
substantial number of displaced families (about 700). The project is considered to pay cash grants
instead of house sites to overcome this challenge. The respective states are required to confirm the
availability of budget as estimated in the respective RAPs and confirm to provide additional
amounts if required due to provisions of new LARR act. The provisions of new LARR Act, 2013
for land acquisition will be applied and accordingly the RPF is being updated including the
proviso for payment of cash to the displaced families in the event of non-availability of alternative
house sites. This updating is expected to be completed by May 31, 2015.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). As part of IESA, a separate study on indigenous people
(referred locally as tribal) was undertaken. The results indicate that tribal as groups/communities
will not be adversely affected due to project interventions. However, those affected on individual
basis will be supported as per the R&R entitlement framework which provides additional support
to tribal affected families. . In case of phase-II roads, it was observed that the people living along
the villages passing through the roads did not possess the characteristics of tribal people as
described in the Bank's operational policy and those few tribal people affected by the Project
roads are integrated with the non- tribal people and they do not live in groups. Therefore, the need
for preparation of separate Tribal plans was not required. There is a provision for additional cash
assistance equivalent to 500 days of minimum wages as resettlement assistance to affected tribal
families among those affected people living in the scheduled notified areas. However, none of the
projects are passing through the notified areas.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no new potential / indirect and/or long term impacts on account of restructuring. The
earlier assessment as detailed below continues to be relevant.
The project interventions and/or activities would not lead to adverse long-term environmental
impacts due to future activities on the selected roads and state highways. The project is expected to
improve some of the local drainage issues along/across the proposed road. Further the road safety
would also improve. However, the improved road could lead to development along the project
roads. These developments are expected to be adequately organized by the other line agencies.
During project implementation, the resettlement issues are expected to be addressed to the
satisfaction of the affected communities and ensure that those affected/displaced improve their
standard of living. Similarly, measures proposed under tribal plan(s) would help the tribal
communities to access project benefits at par with others. However, issues like HIV/AIDS and
road safety will continue even after project is completed. In this regard, the concerned state
agencies are involved in both planning and implementing measures proposed under the HIV/AIDS
and Road safety plans so that they are organized adequately by the concerned state agencies in the
post project period.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project components entail widening of select roads, largely long the existing alignments.
Therefore the project alternatives relate to: (a) several minor realignments for geometric
Page 5 of 11


﻿improvements, and (b) limited number of by-passes to avoid congested settlement/town areas. In
such areas, route alignments and cross sections have been optimized considering technical, cost,
social and environmental criteria. For the rest of the project, during the detailed feasibility studies
and the EA and SIA, cross-sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives were considered.
O
The factors which have influenced the designs of various components of the road improvements
include resettlement, tree cutting, loss of arable land vis-a-vis the traffic-carrying performance and
safety of the roads, and impacts on cultural and community properties. As far as feasible,
concentric widening has been adopted in the built up stretches to minimize impacts on properties,
land acquisition, and green tunnels. These measures have helped to minimize adverse impacts (in
terms of displacement both physical and economical) on the local population.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For restructured project, the ESMF for maintenance roads and the RPF need to be amended to
suitably reflect the bifurcation and the implementation of various activities by the two
implementation agencies in the successor states of Andhara Pradesh and Telangana in their
respective areas. In case of RPF, the addendum needs to be prepared by both the states - namely,
Andhra Pradesh and Telengana - to also include the retroactive provisions for payment of
compensation under India's new LARR Act and also mentions that District Administration will
carry out land acquisition and resettlement implementation instead of Road Development
corporation of Andhra Pradesh and Roads and Buildings Department in the Telengana. . In case
of KR road in Andhra Pradesh, where substantial displacement involved, two resettlement sites
were identified and all basic infrastructure are being developed and the sites will be allotted to
the displaced families who will be provided with construction grants to construct alternative
houses. In case of other sub-projects in Andhra Pradesh, District Administrations are unable to
identify suitable sites due to non-availability of Government lands. Hence the District
Administrations in Andhra Pradesh are considering paying cash in lieu of house site to overcome
this change.
The assessment of measures being taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues and
the borrower's capacity to plan and implement such measures, as presented at the time of appraisal,
continues to be relevant, with a few changes in tune with the state bifurcation and project
O
restructuring, as explained below
Safeguard policy issues have been addressed by conducting Environmental Assessment
considering relevant provisions under OP 4.01, OP 4.36, OP 4.11; and Social Impact Assessment
(OP 4.12 and OP 4.10) resulting in corridor specific EMPs, RAPs and TDPs respectively. The
safeguard documents are completed for first year Upgradation corridors; and Environmental
Management for OPRC. Social assessment has been completed for the first year Upgradation
corridors which concluded no adverse impact from the proposed works. In addition, specific
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has also been finalized, which will be
adopted by APRDC. The R&R policy framework developed for the project corridors will be
adopted by APRDC for all its projects, irrespective of the source of funding. The Safeguards
assessment for first year PPP component is in advanced stage of completion. The assessments for
the rest of the corridors under different project components is also completed.
The EMPs and Social Management Plans (including RAPs) have been prepared through
consultative process and have been integrated into the project in the form of various avoidance,
minimization, and enhancement measures stated in the EMPs. The corridor specific EMPs include
Page 6 of 11


﻿specific management measures for addressing issues related to cultural and community properties,
natural habitats, construction related activities, and safety management. To ensure that these
measures are implemented, they are reflected and cross referenced in the design drawings, contra
ct conditions and items of Bills of Quantities, and technical specifications. In addition, penalty
O
provisions have also been integrated in to the contract documents to address construction stage
non-compliances effectively.
Detailed stakeholders consultations were held, both during social assessment and RAP/TDP
preparation, at different levels # community, village(s) along the project corridors, mandals and
districts. The stakeholders included road side communities, affected population, road users
including truckers, road side commercial establishments, NGOs and civil society, staff of the
project (RBD/APRDC), revenue department, AP State AIDS Control Society and other line
agencies. Feedback received during these consultations have been adequately considered in
developing R&R policy framework and TD strategy and preparing social management plans
including RAP, TDP and HIV/AIDS plan.
In case of PPP projects, various actions that are required to be completed from land acquisition
and resettlement point of view prior to invitation of RFP (keeping in view the developers#
prospectives have been identified. These include:(a) Resettlement Action Plans ( RAPs) would be
reviewed and endorsed by the Bank and approved by the Government and disclosed; (b) the first
notification under Land acquisition Act would be issued for all the private lands to be acquired for
the respective roads; (c) the contract would be signed with the respective NGOs providing
implementation support; and,(d) the identity cards would be issued to all eligible project affected
households. The payment of compensation and assistance will be extended to all project affected
people prior to financial closure and thus enable the Government to hand over the unencumbered
land to the developers. The preparation of RAPs for initial 3 PPP projects couldn't be completed
as erstwhile APRDC could not complete the preparation of RAPs satisfactory to the Bank prior to
financial closure and hence GoAP has requested the Bank to discontinue the support to safeguards
documentation for PPP projects. The draft RAPS were prepared for these projects and commented
by the Bank. However, these documents were not completed and the client had undertaken
implementation of land acquisition and resettlement impacts as per their own local requirements.
Here, it is noteworthy that these PPP roads are not part of the Bank's financing. The project
financed only the engagement of a Transaction Advisory Consultant to prepare the techno-
a           economic feasibility reports and RAPs for the potential PPP roads and no civil works associated
with these PPP concessions were financed by the Bank. Even here, as the client decided to follow
their own procedures for land acquisition, it was mutually agreed to discontinue further Bank
support for the preparation/review of the RAPs.
Borrower Capacity: APRDC has set up an Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU)
with expertise in forestry, environmental engineer, land acquisition and soc  ial sciences. This
unit functions with direct reporting to the Project Director. The ESMU capacity building has been
integrated as part of the institutional capacity building for APRDC. To facilitate implementation of
social management plans, the project has contracted a Nodal NGO at the project level and
facilitating NGOs at the package level. Sometime ago, the implementation of land acquisition and
resettlement has been transferred to the respective district administrations and this will continue to
be followed in the restructured project in the respective states. In case of implementation of
Environmental management plans, both the sates will have a common arrangement till such time
capacity in Telangana state is established.
Page 7 of 11


﻿In case of land acquisition and resettlement actions, the respective district administrations in
Andhra Pradesh and Telengana will continue to implement the RAPs. The Deputy collector (Land
Acquisition) and Sociologists are already in position at erstwhile Road development Corporation
(RDC) will support both RDC in Andhra Pradesh and the Roads & Buildings Department in
O
Telangana for overseeing and coordination of land acquisition and resettlement implemeniton with
the district administrations.
The additional measures taken to mitigate substantial risks include close monitoring of the Bank
Team on implementation of accelerated LA and R&R action plan prepared by the client,
coordination with procurement and landhanding over schedule with progress in land acquisition
and R&R Implemeniton and periodical reviews at state and district levels on the progress in
land acquisition and resettlement implementation.
The Borrower will also be supported by: (a) Independent Supervision Consultants (SC) who will
be responsible for overseeing Upgradation/Strengthening component of the project; (b) Technical
Audit Consultants for OPRC component; and (c) Independent Engineer for PPP component.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include (i) project affected people (ii) roadside communities (iii) road users
and citizens groups (iv) NGOs and civil society groups (v) local government (vi) implementing
agency (vii) District Administration (viii) Project staff (RBD/APRDC) and (ix) relevant state
government departments including Departments of Revenue, Energy and Environment, Forest,
Tribal/Rural Development, AP Pollution control Board, AP State AIDS Control Society.
Corridor specific consultations were conducted during screening, feasibility, and preparation of
DPRs. The consultations were conducted in formal meetings with communities, informal focus
group discussions and interviews. The content of consultations relate to alignment issues, impacts
on community, cultural, and natural resources; and possible enhancement measures. The DPR
stage consultations are focused on providing information and discussing the draft environmental
management plans addressing various environmental issues, resettlement plans tribal development
strategy and plan, HIV/AIDS Action Plan and involvement of local communities in road safety
O
measures. All consultations have been properly documented. The outcomes of these consultations
are accounted as part of the corridor specific EAs, RAP, TDP, road safety measures and project
level HIV/AIDS Action Plan.
APRDC has made public disclosure of all the Environmental and Social Safeguards documents of
the project prepared so far. The disclosed documents have been made  available for disclosure on
Bank's InfoShop. The updated ESMF for the respective states and the addendum to RPF
incorporating the provisions of new LARR Act for land acquisitions and criteria for payment of
cash in lieu of sites will be disclosed locally and Bank's InfoShop in due course. Similarly, the
corridor specific EAs/EMPs already disclosed by the combined state at the time of preparation will
be suitably modified to reflect the change of implementing agency and re-disclosed by the
respective implementing agencies. The addendum to RPF and RAPs where implementation is still
on-going will be prepared and disclosed in the respective websites of RDC (Andhra Pradesh) and
the Roads & Buildings Department (Telangana).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Page 8 of 11


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Nov-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2009
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  10-Apr-2009
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Jan-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2009
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Jan-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2009
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
O
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X] No[       NA [   ]
property?
Page 9 of 11I


﻿Does the credit/10an incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA[]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Sri Kumar Tadimalla
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Approved By
Regional Safeguards  Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)           Date: 11-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name:                                    Date:
Manager:
Page 11 of 11I


