Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC6011
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P086411 
Original Project Name: SL- Road Sector 
Assistance Project 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P116742 
Project Name:  Sri Lanka - Road Sector Assistance Project - Second Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Amali Rajapaksa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (6%);Sub-
national government administration (4%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%);Rural services and 
infrastructure (17%);Administrative and civil service reform (17%);Social analysis and 
monitoring (17%);Environmental policies and institutions (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
5. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the parent project (RSAP and First 
Additional Financing- P086411 and P110324) will continue to be the same for this 
project. Therefore, the PDO of this Second Additional Financing (AF) is also to lower 
transportation costs through sustainable delivery of an efficient national road system.   
 
3. Project Description 
6. 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Priority National Roads in the East-West corridor 
providing connectivity to the Northern Province. This component will consist of re-
surfacing and improvement of approximately 134 km of #A# class road providing 
connectivity to Northern and Eastern provinces. It will also include the design review and 
Page  2
supervision of selected sections - Ambepussa #Dambulla (92 km #from 0 to 91.9th 
km)and Kanthale-Trincomalee ( 42km # from 157th to 199th km.  
 
9. 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and improvements in Asset 
Management Practices:  This component will provide funding for maintenance, technical 
assistance and strengthening of the systems within the RMTF and RDA relating to road 
maintenance, Institutional strengthening of the RDA, addressing of issues identified 
through the capacity assessment relating to Road safety, incremental operating cost, etc.  
 
10. 
A 3-year periodic maintenance program of prioritized roads will be funded (US$ 
10 million) under the proposed second additional financing. The principle behind the 
IDA funding of maintenance will also be to fund a higher share of maintenance when the 
maintenance funding by GOSL is less and progressively reduce as the GOSL funding for 
maintenance increase. It is however recognized that there will be a capacity constraint in 
using the IDA funding in the first year due to the timing of procurement of contracts. It is 
therefore agreed that the amount of funding from IDA over the 3 year period from 2011 
to 2014 will be US$ 3, 4 and 3 million respectively. The identified program of roads will 
be co- financed by IDA (50%) and GoSL (50%).  
 
11. 
The RDA has applied for a grant from the Global Road Safety Fund for a 
Capacity Assessment. The Assessment is currently under preparation and it was agreed 
that the institutional strengthening component will aim to address the main issues 
identified through the Road Safety capacity assessment. It is envisaged that US$1 million 
will be allocated on road safety.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The road sections to be rehabilitated falls within the first peneplane of Sri Lanka, which 
is relatively a flat terrain. While about 10km of the road strech falls within the wet zone, 
majority of the road sections to be rehabilitated are part of the dry zone. The Ambepussa-
Dambulla section runs through a relatively built up area while Kantale Tricomalee has 
large sections running through agriculture lands and some foret patches.  
 
The project will also provide funds for selected national roads located nationwide for 
maintenance, and therefore, project interventions will be country wide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is designed to provide beneficiaries with improved and sustainable road 
transport by enhancing the durability, efficiency and economic impact of the national and 
rural road network.  Improved road surfaces can reduce travel times and lower the costs 
of vehicle use, while increasing access to markets, jobs, education and health services as 
well as reduce transport costs for both freight and passengers.  Therefore, the project will 
improve the economic and social welfare of the people.  
 
Considering the scope of the project, which is limited to maintenance and rehabilitation 
of national roads, with drainage improvements where needed, it is anticipated that there 
will be no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts.  
Therefore, any potential adverse impacts due to road resurfacing and drainage 
improvement can be easily managed with proper planning, design, construction, 
supervision, monitoring and post-project operation and maintenance. Resurfacing of 
roads has minimal on-site environmental impacts. Disturbances to land, interference to 
soil stability and the hydrology in the area will not take place. Impacts on air quality and 
noise levels will be limited only to the construction period. Longer term impacts depend 
on the projected traffic flow increases and the anticipated reduction in traffic congestion, 
which is likely to arise due to improved road conditions.  It is felt that the net effect on air 
quality and noise levels will be positive over the long term.  Any potential adverse 
environmental impacts triggered under this project will be seen off-site where road-
building material would be sourced.  
 
The Project does not envisage large scale land acquisition. However, where minor land 
acquisition is unavoidable (e.g. where minor road alignments widening or other 
improvements require small scale land acquisition) the project will be designed to cause 
minimum social, cultural and economic disruption.  The Project in these situations will 
use donated land and will ensure : the voluntary nature of the donation; that the donor 
gives up all claims to the land and to compensations for the land; that it is free of 
encumbrances and interests; for any loss of livelihood of vulnerable groups, that 
Page  4
community devised mitigation measures are acceptable to the affectees; a grievance 
redressal mechanism is available; and the title is transferred to RDA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With road improvements, it is anticipated that there is a possibility for increased vehicle 
traffic which could result in road safety issues.  GOSL has just embarked on a program to 
better enforce road rules in a bid to reduce traffic accidents and improve road safety.  The 
resurfacing of existing roads would not significantly increase development in the area and 
therefore, long term impacts would be minimal.  Air quality and noise in the areas should 
improve since there should be less traffic congestion if the roads are of better quality.  
 
Since there are some forested areas in Kantale- Trincomalee section where there is 
possibility of wildlife crossing over, speed bumps, signboards warning road users, etc. 
will have to be put in place to safeguard the wildlife as well as people. It was decided that 
engineering safeguards measures such as overpasses or underpasses will not be practical, 
the assessors have noted during the environmental assessment that the number of animals 
crossing is insignificant and animals are not using any specific corridors for their 
movements. In addition, the buffer area between the road and with forests have been 
cleared and maintained by the armed forces for security purposes and some of these sites 
have been demarcated and fenced for other development activities. These have blocked if 
any corridors that may have existed in the past and have curtailed the movement of 
wildlife across the road.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable under additional finance, as this is connected to RSAP- P086411.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In keeping with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies, the Road Development Authority 
(RDA) prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
specifically for this additional financing, although the Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF)and a Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) 
of the parent project is still valid. They have provided the necessary background for 
environmental and social considerations to be built into the design of the project so that 
environmentally sustainable implementation can take place.  These Frameworks were 
used as a guide and template by the RDA to undertake environmental and social analysis 
and ensure compliance with the World Bank#s environmental and social safeguard 
policies and the relevant provisions under the National Environmental Act (NEA) and 
associated regulations.  Based on the EAMF, road specific environmental analyses has 
been undertaken, for the two road sections included under the project, resulting in 
individual Environmental Management Plans prepared by the Environment and Social 
Division of RDA.  
 
Page  5
In order to be more road-specific, the individual civil works Contractors will be 
expected to develop Environmental Methods Statements (EMS), based on the EMPs, 
which identifies location and site specific details related to both onsite and off site 
environmental and social issues.  These EMSs are required to be cleared by the client and 
IDA prior to commencing any activity at the sites. The respective EMSs will specify the 
methodologies that will be adopted to implement the mitigation measures to be 
implemented by the contractor. In addition, all Contractors are required to obtain and 
abide by relevant GOSL licenses for extraction of material from quarries and borrow 
sites, as well as licenses for the use of disposal sites, crusher and asphalt plant site, etc.  
The PMU and supervisory consultants are required to monitor compliance of license 
conditions and the implementation of the EMS very rigorously.  
 
In addition to the above, the RDA has established an Environmental and Social Division 
at RDA to integrate environmental issues into the planning process as well as undertake 
environmental monitoring.  The project will continue to provide training for appropriate 
RDA staff, particularly focused on field staff.  
 
Moreover, the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established with the environmental 
regulatory agency, Central Environmental Authority (CEA), having EIA review 
experience of over a decade.  However, the weak link in the EA process is in the area of 
post approval monitoring.  Therefore, the project shall continue its initiatives to address 
this weakness, including: (i) making the contractor responsible for the implementation of 
the EMS including penalty clauses in contracts for non-complaince; (ii) requiring the 
supervisory consultants to have environmental specialists monitoring the implementation 
of the EMS, particularly at the level of Resident Engineers; and (iii) recruiting 
appropriate staff at the PMU to provide the requisite monitoring of the EMS.   Overall, 
the Central Environmental Authority will have a responsibility to ensure that GOSL 
environmental clearance conditions are met. IDA missions will continue to emphasize 
EMS implementation in regular project reviews. These safeguards should ensure 
effective implementation of post approval safeguard conditions.  Monthly meetings are 
being held by the PMU with the supervisory consultants and civil works contractors on 
safeguards compliance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental Assessment and Management Framework was prepared with 
stakeholder consultation and was placed for public comments for a 30 day period in early 
2011. Site specific EMS for contract packages will be placed for public comments as the 
contract process progresses. The Final EA with EMPs were were submitted to the Bank 
in 2010.  
 
The contractors and supervisory consultants are also expected to conduct contract 
package-specific consultations with the affected communities and other stakeholders such 
as local authorities, public utility departments, Forest Department, Wildlife Department, 
Geological Survey and Mines Bureau and State Timber Corporation.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/14/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/06/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
N/A 
Page  7
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Amali Rajapaksa 
02/01/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darshani De Silva 
02/01/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sangeeta Kumari 
02/01/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/02/2011 
Comments:  Cleared as per the Email of February 2,2011 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
02/03/2011 
Comments:  Cleared as per the Email of February 3, 2011 
