                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                               Report No: AC518
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: ALBANIA                                             Project ID: P077526
Project: POWER SECTOR GENERATION AND                         Task Team Leader: Iftikhar Khalil
RESTRUCTURING PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 21, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 16, 2004                                IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE                                         Sector: Power (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                              development (P); State enterprise/bank restructuring
                                                             and privatization (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The development objective of the project is to achieve significant improvement in power system
performance through (i) priority investments to increase domestic thermal generation, and (ii) measures to
implement sector reforms and institutional strengthening.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The project would consist of:

(i)     a combined-cycle power station fueled by distillate oil at a six-hectare greenfield site about six km
        north of Vlore adjacent to an offshore oil tanker terminal;

(ii)    technical assistance for:

        -        bid evaluation, contract administration and supervision of project implementation;
        -        examining the option of soliciting bids to supply gas to the plant and, if this option is
                 considered feasible, preparation of the bidding documents and assistance in bid evaluation;
        -        formation of a subsidiary company of KESH to own and operate the plant, and preparation
                 of a power purchase agreement;
        -        follow-up studies required by the Environmental Management Plan;
        -        power sector reforms;
        -        consumer satisfaction surveys; and
        -        improvements in inventory control;

        and training in procurement and environmental management.

The plant would be designed to allow conversion to natural gas if and when imported gas is brought to
Albania. The plant size would be 85 MW - 135 MW depending on the evaluation of bids that will be
requested for this range of plant size. The total amount of financing is currently expected to be US$
112.66 million (IDA - US$ 25 million, EBRD - US$ 37.5 million, EIB - US$ 37.5 million, KESH - US$
12.66 million). EBRD has indicated a willingness to raise its loan to US$ 40 million and EIB to Euro 40

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS


million if necessary. If even greater additional financing is required as a result of higher bid prices (an
unlikely eventuality), this would be provided by KESH. The cost of the power station includes US$ 3
million for the needed refurbishment of the existing oil tanker terminal. The total project cost also includes
US$ 4.85 million for technical assistance.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The location of the proposed power plant is described in I.A.3.

Proximity to the Narta Lagoon. The site is located about two kilometers south of the Narta Lagoon. The
lagoon and the surrounding ecosystem that extends north to the Vjosa River delta covers approximately
10,000 hectares, is composed of forests, wetlands, sand dunes, beaches and agricultural land., and is home
to a number of endangered species. Parliament is expected to designate the Narta Lagoon as a "Protected
Area" under a new law which provides for the establishment of protected areas to ensure the conservation
of natural resources, protect biodiversity, and restore and maintain habitats and species. The Government
has confirmed that the proposed Vlore power plant site will be outside of the boundaries of the Narta
Lagoon protected area. The EA has concluded that the proposed project will not have an adverse impact
on the Narta Lagoon and the ecosystem contained and surrounding the lagoon.


B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)

Comments: A new thermal power station is normally assigned an 'A' classification because of the potentially
large environmental impact its construction and operation could have, and the correspondingly significant
measures which need to be taken to limit environmental damage.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe

                                                         3
                                                                                                           ISDS


any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Construction Phase

Emissions to air. Fugitive dust may be emitted from general site work, road improvements (the existing
dirt access road will require upgrades and resurfacing), and truck traffic (related to deliveries of materials
and equipment). Concrete and asphalt batch plants may also contribute to local particulate emissions. Only
those plants which have valid operating licenses including any requisite permits from environmental
authorities will be eligible to bid for contracts. This requirement will be specified in the bid documentation.

Noise. Noise from construction activity may be significant. There are no residential communities within
500 meters of the construction site, so noise should not create a significant problem. Additionally,
construction activities which generate significant noise levels will be limited to reasonable daytime hours
and this condition will be specified in any contract bid document. Thus any impacts on the closest
residential communities as well as local biological habitats will be minimal.

Ground and surface water. Minor short-term lowering of the groundwater table may occur in the vicinity
of the site during dewatering of foundation excavations. However, groundwater resources in this area are
limited and the groundwater is not typically used for domestic or other purposes. Therefore the limited
drawdown from dewatering activity is not expected to have a significant impact.

Water from dewatering activities could contain suspended solids, oil and grease. The water will be visually
inspected for oil presence. Oil contaminated water will be treated prior to disposal with an on-site oil water
separator (OSW).

Accidental spills of fuels or other materials could contaminate coastal or inland waters. This issue will be
addressed by a Spill and Emergency Response Plan which the Borrower has agreed to prepare prior to
commencement of fuel deliveries for the Plant. The Plan will be reviewed and approved by the World Bank.


Aggregate sources.      Existing stone and gravel quarrying operations close to the site would provide
sufficient resources for construction requirements without depleting local resources.

Marine habitat. Installation of the cooling water intake and discharge outfall pipelines could have impacts
on the marine habitat. The work may involve dredging and disposal of excavated material, which could
cause sediment release to the surrounding marine environment. However, effects are expected to be minor
since the amount of material to be dredged is quite small and will only be done once. Nonetheless, dredged
material will be analyzed for mercury and if mercury levels exceed standards (USEPA 503/8-91/001)
appropriate measures will be taken for disposal to an acceptable site.

Coastal navigation. Construction activities are not likely to interfere with coastal navigation of shipping
or passenger vessels.

Land acquisition. No land acquisition is involved for the power plant itself as the land is already owned by
the Government.      About 0.8 hectares of land will need to be acquired for the foundations of the
transmission towers for the 7 km of double circuit 220 kV transmission line needed to connect the plant to
the Babica substation. The land acquisition will not involve any resettlement. A policy framework adopted
by KESH for land acquisition is included as an Annex to the PAD. No significant impacts are expected
from construction and operation of the transmission line. However, the Supplementary Environmental

                                                      4
                                                                                                         ISDS


Assessment to be prepared during project implementation will define the transmission line route in greater
detail to assure minimum environmental impact.

Transportation. To alleviate pressure on existing roads in the Vlore area, the main access roads would be
upgraded to accommodate the additional traffic. Scheduling the delivery of major plant components for
off-peak traffic times can also help mitigate impacts on the local traffic flow.

Operation Phase

Emissions to air. Combustion of the distillate oil during plant operation would result in emissions of sulfur
dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, particulate matter less than 10 microns, and
total suspended particulate. The particulates may contain small amounts of trace metals. The generation
facility would be designed to meet the more stringent of the EU or World Bank emission standards and
ambient air quality impact limits. Sulphur dioxide emissions would be controlled by limiting the sulphur
content of the fuel. Nitrogen oxide emission would be controlled through burner management and water
injection to the combustion turbines. Particulate emissions would be reduced through good combustion
control to minimize the products of incomplete combustion and control of fuel oil quality. The United
States Environmental Protection Agency Industrial Source Complex Model (ISC3) was used to estimate the
impact of plant operation on ambient air quality. The results meet the World Bank and EU standards for
carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide and particulates. Using limited baseline data provided
by the Regional Environmental Agency in Vlore, it was determined that emissions from the Vlore power
plant would result in the air quality in Vlore remaining within the "moderate category." This result would
comply with the World Bank, EBRD and EIB air quality standards for thermal generating plants. Since the
air quality results are based upon limited baseline data, the Borrower has agreed and is currently
implementing a more comprehensive air quality monitoring program and will prepare a Supplemental EA
by December 2005 with more detailed analysis of air quality impacts. The Borrower will implement any
resulting additional mitigation measures required.

Noise.    Significant noise levels can result from operation of the turbines.      The transformers in the
switchyard can also generate significant noise levels. The combustion turbines would be designed to limit
noise to 85 decibels (A), and thereby meet the EU and World Bank guidelines for noise emissions. In
addition, as previously mentioned, there are no residences within 500 meters of the plant site, the nearest
population centers (Narta, Vlore) are several kilometers away, and the area between the plant site and these
residential communities are wooded. The likelihood of any disturbance from noise is extremely unlikely.

Oil spills. Oil spills could occur during the shipping, unloading and transfer of the fuel to on-site storage.
As mentioned above the Borrower has agreed to prepare a Spill and Emergency Response Plan. This Plan
would address the oil spill issue.

Water intake. Water intake for the once-through cooling system may affect a localized zone of the marine
ecosystem where the intake structure is located. The primary impacts of concern are impingement of
marine life on the intake screens and entrainment of marine species in the cooling water system. The
Supplemental EA will include studies of local marine flora and fauna which will be used as part of the
siting study for cooling water intake and outfall.

Thermal discharge. Once-through plant cooling water that is discharged to the Bay of Vlore would
increase temperatures in the vicinity of the discharge location. Thermal impact modelling was evaluated
using the Cornell Mixing Expert System (CORMIX). It was determined that the potential increase in water
temperature would be less than the World Bank's guideline of three degrees Celsius at the edge of the

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


mixing zone (actual calculated value was 0.87 degrees Celsius). If the impacts are found to be greater than
predicted after operation begins, modifications to the diffuser operation can be made to enhance diffusion
rate of the thermal plume to comply with World Bank requirements.

Chemical discharge in cooling water. Chemical discharge in the plant cooling water is expected to be
negligible. Water will be treated with sodium hypochlorite to eliminate fouling. Residual chlorine levels in
the effluent will be maintained within world Bank guidelines (0.2 mg/liter).

Wastewater discharge.        The wastewater discharge would be designed to comply with World Bank
standards.

Hazardous waste.       The amount of hazardous waste created would be very low and originate from
maintenance sources. The waste would consist primarily of spent lubricants, used rags and spent clean-up
solvents. There would be no ash residue from the combustion of the distillate fuel oil and no sludge
accumulation from fuel storage. Any hazardous waste generated would be treated in accordance with
Albanian regulations and handled at a dedicated facility with appropriate equipment for managing material
of this nature.

Narta Lagoon. There will be no adverse impacts on the Narta Lagoon from the thermal discharge or
wastewater discharge from the plant.       The plant meets all air quality standards, including those set to
protect sensitive vegetation and ecosystems.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

None.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

The environmental impacts identified for the operation phase would continue as long as the plant operates
(20 years or more). The site is large enough to accommodate two additional generating units of about the
same size. The electricity demand and supply projections presented in Annex 4 show one of these two
additional units starting operation in 2009. Its environmental impacts would be about the same as that of
the first unit and would be additional to the impacts of the first unit as long as both units are operating at
the same time. A full environmental assessment would be carried out prior to any decision being made
regarding additional plants being constructed at the Vlore site or in its vicinity.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

Alternative sites and fuels were evaluated in the feasibility study for the project. The other sites and fuels
(coal, heavy fuel oil) were found to be less attractive from the environmental point of view.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

A full-scale EMP has been prepared in accordance with the requirements for projects rated Category A.
The EMP defines the measures needed to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts,
improve environmental performance and ensure compliance with applicable safeguard policies.               The
Borrower has agreed to implement the EMP.

                                                     6
                                                                                                       ISDS


The main environmental mitigation measures include the following:

Construction Phase

-      While few trees would be affected by the site work, no trees would be cut that do not interfere with
       the site work, and any cleared wood would be made available to local residents.
-      The final site grade would facilitate drainage and avoid flooding and pooling. A site drainage plan
       would be developed to protect against erosion. Protecting stockpiles through the use of silt fencing
       and reduced slope angles would also minimize soil erosion during construction.
-      Construction equipment would meet the applicable noise standard in EU Directive 2000/14/EC of
       May 2000;
-      To reduce dust from site access upgrades, disturbed areas would be watered on an as-needed basis.
       Work involving nuisance noise would be minimized during locally recognized days of rest and at
       night.
-      Where site excavations require dewatering, the excess water would be visually inspected for oil
       contamination prior to discharge to the site drainage system. Oil contaminated water would be
       treated prior to disposal;
-      Borrow areas would avoid agricultural areas.
-      Borrow areas would be reworked to blend into the surroundings. Revegetation would be performed
       using local plants. All slopes and working surfaces would be returned to a stable condition.
-      The water supply for use in construction of the generation facility would be monitored to ensure
       that it does not adversely affect other water uses in the area.
-      Fuel storage tanks would have secondary containment with sufficient volume to contain a spill
       from the largest tank in the containment structure. The containment area would have a means of
       removing accumulated water. Drains would be routed through the site/water separator. A spill
       and emergency response plan would be developed and put in place prior to commencement of fuel
       deliveries for the Plant.
-      Existing sources of aggregate would be used and no new sources would be developed.
-      Storm water runoff from the batch plant would be directed to the site drainage system. Noise
       would be controlled to an acceptable level. Dust bags would be installed as necessary.
-      The influx of workers is not expected to exceed 350 to 500 individuals. Workers would be housed
       in Vlore and transported by bus to the site. A first aid station would be provided on-site.
-      The upgrade of the main access road to the plant would have a positive effect on local traffic.
       Dust from the road would be minimized with water during construction and by providing a paved
       surface. Trucks would be tarped when carrying load. Road speeds would be controlled to reduce
       the potential for accidents.
-      Solid waste would be disposed of in accordance with local standards using a local contractor.
-      A packaged sewage disposal facility would be provided. No direct discharge of untreated liquid
       waste would be allowed.
-      Disturbance to aquatic life would be minimized by careful siting of the intake and outfall.
       Construction wastes would not be disposed of in the bay. The intake and outfall would be
       constructed in such a way as to minimize the release of sediments to the bay. The period for
       construction of the intake and outfall would be scheduled to minimize the impact on fishermen. All
       barges and buoys would be clearly marked and illuminated at night.
-      Topsoil on the final site would be graded and planted as appropriate.

Operation Phase

-      The combustion turbines would employ state of the art control technology for all pollutants.

                                                     7
                                                                                                      ISDS


        Nitrogen oxides would be controlled using water injection. Sulphur dioxide would be controlled by
        firing only low-sulphur distillate fuel oil. Employing good combustion control would control
        carbon monoxide, particulate matter and volatile organic compounds. The stack height would be
        47 meters from grade.
-       The combustion turbines would be enclosed in an acoustic enclosure to ensure that noise does not
        exceed 85 dB(A) at 1 m. Workers in close proximity to this equipment would be required to use
        hearing protection. Off-site noise would not exceed 70 dB(A) at one meter. There is no residential
        housing in the area of the site.
-       The location of the cooling water intake would be chosen to minimize the impact on the aquatic
        environment. Bar screen intake screens would be utilized. Final screening with travelling water
        screens at cooling water pump suctions would be employed. An inlet velocity of less than 1 m/s
        would be used to minimize entrainment.
-       The plant would supply its own fresh water supply from the Adriatic Sea through a membrane
        desalinization system.
-       A sewage treatment facility would be provided at the plant and discharge of treated effluent would
        be combined with the cooling water discharge.
-       Many of the workers would be from the Vlore area. However, the infrastructure of the City of
        Vlore would be able to accommodate all workers coming from outside the area.
-       A spill response plan and necessary response equipment would be provided to handle fuels and
        hazardous materials. As many as 30 deliveries would be made per year.              Monitoring and
        enforcement of sea conditions under which a vessel may make deliveries would be part of the plant
        procedures and implemented through the delivery contracts.
-       The oil pipeline would be regularly inspected, and a maintenance program would be developed as
        part of the plant operating procedures.
-       Oil storage would include secondary containment of sufficient size to contain 110% of the contents
        of the largest tank. A means of removing rainwater would be included. Drains would be routed
        through the plant oil/water separator.
-       Clearing for transmission lines would be minimized. The line would be routed to minimize the
        impact on residential areas. The electromagnetic field emitted by the line would be checked.
-       The plant would be shielded by trees and set back from the ocean. Landscaping would be used to
        enhance the appearance of the generation facility.

The EMP provides for monitoring as follows:

Construction Phase

Construction. Visual inspection of dust would be ongoing at the construction site

Noise. Noise would be monitored during day and night for an eight-hour period. In addition, spot
monitoring of various pieces of construction equipment would take place. The site construction manager
would maintain records of any noise complaints.

Site drainage. Drainage swales would be inspected on a weekly basis to ensure that storm water discharge
from the construction site is effective.

Operation Phase

Air. There would be continuous monitoring of meteorological parameters including wind speed, wind
direction, and ambient temperature and ambient pollution concentrations of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen

                                                      8
                                                                                                        ISDS


oxides and particulates. The flue gas characteristics of each generating unit would be determined after
commencement of operations to ensure that emission performance criteria are met.

Noise. A noise monitoring program would be undertaken, especially at times of high noise events, in order
to record the impact at a downwind location.

Marine environment. The condensate discharge temperature would be monitored continuously to verify
compliance with design criteria. Quarterly spot measurement of the cooling water discharge plume would
be conducted to verify the modeling input parameters.

A specific study would be undertaken downstream of the diffuser to delineate the area impacted by the
plume. Records of fish impingement, including numbers and weight by species, would be kept. If
complaints are received from local fishermen regarding decreasing catches after the plant is in operation, a
survey of fishing impacts would be conducted.

Site wastewater discharges, including runoff and discharge from the packaged sewage treatment plant
would be monitored four times a year to verify compliance with design criteria.

Monitoring would be implemented for the single point mooring, pipeline and on-shore oil storage and
handling areas.      A plant representative would be present during fuel deliveries to monitor the
connection/disconnection and fuel transfer operations at the single point mooring for leaks and releases.
The condition of the single point mooring would be inspected routinely between fuel deliveries. The entire
length of the underwater pipeline would be monitored periodically for signs of leakage. Gauges would be
installed to monitor flow in the pipeline as an additional aid to identifying losses. The onshore oil storage
and handling facilities would be inspected weekly.

The EMP would be implemented by KESH in accordance with a covenant in the Project Agreement.
KESH is creating an environmental unit with technical assistance financed by the IDA credit for the Power
Sector Rehabilitation and Restructuring Project.       Technical assistance would be provided under the
proposed project to conduct follow-on studies required by the EMP (e.g. updating the estimation of the
impact of plant operation on ambient air quality using site-specific data; development of an oil spill
response plan and identification of the related equipment to be procured). Training in environmental
management would be provided under the proposed project.

Selection of the route for the seven-kilometer transmission line will be carried out so as to minimize the
environmental impact. There will be land acquisition of about 0.8 hectare, no resettlement and no impact
on natural habitats and cultural properties. As is being done under the Power Sector Rehabilitation and
Restructuring Project, land acquisition will be carried out in accordance with Albanian law, which provides
for compensation on the basis of fair market value.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan were prepared by the Montgomery
Group with financing from USTDA. An independent review of the EA and EMP was carried out by
Consultants financed by CIDA.

The key stakeholders include: KESH, as the project sponsor; the Government, which supports the initiative
for new domestic power generation, but which also wants to minimize adverse environmental impacts; the

                                                      9
                                                                                                           ISDS


general population of Albania, which is expected to have the same goals as the Government; and the
residents of the Vlore area, who would benefit from the electricity produced by the plant, the employment
creation resulting from the plant's construction and operation, and any other income brought to the
community by the plant's activities, but would also have to bear any adverse local environmental impacts.

A meeting was held in Vlore in the Fall of 2002 to introduce the project to the public and begin the public
consultation process. A second meeting was held in Vlore on April 2, 2003 to receive public input on the
scope of the assessment. Over 100 persons attended the second meeting, representing various government
agencies, universities, non-governmental organizations and the general public. The meetings were covered
by Albanian television stations and broadcast through a segment on the nightly news. Additional meetings
were held with the Ministry of Environment on August 15, 2002 and March 31, 2003.                    A public
consultation meeting was held on September 3, 2003 in Vlore to discuss the draft EA. It was attended by
35 persons representing national and local government agencies, businesses, non-government agencies and
the general public. No major issues were identified.

The Environmental Assessment, including the Environmental Management Plan, will be made available in
a public place.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

                                                     10
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              10/24/2003      10/17/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/24/2003      10/20/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           10/27/2003      10/23/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        10/29/2003      10/23/2003
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Iftikhar Khalil                                    December 12, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Bernard Baratz                                     December 12, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Ronald N. Hoffer                                        December 17, 2003
Sector Manager                        Henk Busz                                          December 12, 2003

