1
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorld Frt ol Frvorry
InfoShop
Report No: AC77
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/19/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF            Project ID: P071144
Project: Private Sector Development and           Task Team Leader: Ivan Rossignol
Competitiveness
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 23, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 3, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 120.00
Managing Unit: AFTPS                              Sector: General transportation sector (20%); Mining
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  and other extractive (20%); General energy sector
Status: Lending                                  (20%); General finance sector (20%);
Telecommunications (20%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
development (P); State enterprise/bank restructuring
and privatization (P); Export development and
competitiveness (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's development objective is to increase the competitiveness of selected firms in the mining,
transport, energy, telecom and financial sectors, thereby contributing to the growth of these sectors.
The project is thus expected to make an important contribution towards improved living conditions of
the Congolese population.
Increased competitiveness from changes in tax, legal and judiciary will immediately result in more
private investments in the productive economy, which will translate in job creation. Reform in the
mining, transport, energy, telecom, and financial sectors will be achieved by implementing public
enterprise reform, which should bring the following benefits: (i) increased participation in the economy
From the private sector (thus stimulating competitiveness), increased output of, access to, and quality of,
utility services for the population. While leading to job losses in the short ternM the reform will, in the
medium term, contribute to generating employment in a stimulating business environment. Finally, a
pilot around economic reinsertion of workers in the mining sector in the Katanga region will facilitate
the reintegration of Gecamines workers in the local economy and result in empowerment of local
communities and increased competitiveness of local SMEs. It is expected that this pilot will have a
demonstration effect on other sectors of the economy, and will result in substantial decrease in state
subsidies to some ailing sectors of the economy, thus freeing-up scarce resources to implement poverty
reduction strategies.


﻿2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
Consistent with the I-PRSP, the proposed project supports reforms to achieve macro-economic and
pro-poor growth. In particular, this project will help improve the governance situation in public
enterprises and will help improve the access to the main infrastructures and utilities. The project is
focused on selected sectors of the economy, which can have the highest impact in terms of GDP growth.
Project component 1: Improving the investment climate (US$36.10 million)
Following years of war and of bad governance, the current business environment in DRC is not
conducive to attracting investment, to develop the private sector or to restructure the public enterprises.
First, the legal system is no longer adequate and does not have a strong and reliable judiciary system with
a well applied commercial code. Second, the tax system is obsolete and virtually impossible to apply for
both the state and the public and private enterprises. Third, the country is perceived as being at high
political risk, which is detrimental to attracting foreign direct investment, and to the development of
regional trade and of financial markets. Finally, key sectors of government, like the Ministry of Mines,
lack the capacity to actively promote their resources and thus help develop a competitive sector.
Building capacity of the Ministry of Mines will strengthen the Government's capacity to regulate mining
activities, improve revenue management and the granting mining titles.
For the reform to be successful, a new enabling environment addressing these issues will have to be put
in place before divestiture is carried out. The Government's objectives through this project are to focus
on (i) the legal, judiciary and fiscal framework, (ii) increase financial intermediation, (iii) increase the
capacity at the level of the Ministry of Mines, and (iv) provide for a mechanism to promote investments
while reducing administrative barriers and improve policy dialogue with stakeholders.
Project component 2: Implementing the parastatal reform (US$71.69 million)
The once sustainable public enterprises in the utilities sector have all diversified into non-core
commercial activities. Poor governance associated with the sharp decline in economic activity during the
recent Congolese conflict have led these enterprises to become financial drains for the Government. The
basic utility services, they are supplying, have dramatically decreased in quality. Per capita access has
declined. Even former cash cows like Gecamines have turned into non-profitable companies. This, in
turn, has hampered private sector development, which could not grow in a competitive and transparent
environment. In parallel to creating the appropriate business environment to foster competitiveness, the
project would support the parastatal reform in the telecommunication, transport, energy and mining
sectors, which objectives would be to improve access to, and quality, of the basic utilities, contain the
hemorrhage on public finances, and finally address bad governance issues.
The project supports the Government's objectives to (i) facilitate divestiture from ailing public
enterprises (including defining, supporting the social cost and economic reinvention in the mining,
banking and telecom sectors): Gecamines, SNEL, OCPT, SNCC, RVA, LAC, Citytrain, BCCE, NBK,
BCA; (ii) create the appropriate controls and institutional capacity for utilities to be provided on a
sustainable basis; (iii) create the appropriate structure to pilot the parastatal reform through strengthening
of COPIREP.
Project component 3: Initiatives for economic development in the Katanga region (US$7.41
million)
This component supports measures aimed at increasing competitiveness of the economy of Katanga, the


﻿3
ISDS
leading mining region in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Katanga is expected to attract private
investment in mining after a brief period of restructuring of parastatal Gecamines. The component would
create new economic opportunities for the workers retrenched from Gecamines and other parastatals
present in Katanga (such as SNCC and OCPT) and would focus on local economic development
activities in the Province. The component consists of the following five activities, aimed at increasing
mining-related private sector competitiveness, improvement of living conditions of small-scale mining
operators, empowering municipalities, and social mitigation activities in connection with Gecamines
restructuring in the region: (i) small grants program; (ii) supply-chain approach to integration of small-
and medium enterprises to improve the competitiveness in the region; (iii) transfer of social services to
municipalities; (iv) set-up of regional development framework; and (v) coordination of activities
associated with Gecamines restructuring.  Specific measures will be taken at the policy and
zommunity-based levels to ensure that the benefits of mineral wealth can be broadly shared by the
Congolese population.
Project component 4. Project Coordination and Implementation arrangements (US$7.13 million)
The implementation of the project will require regular follow-up from an implementation unit, which will
need to monitor financial management of the project, track disbursement, engage in procurement
activities when needed. The Government has already created BCeCo to support such activities in the
context of the IDA Grant. It would therefore be consistent with this earlier choice to use BCeCo as the
Project Implementation Unit. However, given the current capacity load of BCECO, it is envisaged to
migrate the implementation capacity of BCECO for this project to COPIREP during the implementation
phase of the project.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Kinshasa (companies to be restructured are headquartered in Kinshasa) and Katanga (for the
mining related activities only).
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project has been categorized as a B due to the potential environment liabilities incurred by
the enterprises to be privatized.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims


﻿4
ISDS
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The draft Environmental Pre-Audit identified environmental liabilities such as soil pollution
from various oils and solvents due to ineffective management; the likely existence of PCB;
inappropriate disposal of liquid and solid wastes; ineffective occupational health and safety
provisions; poor arrangements for storing chemical products used by the enterprises, and
damaged buildings. The audit further noted that employees of OCPT had decided to live in the
buildings of OCPT's Direction Logistique because they had not received salaries for three years.
The issues raised by these employees will be addressed in a Baseline Study and included in
Project Component 2, sub-component 3 which will support the social costs of the reform.
The major issue relates to the selling of various social assets belonging to Gecamines to the
retrenched labor force, especially housing. Retrenchment is not a social safeguard issue except
where people will lose associated housing, and especially in one-industry towns (i.e., where
resettlement is a necessary consequence of retrenchment). Unless special precautions are taken
during the negotiation of the voluntary separation compensation packages, some people are likely
to lose their rights to houses. A Steering Committee will be created at the Presidency level to
overlook Gecamines' restructuring with a mandate for: (i) the set up of a policy for the severance
of redundant workers, including the provision of a social safety net for those that leave the
company, and the transfer of social services provided by the company; and (ii) the evaluation of
the huge environmental legacy left by past administrations and coordination of the clean-up
work. Past mining activities have left a huge social and environmental legacy in DRC. The
country is particularly ill-equipped to deal with it as there is no legal and regulatory framework
for environmental protection, and the state-owned mining companies do not have environmental
management systems. Such historical impacts are not caused by the proposed project, nor will be
directly addressed by it. Moreover, attracting private investment for the rehabilitation of the
mining activity will not work without a clear idea of past environmental liabilities and the
responsibilities that should be inherited by the new investors. Rather than dealing with this issue
on a case by case basis, there is a need to develop an integrated framework to address them and
prepare for the clean-up of the contaminated sites. Under the proposed project, technical
assistance will be provided for the set up of the regulatory framework needed to promote
environmental and social protection in mining, and monitor the environmental requirements for
mining projects. The project will also fund environmental audits in the environmentally damaged
areas to clearly define responsibilities for the liabilities and prepare mitigation plans.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A


﻿5
ISDS
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
For the purposes of the proposed project, the Borrower has prepared a draft Environmental Pre-Audit
covering OCPT, SNCC, SNEL, RVA, LAC and City Train. Enterprises requiring additional audit work
have been identified in this pre-audit.


﻿6
ISDS
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The draft Eny. Pre-Audit has been disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop on April 23,
2003.
A participatory approach will be encouraged with the following groups: private sector,
Government, NGOs and communities affected by the restructuring of the parastatal, trade and
business associations. The Government will use the Dialogue Forum (to be set up under
Component 1 of this project) to achieve this objective. In addition, consultation seminars have
been held during project preparation (financed by a PPF) and will be held during implementation.
In addition, the project implementation units (COPIREP and the Ministry of Mines) will use the
media to communicate effectively on the issue of reform.
In the mining sector, specific measures have to be taken to ensure that the benefits of mineral
wealth can be broadly shared by all Congolese, both at the policy level and at the level of
community-based rural development activities. The main challenge is to ensure that affected
communities will effectively benefit from the rehabilitation of mining operations.
Nongovernmental groups and the private sector should be encouraged to provide social services,
but these efforts should also be adequately coordinated to avoid large gaps in coverage, to ensure
technical supervision, and to mount country-wide campaigns (e.g., for HIV/AIDS). Capacity
building will be provided for community associations and municipal governments for the : (i)
decentralized management of social and environmental issues in mining communities; (ii) the
preparation of regional and local development frameworks; (iii) the prioritizationof investments
according to regional and local development priorities; and (iv) the analysis of potential impacts
on the regional economy. This would include the preparation of local (urban and rural)
development plans and investment programs using participatory approaches. Institutional
arrangements involving regional committees relying on a large participation and representation of
the local governments, the private sector, and local NGOs, would be established to fill the gap
between communities and Provinces.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
( ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.


﻿7
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Ex ected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/14/2003      4/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           4/22/2003      4/23/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            4/22/2003      4/23/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Ivan Rossignol                             05/07/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt/Person/World Bank  05/07/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                   05/07/2003
Sector Manager/Director:     Demba Ba; Peter A. Van Der Veen            05/07/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH        FEEDACK       SITE MAP      SHOWCASE


