Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/30/2009 
Report No.:  AC4129
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P096124 
Project Name:  Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Haney 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 17, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2010 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
666.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
295.00
295.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary development objective of the proposed project is to increase the supply of 
energy to India's national grid through the addition of renewable, low-carbon energy from 
the Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project.  A secondary development objective is to 
support capacity-building at the Tehri Hydro Development Corporation with respect to 
the preparation and implementation of economically, environmentally and socially 
sustainable hydropower projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of two components: (i) construction of the 444 MW Vishnugad 
Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project (VPHEP); and (ii) technical assistance for capacity-
building and institutional strengthening at THDC.  
 
VPHEP has been designed as a 444 (4 x 111) MW, run-of-river hydropower generation 
scheme on the Alaknanda River in the north Indian state of Uttarakhand.  The scheme 
envisages the utilization of 228.86 cumecs discharge and design head of 237 metres.  The 
Project will generate approximately 1,800 GWh (Gigawatt-hours, or million kilowatt-
hours) of design energy in a dependable year.  The gross storage of 3.63 million cubic 
Page  2
meters (MCM) is equivalent to about 4.9 hours of average flow. The reservoir capacity, 
i.e. live storage, is equal to the total volume of water required for power generation for 
diurnal variations.  The major civil works required by VPHEP include a 65-meter 
diversion dam, a 13.4-km headrace tunnel and a 3-km tail race tunnel, and an 
underground power house.  All water diverted from the river will be returned to the river 
approximately 18 km after the point of diversion.  The impact of the Project on 
downstream water quantity and quality is expected to be negligible.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is located on the Alaknanda River, a major tributary of river Ganga, in the 
Chamoli District of the state of Uttarakhand.  The diversion barrage will be near the 
village Helong (79o29'30" E and 30o30'50" N) and the underground power house at Haat 
village (79o24'56" E and 30o25'31"N), some 3 km from the town of Pipalkoti.  The 
Project infrastructure lies on the right bank of the Alaknanda, whereas Pipalkoti and 
National Highway 58 (from Ghaziabad to Joshimath) are on the left bank.  
 
The Alaknanda originates at a height of 3,641 meters from two glaciers, Bhagirath 
Kharak and Satopanth.  The morphology of the Alaknanda River divides into two distinct 
zones: the Greater Himalayas which are snow-fed and the Lesser Himalayas which are 
normally rain-fed.  The steep natural drop of the Alaknanda River together with its 
perennial flows offers great potential for hydropower generation.  The total catchment 
area of the river is 11,040 sq km, of which the catchment area for the Project is estimated 
to be 4,672 sq km.  
 
The unique geographical location climate and topography along with latitudinal 
variation of the area has endowed the Alaknanda basin with luxuriant and diverse flora. 
The state of Uttarakhand is covered with rich forests. The recorded forest area of the state 
is 34,662 sq. km. which constitute about 65 per cent of the area of the state.  Of the 16 
forests types existing in India, five can be found in the Alaknanda basin.  Out of the total 
forest cover of the Alaknanda Basin about 47 per cent is dense forest with 74 per cent 
crown cover.  The catchment area mainly comprises dense mixed forest with pine as the 
dominant species. The basin has two national parks, the Nanda Devi National Park and 
the Valley of Flowers, and two wildlife sanctuaries.  
 
The Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve (NDBR), a World Heritage Site, also lies in the 
Alaknanda basin, with the two national parks comprising its Core Zone.  The Project is 
located 37 km away from this Core Zone. The Project is also located outside the 
Transition Zone, the outermost zone of the Reserve. No legal or regulatory restriction 
therefore applies to the Project.  Other than the NDBR, the protected area closest to the 
Project is the Kedarnath Wildlife Sanctuary, which is 72 km away.  
 
The state of Uttarakhand falls under Seismic Zones V and IV of Seismic Zoning Map of 
India. The Project area itself falls under Seismic Zone. The most recent seismic activity 
in the area occurred on March 29, 1999 when an earthquake of magnitude 6.8 Richter hit 
the area.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Asger Christensen (SDV) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDI) 
Mr Pyush Dogra (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Involuntary Resettlement:  As a run-of-river project, VPHEP has comparatively limited 
land acquisition impacts which affect a total of 1,223 households (1,477 families with 
5,159 persons) in 19 villages.  The Project will require a total of 141.53 ha of land 
comprising 31.62 ha of private land, 90.09 ha of government forest/grazing land, 10.3 ha 
of van panchayat land (community held grazing and forest land), and 9.54 ha of state land 
owned by the Public Works Department.  The acquisition of private land affects 769 
families in seven villages, while 708 families in the remaining 12 project-affected 
villages will lose access only to government forest/grazing and/or van panchayat land.  
 
Of the private land required, 60 per cent is purchased from willing sellers (136 
households/242 families) in one of the seven affected villages - Haat.  THDC has agreed 
to a demand from villagers in Haat, that the company acquire land from anyone in the 
village who wished to be relocated in recognition of the disproportionate impact of 
construction disturbance on the village from the powerhouse, switchyard, a surge shaft, 
and access roads.  The transfer of land and houses in Haat is based on land acquisition 
procedures to ensure complete recording of ownership, and on the compensation and 
assistance provisions in THDC's Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy.  A total of 265 
families will have to resettle under the project, and 92 per cent of these are families from 
Haat who requested THDC to purchase their land.  
 
A
total of 11 villages lose access to an average of 2.5 per cent of the government forest 
land that they use at present for grass collection and grazing, and a total of 8 villages lose 
Page  4
access to an average of 0.9 per cent of the van panchayat land they use for collection of 
grass and firewood.  Of these villages, 3 lose access to both government forest and van 
panchayat land.  About 90 per cent of village households use van panchayat and/or 
government forest land for collection of grass for livestock fodder or for collection of 
firewood.  
 
Indigenous People:  OP 4.10 was not found to be triggered since there are no Scheduled 
Tribal communities in the project area.  The population in the project affected villages is 
predominantly Hindu general castes (about two thirds) and scheduled castes (one third).  
In Haat the affected population includes 11 Bhotia families (8 households) who migrated 
from Malari near the Hindu pilgrimage site of Badrinath on the upper reaches of the 
Alaknanda river 15 years ago and settled in the village.  Another project-affected Bhotia 
household resides in Batula village.  In the Malari area, the Bhotias were traditionally 
involved in trans-Himalayan trade and in the management of the temple at Badrinath.  Of 
the families settled in Haat and Batula, some have acquired marginal landholdings while 
others are tenants, and some hold government jobs.  They still hold land in their original 
home area.  The Bhotia families do not speak a separate language from that of the 
majority population (Garhwali as mother tongue and also speak and understand Hindi) 
and are Hindus.  They do not have a historically based collective attachment to the land 
in Haat or any customary rights to forest and grazing land.  Nor do they or have political 
institutions that separate them from the majority population.  
 
Environment Impacts. The client has obtained the three-stage environmental clearance 
from the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), Government of India. The final 
environmental clearance to the Project was granted in August 2007.  The initial 
environmental impact assessment was prepared by a consultant, covering, in its baseline 
surveys, the period from October 2005 to April 2006.  Subsequently, additional studies in 
the area of terrestrial biodiversity, managed river flow and archeology by independent 
consultants were undertaken to enhance the analysis, which involved additional detailed 
field investigation and community consultations over a period of about a year (April 
2008-May 2009). The earlier EA and the additional environmental studies have been 
integrated into a consolidated Environmental Assessment and Environmental 
Management Plan (EA/EMP).  
 
A
baseline environmental study was conducted to assess the current status of the 
environmental resources in the area.  This was based on detailed field surveys and 
secondary data review of the Project Influence Area (7 km around Project sites), the 
Project Immediate Affected Area (500 m on either side of Project sites) and in the Project 
Affected Areas that comprise land acquired for Project.  
 
Impacts on Forests, Flora & Fauna. Baseline data shows that the forests of the Project 
Influence Area mainly fall in the degraded category, with pine as the dominant species.  
Open shrub formations occupy the ground and the natural flora is interrupted by human 
settlements with intensive agricultural and horticultural activities, heavy lopping and 
browsing, and is also affected by continuous traffic on National Highway 58.  All the 87 
species of flora found in the Project-affected Area are abundant throughout the region 
Page  5
and none belong to the rare, endangered or threatened categories.  An assessment shows 
that the diversity index for the Project-affected Area is low - below 2.5 - and this is true 
for both trees and shrubs, and grasses and herbs.  
 
16. 
The Project will clear 6,153 trees, none of which are endangered, rare, threatened 
or endemic.  Three species near one of the adits fall in vulnerable category as per IUCN 
Red list. However the EA observes that these species are common in India in the 
Himalayan region and are in fact commonly distributed throughout the wider Project 
Immediate Influence Area and Project Influence Area.  Therefore, adverse impacts on 
terrestrial biodiversity due to proposed tree felling are not expected.  
 
The fauna of the project area is mainly represented by reptiles, birds and mammals. 
Wildlife reported by local inhabitants during consultations include Leopard, Bear, Wild 
Boar, Monkey and Deer. According to the IUCN Red List, most of the wildlife reportedly 
found in the area falls in the "Least Concern" category and only one species, the Brown 
Bear, falls in the "Vulnerable" category. As per the national Wildlife Protection Act 
(1972) two of the local species, the leopard and the Himalayan Black Bear (Panthera 
pardus and Selenarctos thibetanus) fall in the critical Schedule I category requiring 
appropriate measures.  However, there are no reported wildlife habitats in the Project-
affected Area and no fragmentation of habitat will occur due to the Project.  
 
Impact on Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve (NDBR: The project is located 37km away 
from the core zone of the NDBR. The project is also located outside the transition zone, 
and at its closest touches the boundary of the transition zone (at the dam site). No legal or 
regulatory restriction therefore applies to the project. Other than the NDBR, the protected 
area closest to the project is the Kedarnath Wildlife Sanctuary, 72km away from the 
project.  
 
Construction work is likely to increase the noise level in the area, but the impact will be 
intermittent and temporary and localized.  Air quality may be affected due to generation 
of dust and fugitive emissions, but this impact will also be temporary and limited to the 
construction phase.  
 
Impacts on Archaeological & Cultural Property: The Project infrastructure - both the 
core facilities as well as the approach roads - will not affect any archaeological sites.  The 
detailed archaeological survey conducted revealed that some eight villages lying in the 
wider Project Influence Area contain some archaeological sites.  However, as all project 
units are being constructed on the right bank of the river and these villages all lie on the 
left bank, there will be no impact on these sites.  
 
There is one site of cultural importance at Siyasain near THDC's planned staff colony.  
Besides the heritage building there are a number of temples in the villages in the project 
area.  
 
Water Quality Impacts:  The average discharge in the river at dam site is 182.7 m3/s.  
Dependable flow at 50 per cent, 75 per cent and 90 per cent are 88.6 m3/s, 42.5 m3/s, and 
Page  6
28.5 m3/s respectively.  Low flow of the order of 35 m3/s occurs in the river in the month 
of January, February and March.  Less than 100 m3/s and more than 25 m3/s discharges 
are available in months of November, December and April. 12 months discharge data of 
the tributaries are measured.  Birahiganga was found to be the major tributary in this 
reach, while Garudaganga and the Tapan Nala are small tributaries. Very low discharge is 
available in months of Jan-Feb-March. There is likely impact on the flow downstream i.e. 
point of diversion to tunnel to point till water is released in to the main river. This may 
impact water quality, water usages downstream  and aquatic life especially during lean 
periods i.e December to February.  
 
Impacts on Aquatic Ecology: An in-depth study of aquatic ecology was carried out in 
the Project Area.  Primary data on various aspects of aquatic ecology were collected 
through intensive survey of the area, aquatic sampling, consultation with local 
communities and fishery experts.  Secondary data were also reviewed to confirm the 
primary data.  The study showed that no commercial fishing is done in the entire 
Alaknanda.  However, on a few of the tributaries, local villagers sometimes use either 
open cast nets or fishing lines and hanging loops.  For instance, the Birahiganga sees 
fishing throughout the year.  
 
Periphyron was represented by 18 species of 3 families, Phytoplankton by10 species 
from 3 families, Zooplankton by the 3 taxa of 5 species, Macrozoobenthos by 22 taxa 
from 5 orders and 20 fish species in the River Alaknanda and its tributaries in the Project 
stretch.  
 
There had been concerns about possible impacts on the two species of the endangered 
mahseer fish (Tor tor and Tor putitora) which can be found in the lower reaches of the 
Alaknanda. The environmental assessment for VPHEP did not reveal the presence of this 
migratory fish either upstream or downstream of the dam site, allowing for the conclusion 
that the construction of the barrage will not act as an impediment to the migratory 
mahseer.  
 
The other vulnerable species found in the Project Area are Schizothoraichthys progastus 
(snow trout) and Pseudecheneis sulcatus. All other species are abundantly available and 
their survival is not threatened.  
 
There are some specific pockets of riparian vegetation in the Alaknanda and its 
tributaries.  The Birahiganga especially contains a considerable riparian vegetation cover 
that provides a conducive habitat for fish.  
 
The river water will be not stored during construction and the natural flow of the river 
will be available throughout the stretch. However, the area near the dam site will be 
affected due to the construction of the coffer dam and the diversion tunnel.  
 
Construction activities also involve large-scale extraction of different types of 
construction material from the river bed, including boulders, stones, gravel, sand, etc. 
Extraction of gravel and sand causes impact on fish stocks and other aquatic life by 
Page  7
destabilizing the sub-stratum, increasing the turbidity of water, silting of the channel 
bottom and modifying the flow which in turn may result in erosion of the river channel. 
These alterations are likely to upset the composition of aquatic organisms and the 
stability of the ecosystem.  
 
Impacts on River Water Usage: As the river flows through a deep gorge in this area, its 
water is used neither for agriculture nor for drinking purposes.  The natural springs and 
streams that abound in the area supply people with drinking water.  Nor is the water of 
the Alaknanda used for irrigation for agriculture is primarily rain-fed.  There is no 
organized irrigation system in the area apart from a few canals and gullies. With no 
industries in the area, there is also no industrial demand for water.  The construction of 
the Project will thus not have any impact on water usage by the communities.  
 
Impacts on Health & Safety:  No significant negative health impacts are expected from 
the Project.  The villages in the area are not dependent on the river for drinking water and 
instead lay pipes to various small streams to bring in potable water to their homes.  The 
occurrence of various vector-borne diseases and the adequacy of local vector control and 
curative measures will be closely monitored during operations.  Noise and fugitive 
suspended particles during construction will have an impact on communities living in the 
Project Area.  
 
The safety of the local community, labor force and project staff is also an important 
aspect, especially given of the fragile Himalayan geology and the substantial 
underground construction work to be done.  
 
Construction-related Impacts: During construction phase the Construction/Labor Camp 
will be located in the project area.  
 
Project construction is likely to last for a period of about five years. The peak labor 
strength likely to be employed during project construction phase is about 2,000 workers 
and 600 technical staff.  The establishment of labor camps is likely to affect the local 
environment through improper waste (solid and garbage/sewage) disposal, negative 
impacts on public health, unfriendly use of community resources like trees for fuel, 
poaching of wildlife by labor, and leaving dirty and waste material after shifting from one 
site to another. There is also the possibility of the transmission of diseases by the 
immigrant labor population.  
 
A
major impact will be the generation of muck and debris generated during 
construction.  The project is expected to throw up an estimated 1.5 million cubic meter of 
muck and its improper disposal could have a major impact on the area and the river.  The 
construction of new roads will involve hill cutting which could lead to soil erosion and 
landslides, generation of debris, dust pollution, disturbance of local drainage, and 
increased siltation in nearby water bodies.  
 
Downstream Hazards and Dam Safety: The worst-case downstream hazards which may 
occur due to the failure of the dam are flooding of the river bank and triggering of 
Page  8
landslide.  Although the water in this event can be expected to flow with a force that will 
erode the river banks and pose a threat to life and property, the EIA shows that most of 
the villages are located at higher elevations and there are no habitations close to the bank 
of the river.  The villages which are located at lower elevation and may suffer some loss 
of property and life have been identified. The villages may not be impacted directly but 
may be impacted in terms of loss of access route and agricultural land.  
 
Indirect & Cumulative Impacts: Indirect and cumulative impacts are associated with 
various construction activities such as clearing of vegetation for building various project 
units, movement of vehicles, construction equipments and machineries, interferences due 
to influx of workers as well as temporary establishment of labor camps, the effects of 
blasting etc.  These could impact the project vicinity and the communities living in it.  
 
The development of VPHEP is likely to trigger associated development in several 
sectors such as transportation, automobile, commercial sectors such as daily needs, 
agriculture related developments such as vegetable, fruit, grain, fertilizer, pesticides, 
irrigation, electric appliances, which is likely to provide employment opportunities for 
local people and help to increase their social and economic status.  The possible negative 
cumulative impacts relate to the transmission of diseases by an immigrant labor 
population.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Alaknanda basin is one of the key regions for hydropower development in 
Uttarakhand.  The basin has an estimated potential of 4,000 MW.  Presently only one 
project (400 MW) is under operation, two are under construction and 16 are in various 
stages of investigation and development.  The cumulative impacts of the development of 
multiple hydropower projects on the river have been considered under various scenarios 
in the Bank-commissioned "Analysis of the Cumulative Impacts of Large-Scale 
Hydropower Development on the Alaknanda River" (completed October 2009). The 
study focused on the following areas of impact: (i) river flows and river connectivity; (ii) 
landscape and biodiversity; (iii) settlements and social infrastructure; sacred sites and 
tourism; (iv) employment and economic development; and (v) fiscal impacts of 
hydropower development.  
 
While it is impossible for any single project to seek to mitigate the basin-level impacts 
of the development of multiple projects, VPHEP's EMP sets out some long-term 
measures that may help ameliorate some of the higher-level effects of hydropower 
development in the area.  The project's CAT Plan, for instance, sets aside Rs. 470 million 
to be used over five years. Activities under the CAT Plan to be implemented by the state 
Forest Department include tree plantation, soil and water conservation works, 
densification, and assisted natural regeneration in the area.  A total of 1,000 ha will be 
treated for plantation activities. Of this, 450 ha will be devoted to densification, 50 ha to 
pasture development and 300 ha for the cultivation of medicinal plants.  Apart from this, 
around 1,200 ha have been selected for assisted natural regeneration.  A variety of soil 
and moisture conservation measures will be initiated, including constructing vegetative 
Page  9
check dams, gully plugs, stone check dams, crate wire check dams, spurs and water 
percolation tanks. The CAT plan dovetails with and provides funds for certain livelihood 
support activities being launched under the project that will not only help local 
communities improve their incomes but will also facilitate eco-restoration as well as eco-
development of the catchment area. Building awareness in the community for catchment 
development on a watershed development basis will be central to all these activities.  
 
In addition, the project will also provide Rs. 43.9 million in support of the state 
government's program for the conservation of the Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve.  Under 
the EMP, state government will also receive Rs. 66.6 million for biodiversity 
management and Rs. 11.7 million for fish enhancement and management. A provision of 
Rs.11.81 million has also been made for environmental monitoring around the project 
area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Government of Uttarakhand alloted THDC the rights to investigate and develop the 
Vishnugad Pipalkoti site for hydropower generation. In order to decide on a barrage or a 
dam, investigations were carried out by THDC at several locations in the area. A 
summary of the findings of various alternatives is given below:  
 
i. D-1 Site.  Location: near Pipalkoti. Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Pipalkoti town and 6 villages will submerge  
 
#
Huge forestland under submergence  
 
#
NH-58 below pond level, will need realignment in 20/30 km stretch  
 
#
Main Central Thrust close to the site  
 
#
Calcareous rock-not suitable for storage dam  
 
Conclusion: not suitable.  
 
ii. Upper barrage site.  Location: Just d/s of Animath nala - Alaknada confluence. 
Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Overburden depth too much- much excavation required.  
 
Conclusion: Not suitable.  
 
iii. Lower barrage site.  Location: near Helong. Environmental, social and technical 
issues:  
 
#
Close to MCT  
 
#
Full head not able to utilize  
 
Conclusion: not suitable.  
 
iv. D-2 site.  Location: 120 m d/s of D-1.  Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Overburden depth too much  
 
Conclusion: not suitable.  
Page  10
v. D-3 site.  Location: 200 m d/w of D-2. Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Rockfall prone  
 
#
20m thick river borne material terrace above water level on both bank  
 
Conclusion: not suitable.  
 
vi. D-4 site. Location: 1.5 km d/s of D-1. Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Least environmental and social problems  
 
Conclusion: found suitable.  
 
vii. D-5. 50 m d/s of D-4.  Environmental, social and technical issues:  
 
#
Most appropriate site from totality of environmental, social and technical 
perspectives.  
 
Conclusion: finally selected.  
 
On the basis of these investigations, Alternative-D5 was selected for construction of a 
diversion dam with low height spillway. About 70 per cent of the land being used by the 
Project is government land.  The total submergence area is 21.5 ha and no human 
settlement is affected by the submergence. The site selected for the project  minimize the 
amount of private land required by the project, giving preference wherever possible to 
using government land to avoid impacts associated with private land acquisition, 
including physical displacement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) for the project area was completed in April 2008, and 
subsequent verification and updating by THDC of the SIA data on impacts have informed 
the measures to ensure that negative impacts are mitigated and that people receive 
benefits from the project.  The cut-off date for entitlements for losses caused by land 
acquisition is December 31, 2008, when data were completed for all affected villages 
with the finalization of impact determination in the Hatsari hamlet of Haat village 
following modifications in the project#s technical design.  
 
THDC has developed a project-specific Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy which 
goes beyond the requirements of the new National Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
Policy (NRRP) of 2007 and which together with the Resettlement Action Plan establishes 
compliance with OP 4.12.  THDC has deployed a social mitigation team comprising a 
two THDC staff and two contracted social workers (the team will shortly be expanded 
with two additional social workers).  A reputed regional NGO has been contracted to 
assist with communication with the villagers, preparation and implementation of the 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and preparation of local development activities.  During 
the project preparation period, THDC has strengthened both its commitment and capacity 
to deal with resettlement and rehabilitation issues.  THDC is in the process of 
establishing a cadre within the company to address the social issues associated with its 
projects. In line with the NRRP, 2007, the state government has appointed an 
Page  11
Administrator and Commissioner for R&R, and established grievance redress 
arrangements.  
 
Entitlements: Under THDC's R&R Policy, those who lose private land have a choice 
between two compensation options.  Option 1 is based on NRRP 2007, whereas Option 2 
is based on negotiated settlement.  Of the 769 families from whom land and/or houses 
will be acquired, 301 have chosen Option 1 while 468 have chosen Option 2.  
 
Under Option 1, the land compensation is based on the government Circle Rate which 
ranges from INR 18,000 to 102,000 per Nali (one fiftieth of a hectare equivalent to 200 
sq.m) in the project area.  The amount paid for land would include the compensation 
amount, solatium (30 per cent of the compensation amount), interest (12 per cent from 
the date of award), and R&R assistance including a rehabilitation and subsistence grant; 
assistance for house construction, and a resettlement and shifting grant.  Under Option 2 
the negotiated and agreed rate is INR 100,000 per Naali (one fiftieth of a hectare or 200 
sq.m) irrespective of the quality of the land.  
 
Option 1 and 2 share the following features:  
 
#
The minimum compensation for agricultural land will be for 1.5 Nali even if the 
PAP holds less than a Nali.  
 
#
THDC will pay the replacement value of a structure based on PWD#s latest 
Schedule of Rates (SOR).  Land compensation will be calculated as per the process 
followed for agricultural land.  The minimum compensation for homestead land will be 
for a Nali even if the PAP holds less than a Nali.  
 
#
Any community property that will be affected by the project will be replaced by 
THDC before the demolition or acquisition of such properties.  In case of grazing land 
and van panchayat land, THDC will provide access roads to the residual van panchayat 
and/or grazing land.  In addition, each affected household will be paid 100 days of 
minimum agricultural wages (MAW) per year for a period of 5 years as a grant towards 
the loss of fuel and fodder.  This is equivalent to the income losses from restrictions in 
access calculated in the SIA.  
 
#
Employment in the project will be provided subject to suitability and availability, 
and all adult PAPs will if they so chose be included in activities to assist income 
generation.  
 
Resettlement:  All the families that will be resettling have chosen to move to locations 
of their own choice.  In addition to the house compensation # which the case of Haat 
equals the agreed selling price # all the relocating households that are resident in the 
houses acquired (including the non-titleholders) will receive the additional INR 1 million 
for self-resettlement to substitute for the infrastructure they would have access to in a 
resettlement site.  Of the families losing their houses, three are non-titleholders, who will 
nevertheless receive the minimum land compensation of INR 100,000.  Of the 104 
residential and residential / commercial houses to be acquired, 94 are in Haat, and the 
remaining are in the villages of Jaisal (6) and Batula (4). Most of the households in Haat 
own either a house or land in the adjacent villages of Maina, Daswana, and Mayapur on 
the other side of the river.  There are 17 Scheduled Caste households (29 families) from 
Page  12
Haat most of whom hold agricultural patta land # granted by the government and 
allocated by the Gram Panchayat to landless families # in Daswana.  A special 
permission is required from the District Magistrate to build houses on this land, and 
THDC will facilitate this.  Whereas the NRRP of 2007 does not provide for 
compensation for patta land, THDC is paying compensation equivalent to land held as 
private property (Naap land).  
 
Since the affected families that will have to relocate have chosen to move individually 
to locations of their own choice where most already own an alternative house, THDC will 
not establish resettlement sites.  In the case of Haat, the relocation will be across the river 
where people will be closer to the schools and health facilities that they already use.  For 
the Scheduled Caste families from Haat who are moving to Daswana and building new 
houses there, THDC will provide a road connection to the site and access to electricity 
and water.  
 
Income restoration:  All PAPs losing agriculture land or getting displaced or losing 
livelihood will be supported by THDC for restoration of income.  For income restoration, 
the NGO contracted for RAP implementation along with the Environmental and Social 
Cell of THDC will take following steps: (i) conduct need assessment survey to identify 
trades; (ii) identify master trainers for training; (iii) establish backward and forward 
linkages for each of the trade selected; (iv) arrange for training logistics.  The NGO will 
also monitor each PAP and document the progress of income restoration, which will also 
be subject to independent external monitoring.  So far only 151 PAPs have expressed an 
interest in receiving such assistance.  
 
Local development and benefit sharing:  Two categories of local development funds will 
be available.  The first includes dedicated funds of INR 90 million that will be used for 
the 19 affected villages over five years during the construction period.  THDC has by 
August 2009 spent INR 5 million from other sources than the dedicated funds on minor 
infrastructure development projects in ten villages.  The second category requires, as 
mandated by the National Hydro Policy, that one percent of the plant#s revenue will be 
available for local development activities in a wider area comprising both directly and 
indirectly affected communities after the commissioning of the Project.  The modalities 
for utilization of this one percent will be determined when the state Hydro Benefit 
Sharing Policy, which is currently being drafted, has been completed.  However, for the 
first category, investment plans will be prepared by the communities.  Civil works will be 
carried out by contractors or by the gram panchayats with monitoring by the beneficiary 
community.  In addition, during the construction period, contracts for small civil works 
will to the extent possible be given to eligible PAPs.  THDC will also provide 100 kWh 
of free electricity per month for a period of 10 years to affected households. Apart from 
project specific R&R Policy and RAP, THDC has developed a Corporate Social 
Responsibility Policy for the implementation of Community Development scheme. The 
scheme addresses the issue of #Community Development# in the neighborhood area of 
operating stations where construction has been completed and rehabilitation and 
resettlement issues addressed stand as per the R&R policy of Corporation applicable for  
Project under construction stage/planned for construction. To plan, execute, follow-up 
Page  13
and monitor the CSR-CD schemes of THDC, the "Society for Empowerment and Welfare 
Activities" (SEWA) was registered on March 24, 2009.  
 
Management of non-land acquisition impacts:  People in villages affected by land 
acquisition as well as those in the 12 non-affected villages situated on the mountain 
above the head and tail race tunnels expressed concern over the possible impacts on their 
houses of blasting or blasting-induced landslides during construction and/or soil 
subsidence after construction of the tunnel.  To address these concerns, THDC has: (i) 
commissioned a study by the Department of Earth Sciences, IIT Roorkee, which is 
expected to be disseminated to the concerned villagers in local language by December 
2009; (ii) provided for an insurance scheme to cover such impacts (which are not 
anticipated); (iii) established a baseline of the current condition of all habitations against 
which damage assessments can be made; and (iv) mapped and measured all water sources 
to enable assessment and mitigation of any future decrease in water availability caused by 
project construction activities.  While not entirely doing away with the need for blasting 
to construct the head race tunnels, the decision to use a tunnel boring machine means that 
most of the head race tunnel will be constructed without blasting.  
 
Grievance redress:  A district level grievance redress mechanism headed by a retired 
zilla parishad CEO with a background in the law has been established with representation 
of a PAP from each of the 19 affected villages, an NGO representative, and THDC's 
project level environment/social manager as secretary.  THDC has also developed by-
laws for the grievance redressal cell.  THDC will maintain a register of complaints, their 
processing, and their resolution.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation:  Since land acquisition and all relocation will have to be 
completed ahead of the start of specific construction activities, the process needs to be 
carefully monitored, so that problems are identified and dealt with on a timely basis.  
THDC will generate aggregate monthly reports with village specific information.  A 
committee for internal monitoring will be constituted headed by the Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate in Chamoli and with participation of project staff and PAPs.  External 
monitoring will be conducted during the implementation period to provide independent 
verification and assessments of RAP implementation.  An evaluation of the achievement 
of the objective of R&R activities # restoration or improvement of PAP living standards # 
will be conducted as part of the project midterm review and before project closure.  
 
Budget:  The costs of land acquisition, resettlement, and rehabilitation are part of the 
project's capital costs.  A budget of INR 616.5 million (about USD 13.4 million) has been 
earmarked for RAP implementation and monitoring.  
 
Environmental Safeguards:  
 
The environmental impact assessment was prepared by a consultant, covering, in its 
baseline surveys, the period from October 2005 to April 2006.  Subsequently, additional 
environmental studies by independent consultants were also undertaken to enhance the 
analysis, which involved additional detailed field investigation and community 
Page  14
consultations over a period of about a year (April 2008-May 2009). The initial EA and 
the additional environmental studies have been integrated into a consolidated 
Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan (EA/EMP).  
 
Consolidated EA : The consolidated EA/EMP was supplemented with the following 
supporting documents: (i) Study of the Managed River Flow in the Project stretch of the 
River Alaknanda.; (ii) Assessment of the Terrestrial Biodiversity Impacts from the 
Project; (iii) Assessment of Archeological, Physical and Cultural Resources  (documents 
(i) to (iii)  prepared by a consultant, (iv) Safety Assurance Plan for the project prepared 
in-house by THDC; and (v) Catchment Area Treatment Plan for the Project prepared by 
the State Forest Department. The summary recommendations of all the above studies 
have been incorporated in the EMP. All the direct and indirect environmental impacts 
observed in the EA have been addressed through a comprehensive Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP).  
 
Regulatory Clearances: THDC has obtained the three-stage environmental clearance 
from the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), Government of India. The final 
environmental clearance to the Project was granted in August 2007. This was preceded 
by the Stage I clearance in July 2003; Stage II clearance from MoEF in May 2005;  forest 
and environmental clearances by the Government of Uttarakhand; and a no-objection 
certificate from the Uttarakhand State Pollution Control Board. Public hearing as part of 
environmental clearance of the project was held twice in October 2006 and January 2007.  
 
Management of Forest & Terrestrial Bio-diversity Impacts: The EMP addresses the 
mitigation by planting 12,306 trees lieu of tree felled (under green belt development) and 
plantation along approach roads. In addition 201 ha degraded land will be undertaken for 
compensatory afforestation at a ccost of Rs. 64 million. This will be executed by the State 
Forest Department. A Herbal Garden will also be developed in consultation with Forest 
Department.  
 
A
detailed CAT Plan is prepared to restore the ecosystem of the area in a sustainable 
manner. The total area of selected catchment is 84,085 ha. Out of which, 12,964 ha (15.4 
per cent) is rocky and snowbound. The remaining area of 71,121 ha (84.58 per cent) is 
treatable. The CAT Plan emphasis on catchment treatment through plantation, soil and 
water conservation works, wildlife protection and will also address the local needs  
through a participatory approach and livelihood initiatives. The total Budget for CAT 
Plan is Rs.470 million.  
 
The EMP also includes measures related to prevention of disturbance to the forest and 
wildlife in the course of construction, a procedure for disposal and management of muck 
and debris and redevelopment of muck disposal sites. Dumping area are either devoid of 
vegetation or show weedy shrubs.   To mitigate the loss of shrubs an approved muck 
disposal plan shall be strictly implemented. After the quarry operation the area will be 
redeveloped.  
 
Page  15
The EA assessed the potential of indirect impacts on the transition and buffer zones of 
the NDBR and determined that such impacts are not significant during either construction 
or operation. The EMP, nevertheless, provides for interventions to enhance the quality 
and the management of the buffer zone.  A provision of Rs 44 million is provided for 
such activities in NDBR area.  
 
Management of Physical & Cultural Resources Impacts: The separate archeological 
studies undertaken for the project specifies that Project does not have any impact on 
cultural resources of the Project Influence Area and the Project Immediate Affected Area. 
Temples falling in the villages on the right bank of the Alaknanda may be considered for 
enhancement and beautification and suitable provision have been provided in the EMP. 
The construction contractors or THDC does not have the right to any of the Historical / 
Archeological related items like coins, artifacts, statues etc found during the construction 
activity.  Procedures have also been specified in case a chance find occurs of any 
artefact/building of archeological significance.  
 
Management of Water Quality & Availability impacts: To address the flow, aquatic and 
aesthetic requirements, the Managed River Flow Study conducted suggests that a 
minimum of 3 cumecs water needs to be made available in the stretch downstream of the 
dam up to the tail race tunnel outfall where the diverted water will rejoin the main river 
course.  THDC will thus maintain a minimum flow of 3 cumecs in the area immediately 
downstream of the dam at all times.  It also plans to implement the following mitigation 
measures as well:  
 
a. THDC proposes to construct six 5m high concrete overflow weirs across the 
Alaknanda just downstream of the dam. These weirs are proposed up to the point where 
the first major tributary, the Tapan Nala, meets the river 2.69 km below the dam. This 
arrangement will ensure that there is a perennial pondage of about 0.13 Mcum of water in 
the critical stretch of the river, which shall be sufficient for the social uses of the river for 
the local community during the non-monsoon /low discharge period.  An average 
ponding of water behind each weir would be about 21666cu.m. It has been suggested that 
THDC should prepare an annual desilting plan for maintenance of the ponds.  
 
b.
In order to regularly replenish these ponds with fresh water, it is estimated that a 
minimum 2 cumecs of river water is required to gradually re-circulate the entire pond 
water in three hours time. Given the stipulated minimum environmental flow of 3 
cumecs, the water stored behind the weirs shall be fully replaced by the fresh water in 
about two hours. Therefore, there will be no likelihood of this water stagnating and the 
availbility of fresh water will be ensured.  This is critical only to the 2.69km-stretch 
below the dam (and that too in lean period), as several tributaries join the river beyond 
this point.  
 
Aquatic impact management: The fish management program will be undertaken by 
THDC in consultation with the State Fisheries Department.  THDC will procure juveniles 
of Snow Trout from the government hatchery. The mahseer hatchery constructed at Tehri 
for THDC's Tehri Project will be used for the propagation of this fish. The catchment of 
Birahiganga can be improved by plantation along the bank. Anthropogenic activity like 
the extraction of sand, pebbles, gravel and stones and fishing activity in the river should 
Page  16
be completely banned.  THDC is also consulting leading fishery institutes to explore the 
possibility of completely diverting of the Mahseer's route towards Birahiganga.  
 
Management of construction related impacts: Management of construction-related 
issues will be the responsibility of THDC (through the contractors, as and where relevant 
and described in the EMP). The construction agency is required to comply with the laws 
with respect to environment protection, pollution prevention, forest conservation, 
resettlement and safety and any other applicable law. The EMP contains an Emission and 
Dust Management Plan, Construction / Labor Camp Management Plan, Borrow Area 
Management Plan, Public Health Plan (including plan to manage HIV/communicable 
diseases), Safety Plan and Green Belt Development Plan.  
 
1.
Muck Disposal Management: The total quantity of muck to be generated is 
estimated to be about 1.5 Mm3. The plan to manage includes the reuse of some of the 
muck as construction material for the Project, site protection, rehabilitation measures 
which includes civil works, vegetative measures, fencing and planting. As the selected 
four muck disposal sites are close to the river, there are chances of loose material rolling 
down causing blockages in the flow or contaminating water with silt. To avoid this, 
retaining walls (of height up to 7m) will be built muck-dumping begins.  Plantation will 
be carried out at the muck disposal sites for stabilizing the slopes, and for improving the 
aesthetic value of the area.  Once the dumping activities are completed, the dumping 
areas will be developed into terraces and restored by laying soil and planting saplings.  
 
2.
Labor Camp Management: To ensure health and hygiene in labor camps measures 
like adequate provision of latrines and sewage treatment (one for 20 persons; one septic 
tank for 500 persons)have been made. Storm water drainage, medical and first aid 
facilities and health awareness camps have also been envisaged in the EMP. In addition, 
the use of kerosene /LPG for cooking shall be encouraged. The standard bid documents 
for the main contractors contain related provisions.  
 
3.
Safety of Workers and Communities: THDC has adopted a safety manual which 
lays down a system similar to the well-known ISO 9001 standards. The manual also 
delineates responsibilities for ensuring effective health and safety management at the site/ 
in the plant, including measures for fire prevention, fire fighting, first aid and medical 
care. At every work site adequate and suitable arrangements for rendering prompt and 
efficient first aid to injured persons shall be maintained under the guidance of the medical 
officer-in-charge of the Project. First aid appliances/kits shall be maintained in a readily 
accessible place. The appliances shall be kept in good order and they shall be placed 
under the charge of a responsible person who shall be readily available during working 
hours. The bid document includes these provisions.  
 
4.
Road construction and management : The construction of new roads involves hill 
cutting which can lead to soil erosion and landslides,  generation of solid wastes in the 
form of debris, dust pollution, disturbance of local drainage, siltation in nearby water 
bodies. The EMP includes measures for proper muck disposal, slope stabilization, 
drainage and bioengineering measures to protect the road slopes. The proposed project 
will use existing roads as far as possible, for instance, an existing PWD road is part of 
approach road to Dwing Adit. This will ensure that no new road cutting will be needed on 
the left bank for this section. This will reduce the impact of road construction.  The EMP 
also includes measures to control air and noise pollution. Regular water sprinkling on 
Page  17
construction sites and unpaved roads, particularly near habitations, will be undertaken to 
control fugitive dust. Trucks carrying soil, sand and stone may be duly covered to avoid 
spilling. Plants, machinery and equipment will be handled so as to minimize the 
generation of dust.  All crusher, machineries, vehicles and equipments used in 
construction shall confirm to relative dust emission standards of the Central Pollution 
Constrol Board.  
 
EMP Budget: A capital cost provision of about Rs.661 million has been made towards 
the environmental protection activities and measures in the EMP.  
 
Institutional Arrangements  
 
An Environment and Social Group has been established at the corporate level, headed 
by a General Manager who reports to Director (Technical).  This comprises one Senior 
Manager each for the social and environment streams with relevant specialist staff. 
THDC is strengthening this group by hiring two environment engineers and two 
sociologists.  At the Project level, THDC has deployed a Social and  Environment team 
headed by a Senior Manager, who reports to the Project head, and is assisted by separate 
managers for environment and social. It has also engaged a locally-based reputed NGO as 
an interface with the local project-affected communities.  
 
At the Project site, THDC proposes to form an Environmental Management Cell 
(EMC), which will be responsible for overall environmental management for the Project.  
The EMC will be strengthened by posting at least one environment specialist and one 
social specialist at site. The EMC will report to Project head but will coordinate 
functionally with the corporate office for the implementation of the EMP and the RAP.  
 
Third-party monitoring of the implementation of the EMP will be conducted by an 
agency or a committee of experts who will visit the Project site twice a year to oversee 
and evaluate the EMP implementation and suggest improvements.  The third party 
concurrent monitoring of RAP implementation will be carried out by THDC for the next 
two years.  Monthly progress reports will be submitted by the external agency for the first 
year and half yearly reports for the second year. In addition THDC has retained an 
International Panel of Experts on Environment and Social to advise THDC during 
preparation phase and this will continue in the implementation phase as well.  
 
With respect to dam safety and compliance with OP 4.37, Safety of Dams, the Borrower 
has prepared Dam Safety Plans in the form required for the Appraisal stage. These plans 
will be updated with construction and reservoir filling information. The Emergency 
Preparedness Plan for reservoir filling will be ready not later than one year before 
reservoir filling is completed . The final O&M Plan will be ready not later than six 
months before reservoir filling.   
 
Page  18
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Apart from THDC, the state and central government, stakeholders include villages 
directly affected by land acquisition (19) and indirectly by other impacts (12), civil 
society organizations and research institutions engaged in environmental and/or social 
issues in the State, and other companies involved in the development of hydro power 
installations.  
 
The borrower has undertaken extensive consultations with both directly and indirectly 
affected villagers.  There have been 72 local level consultations on general project, social 
and environmental issues, starting from January 2007 to August 2009 as part of the 
process to prepare and update the SIA and RAP.  On an average 35 people attended these 
consultations to discuss the land acquisition and resettlement issues. The specific issues 
discussed include: compensation procedures, employment opportunities, resettlement 
options, and the relocation of the entire Haat village.  Consultations with affected 
communities will continue during RAP implementation.  The Borrower has set up two 
Project Information Centers (PIC), one at Haat village, and the other in the project office 
in Pipalkoti.  The PICs are stocked with all project-related documents to allow the local 
people access to project-related information. The PICs have also been used for disclosing 
all safeguard-related documents.  One workshop was also organized by the THDC on 
September 13, 2009 to disseminate the findings of SIA, EIA and final provisions made in 
the RAP, and to share details on the status of project preparation.There were eleven 
consultations focused on environmental issues during the EA consolidation process and 
these are recorded in the EA.  
 
The original EIA report (based on which regulatory clearance for the project was 
granted) was disclosed before the formal public hearing, with assistance from the State 
Pollution Control Board.  The updated EA/EMP and the RAP (including translation of 
the Executive Summaries in the local language, Hindi) are available in the PICs, the 
offices of the affected panchayats, the office of the District Magistrate/Collector/ SDM 
and in THDC's corporate office in Rishikesh. All the documents are also available on 
THDC's website, www.thdc.nic.in.  The availability of these documents was also 
announced in the local newspapers (both English and Hindi newspapers) on 27 July 2009.  
These documents were also disclosed in the Bank#s InfoSshop on 14 September 2009.  
The draft reports will be replaced with the final reports once their final versions are 
endorsed by the Bank and the borrower.  
 
In addition to the above, consultations to provide information on the Project and receive 
feedback on concerns regarding environmental and social issues have been held with civil 
society organizations and a meeting was held with Garhwal University. THDC has also 
held a workshop on 9 April 2008 with other hydropower developers to exchange lessons 
on the management of social issues.  In August 2009, THDC sponsored a workshop on 
good practices in environmental assessment of hydro projects that was led a reputed 
expert in this area and in which several other hydropower developers participated.   
 
Page  19
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/27/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
11/10/2009  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/17/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/14/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
N/A 
Page  20
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  21
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Haney 
11/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Pyush Dogra 
11/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh 
11/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Tapas Paul 
11/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
11/27/2009 
Comments:  Cleared. See clearance memo for details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Salman Zaheer 
11/30/2009 
Comments:   
