                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA546
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Uganda                                  Project ID:                       P123204
                              Project Name:                   Water Management and Development Project (P123204)
                              Task Team Leader:               Rosemary Mukami Kariuki
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTWR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                                              protection (20%), Ge neral agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), General energy sector (10%)
                              Theme:                          Water resource management (60%), Urban services and housing for the poor (40%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               135.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     135.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objectives are to improve (i) integrated water resources planning, management and development; and (ii) access to
                              water and sanitation services in priority areas. The project will contribute to higher level goals of sustaining natural resources, improving service
                              delivery, and increasing economic productivity.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project has been informed by the key recommendations of the UWCAS and is takes a pragmatic and phased approach that addresses urgent
                              infrastructure needs that depend on better water resource management; while also supporting decentralization, through the operationalization of
                              planning, management and development capacity at the WMZ level– in order to ensure long-term sustainability. As such, the project supports up-
                              front infrastructure investments, including in urban water supply and sanitation services and source protection; as well as laying the foundation for
                              the sustainability of future investments through the integrated and participatory catchment planning process. Planning and budgeting of these
                              investments will form part of the annual budget process and projects will therefore be included in the respective Medium Term Budget Framework,
                              Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks, and annual Budget Framework Paper.

                              Project Components

                              Component 1 - Investment in Integrated Water Resources Development and Management (US$ 34 million, including contingencies)

                              Sub-component 1.1: Identification, preparation and implementation of selected priority investments through a participatory planning process at the
                              WMZ level (US$ 23 million, including contingencies)

                              This sub-component will support (a) the preparation of three WMZ strategies, capacity building for WMZs, and the establishment of consultation
                              mechanisms via stakeholder Catchment Management Organizations (CMOs) in order to prepare integrated catchment action plans in each WMZ
                              as a basis for identifying and implementing investments; and (b) priority investments in related infrastructure, catchment management and
                              development measures. With respect to (b), a Catchment Investment Fund (US$ 16 million) will be established to support priority investments
                              identified by stakeholders. These may include irrigation and flood structures, reforestation and wetlands restoration, soil conservation and small
                              dams.

                              The focus will be on ‘hot spot’ catchments in each of the four WMZs. These ‘hotspot’ catchments were identified by MWE using the following
                              criteria: social (e.g., population density, gravity of urbanization risk potential), economic (e.g., existing/potential for irrigation and commercial
                              farming, hydropower production, industrial development, tourism), risks (water demands and availability, pollution threats, flood and drought risk,
                              state of monitoring network, trans-boundary obligations), and opportunities (e.g., related initiatives and entry points). MWE has selected one
                              ‘hotspot’ catchment in which to pilot the catchment planning process in order to ensure that a first set of priority infrastructure investments and
                              protection measures from the catchment action plan can be supported early in the project implementation period. Catchment plans in a selected
                              number of additional ‘hotspot’ catchments will be prepared during project implementation. In order to support the implementation of selected
                              priority investments and protection measures identified in the catchment plans prepared under the project, a funding allocation of US$ 16 million
                              has been set aside in a Catchment Investment Fund (CIF). The CIF will earmark 50 % of the investment funds to ensure a minimum level of

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 6
                         development in each of the WMZs. The remaining 50% will support priority investments identified in any of the catchment plans based on agreed
                         criteria including: economic development, environmental and social, sustainability, and ease of implementation. Each funding allocation will be duly
                         approved by DWRM Management through its existing project approval structures. DWRM will also organize and provide technical oversight of the
                         scope and design of the investment proposals and the allocation of these funds to priority investments.

                         In order to ensure that there is sufficient capacity to support the identification, design and implementation of these sub-projects, the subcomponent
                         will strengthen the capacity of the WMZs to: undertake stakeholder identification, analysis and consultation through the establishment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Catchment Management Organizations (CMOs) in each catchment; carry out environmental and social due diligence for the catchment plans
                         (including consideration of potential cumulative impacts on the water resource); and package and procure theproposed investments with support
                         from MWE and supporting agencies (e.g. National Forest Authority)

                         Sub-component 1.2: Improvement of water resources monitoring and information system covering the whole country

                         This sub-component will strengthen and expand the existing monitoring network and develop a comprehensive water information system (WIS)
                         that will enable the country to make more informed decisions regarding water resources management and development. Activities will include
                         enhancement of networks for water quality and pollution, hydro-meteorological, surface, and groundwater monitoring. In addition, appropriate
                         software and analytical tools will be developed, tested and installed as a part of the WIS that will, in particular, support the planning and DSS
                         development and use by the WMZ planning teams. This sub-component will also include: upgrading and modernizing the national reference water
                         quality laboratory; and installing or upgrading key elements of the water information system at the national level and in each of the WMZs. The
                         development of the WIS would be phased, starting with a detailed study on optimizing its design, and then followed by implementation.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan

                         This sub-component will support priority investments related to the implementation of the environmental offset that complements the Bujagali
                         Hydropower Project. These activities, spelled out in the Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan (KOSMP) launched by the Government on
                         May 5, 2011, cover important ecosystems in the catchment of the Kyoga catchment. They include afforestation and reforestation, restoration of
                         native vegetation, conservation of sensitive habitats, restoration and protection of river banks, promotion of environmentally sustainable livelihood
                         strategies, and enhancement of the capacities of the national and sub-national entities responsible for implementation of the management plan. As
                         there are significant synergies with the catchment planning process spelled out in sub-component 1.1 above, MWE will coordinate with relevant
                         local governments, the National Forestry Authority (NFA) and others to harmonize the delivery of this program.

                         Component 2: Infrastructure investment in urban water supply and sanitation/sewerage and catchment protection (US$ 98 million, including
                         contingencies)

                         Sub-component 2.1: Town Water Supply and Sanitation under NWSC

                         This sub-component will construct, improve and expand priority water supply infrastructure and sanitation/sewerage services in the municipalities
                         of Arua, Gulu, Ishaka-Bushenyi, and Mbale. It will also ensure the long term availability and improved quality of water supply through enhanced
                         source protection (e.g., supporting water resources management activities and other measures to protect and rehabilitate catchment areas).
                         Coordination between DWRM and NWSC will be strengthened to enable appropriate measures to be put in place for each of the systems financed
                         under the project. Activities will include: undertaking new or updating existing feasibility studies in each of the respective towns, including
                         environmental and social due diligence (EIA/EMP and RAP, if needed); detailed engineering designs and the preparation of tender documents for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the rehabilitation and construction of new water supply and sanitation infrastructure systems; source protection measures; appropriate pro-poor
                         measures; and the rehabilitation or construction of priority investments. Priority infrastructure improvements will be identified and implemented in a
                         phased approach in order to ensure sustainable water supply for the years to come. Where appropriate, NWSC will work with DWD to coordinate
                         the implementation of sub-projects in those towns with common systems or within one catchment and, if mandated to do so, will manage these
                         towns on behalf of MWE.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Town Water Supply and Sanitation implemented by DWD

                         This sub-component will construct, improve and expand existing water supply infrastructure and sanitation/sewerage services in eight towns:
                         Butaleja-Busolwe, Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi, Kumi-Nyero-Ngora, Rukungiri, Busia, Pallisa, Katwe-Kabatoro and Koboko. In a similar manner to
                         sub-component 2.1 above, this support will also ensure the long term availability and improved quality of water supply through enhanced source
                         protection (e.g., supporting water resources management activities and other measures to protect catchment areas), including coordination
                         mechanisms between DWRM and DWD. As above, activities will involve updating or preparing feasibility studies; environmental and social due
                         diligence (EIA/EMP and RAP, if needed); detailed engineering designs and tender documents; and rehabilitation or construction of priority
                         investments. As several of these towns will be in catchments serving NWSC towns identified in 2.1 above, arrangements for coordinating the
                         design and implementation of sub-project activities will be agreed between DWD and NWSC.

                         Component 3: Strengthening Institutions for Effective Project Implementation (US$ 3 million, including contingencies)

                         Subcomponents 3.1-3.5: Support implementing agencies to effectively implement the project

                         These sub-components will enable MWE (Subcomponent 3.1) to provide oversight of the project through its Water Sector Liaison Department (US
                         $ 1.44 million). They will also support MWE directorates – DWRM (US$ 0.56 million), DWD (US$ 0.56 million), and DEA (US$ 0.27 million) – and
                         NWSC (self financed) to manage the day-to-day implementation of the project, including procurement of computers and vehicles, operations and
                         maintenance, monitoring and evaluation, facilitation of project supervision and review missions, etc. These sub-components will also support
                         capacity building activities for all key stakeholders, including Water and Sanitation Development Facilities (WSDFs), catchment management
                         organizations and District officials in key areas such as training in procurement and implementation of the Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Support for implementation of relevant aspects of the Water Sector Governance
                         Action Plan (GAP) developed in 2009 and revised/updated in 2011 will also be provided.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented at national and sub-national levels throughout Uganda. The country is divided into four newly formed Water
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 6
                         Management Zones (WMZs). Project’s physical investments will support water resources management and development and include the
                         preparation and implementation of targeted investments in water-related sectors. The indicative menu of investments includes rain-water
                         harvesting infrastructure, water off-takes from lakes and rivers, irrigation pumps and water distribution canals, small scale and drip irrigation, small
                         dams (e.g. valley tanks, reservoirs, check dams, sand and sub-surface dams), mini and micro hydropower, contour bunds, riverbank stabilization,
                         reforestation and afforestation, and wetland restoration).

                         Water supply and sanitation investments will focus on priority water supply, sewerage, and catchment protection investments in larger
Public Disclosure Copy




                         municipalities including Arua, Gulu, Ishaka/Bushenyi and Mbale. Similar investments at a correspondingly smaller scale will be implemented in
                         towns of Butaleja-Busolwe, Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi, Kumi-Nyero-Ngora, Rukungiri, Busia, Pallisa, Katwe-Kabatoro and Kovoko. The
                         implementation of priority activities under the Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan would take place in the Jinja, Kayunga and Buikwe
                         Districts.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (AFTWR)
                         Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (AFTUW)
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                         Martin Fodor (AFTEN)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered as the project may have potential adverse environmental and
                                                                                           social impacts through its physical and planning activities, particularly civil works
                                                                                           for water supply and sanitation, water abstraction, treated wastewater discharges,
                                                                                           afforestation and reforestation, and catchment husbandry.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through diligent application of an Environmental and
                                                                                           Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared before appraisal, and site
                                                                                           specific EIAs/EMPs prepared during implementation. The recently completed
                                                                                           Uganda CEA (March 2012) also informs preparation of the safeguards measures
                                                                                           employed by the project.

                                                                                           Preparation of the ESMF was informed by the National Environment and Social
                                                                                           Assessment Stocktaking Report of the water sector that synthesizes existing EA
                                                                                           and SA analytical and sector work such as the Water CAS and State of the
                                                                                           Environment Report.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes              OP 4.04 is triggered due to potential loss or degradation of natural habitats
                                                                                           including, riparian and wetland habitats, through project planning, physical
                                                                                           activities or use of water resources. Project includes activities in ecologically
                                                                                           sensitive areas such as the Kalagala Offset, although these activities aime at
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           improving environmentally sustainable management and use.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               Yes              OP 4.36 is triggered due to potential project impacts on health and quality of
                                                                                           forests, especially in the catchment and riparian areas where the project will
                                                                                           support afforestation, reforestation and improvement of forest management.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          Yes              OP 4.09 is triggered as afforestation and reforestation in the catchments will likely
                                                                                           entail use of herbicides for weed control.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through a Pest Management Plan integrated in the
                                                                                           ESMF, and site specific EAs.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           Yes              OP 4.11 is triggered due to potential impacts on PCR associated with the project's
                                                                                           civil works including earthworks, excavation; and inundation due to water storage
                                                                                           systems.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No               OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no known indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                                           area of influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes              OP 4.12 is triggered due to potential for land acquisition associated with
                                                                                           infrastructure development and limited access to natural resources based
                                                                                           livelihoods in protected areas.

                                                                                           Compliance will be ensured through the RPF and site specific RAPs.




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      Yes              OP 4.37 is triggered as the project will finance rehabilitation and construction of
                                                                                               small dams or utilize existing small dams.

                                                                                               The existing Small Dam Guidelines prepared for Uganda, and the FAO Manual on
                                                                                               Small Earth Dams (both disclosed) will be used to ensure adherence to generic
                                                                                               dam safety measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              OP 7.50 is triggered since the project encompasses international waters including
                               7.50                                                            the River Nile and Lake Victoria.

                                                                                               Compliance is ensured through the issuance of a Riparian Notification.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known disputes over the project area of
                                                                                               Uganda.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The project is predicated on principles of Integrated Water Resource Management, which promote environmentally and socially sustainable
                                 development of water resources. The project will support planning and implementation of catchment management plans, water supply and
                                 sanitation interventions that may have potential adverse environmental and social impacts, e.g. on wetlands, forests, riverine environments and
                                 other natural habitats at specific project sites. The project is not expected to have large scale, significant or irreversible adverse impacts.

                                 Potential adverse impacts of project activities include loss of vegetation, loss of natural habitats, deforestation and changes to forest cover,
                                 degradation of water quality, adverse changes in regime and quantity in water flows, health and safety impacts from construction and operation
                                 of water treatment and wastewater treatment plants and other water – related infrastructure, health and social impacts on communities hosting
                                 workers camps, health and environmental impacts from application of herbicides in afforestation and catchment management, etc.

                                 The project has been assigned Environmental Assessment Category B, because it may have potential adverse impacts on environmentally
                                 important areas like water courses, wetlands, forests and other natural habitats and communities. These are likely to be limited to the location
                                 of the project interventions, and specific mitigation measures for them can be readily designed and implemented following the procedures laid
                                 out in the ESFM and RPF. Project safeguards oversight has not been transferred to the sector management unit.

                                 Potential cumulative impacts of multiple water supply, sanitation and other water infrastructure on the water courses will be considered during
                                 the catchment management planning process.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   Based on the available information, the project is not expected to have potential adverse indirect or long term impacts as the anticipated scale
                                 of project interventions is moderate, and implementation of project interventions will be guided by environmental and social safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 instruments for this project, particularly ESMF and RPF, and by the catchment management plans.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  N/A
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  The main measures through which the project will safeguard against potential adverse impacts will be (i)
                                 Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) informed by the National Environment and Social Assessment Stocktaking Report
                                 of the water sector (originally disclosed in country under the title of Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment) that synthesizes existing
                                 EA and SA analytical and sector work such as the Water CAS and State of the Environment Report, and (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework
                                 (RPF). These lay out procedures for screening and assessing sub-project, preparing sub-project specific environmental and social due
                                 diligence instruments, such as Environmental Assessments or Resettlement Plans, and monitoring implementation of environmental and social
                                 mitigation measures. The RPF provides a step by step procedure on the identification of project affected households, the assets to be lost, and
                                 compensation and other restoration measures.To ensure dam safety, the project will utilize existing Small Dam Guidelines prepared for
                                 Uganda, and the FAO Manual on Small Earth Dams.

                                 Implementation of safeguards instruments and project adherence to ESMF and RPF will rely on (i) existing environmental management
                                 systems in Uganda, in which the implementing Ministry of Water and Environment, and its semi-autonomous National Environmental
                                 Management Authority play a pivotal role together with the environmental officers of the local and municipal government implementing project
                                 activities, and (ii) incremental project specific environmental and social safeguards staff that will be recruited in the Project Implementation
                                 Team (PIT) to provide technical assistance and support safeguards related monitoring and reporting.

                                 Borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures above exists to a good extent, especially regarding existence of legal and regulatory
                                 framework and institutions. The main implementing agency, Ministry of Water and Environment, is also responsible for overall environmental
                                 management in the country, and contains within its system a semi-autonomous environmental regulatory agency, National Environmental
                                 Management Authority, which has benefited from long term capacity building program supported by IDA. To ensure compliance in the context
                                 of increased volume of physical investments supported by the project, stretched out environmental regulatory staff and weak environmental
                                 compliance record, the capacity of MoWE to implement and monitor environmental and social safeguards will be enhanced by including
                                 incremental environmental and social safeguards staff to the Project Implementation Team in MoWE, and use of environmental and social
                                 consultants as necessary.



                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders in this project include the Ministry of Water and Environment and other related agencies like National Environment
                            Management Authority, National Forest Authority, National Water and Sewerage Corporation and local authorities and communities within the
                            project area. The sub-national stakeholders include those in the towns of Arua, Gulu, Ishaka/Bushenyi and Mbale, and small towns and peri-
                            urban areas listed in Section 4.

                           Consultations with national and sub-national stakeholders were carried out during preparation. The process included formal consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           workshops in Kampala and upcountry with various stakeholder groups including the project affected households, as well as informal meetings.
                           Disclosure of safeguards instruments was carried out by notifications in the mass media, posting online, and placement of the safeguards
                           instruments at suitable public locations (NEMA library, MoWE offices, district offices, etc.)

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    19-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                21-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 21-Mar-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    19-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                21-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 21-Mar-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    19-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                21-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 21-Mar-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                           If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                           Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                           Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                           Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                           Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 6
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Rosemary Mukami Kariuki
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                    Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name                                                                     Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                          Page 6 of 6
