                                                                                   63699

                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.:


I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

 Project Name                Kosovo Power Project
 Region                      EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
 Sector                      Power (100%)
 Project ID                  P118287
 Borrower(s)                 Project company TBD via competitive tender
 Implementing Agency
                             Ministry of Economic Development (MED)
                             Pristina
                             Kosovo
                             Tel: (381-38) 2002-1301    Fax: (381-38) 2002-1302
                             Kosovo

 Environment Category        [X] A [ ] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
 Date ISDS Prepared          July 27, 2011
 Estimated Date of           September 1, 2012
 Appraisal Authorization
 Estimated Date of Board     November 17, 2012
 Approval


The Government of Kosovo has requested that the World Bank provide support in the form of a
partial risk guarantee from IDA for a proposed independent power project that would use
domestic lignite coal. To review compliance of the proposed project with the criteria for
supporting coal-fired power generation projects in the World Bank’s Strategic Framework for
Development and Climate Change (SFDCC), the Bank has appointed an External Expert Panel.
The Bank’s decision whether or not to proceed with any financial support to the Kosovo Power
Project is dependent on the outcome of the SFDCC External Expert Panel review.

B. Project Objectives
The objective of any prospective World Bank financial support to the proposed Kosovo Power
Project would be to reduce the environmental impact of electricity generation and strengthen
security of supply in Kosovo in an economically efficient, environmentally sustainable, and a
carbon-neutral manner.

C. Project Description
The proposed Kosovo Power Project is envisaged to replace the Kosovo A Power Station with a
rehabilitated existing power plant (Kosovo B) and a new power plant as well as the development
of a mine to meet the fuel needs. As noted above, the determination of any World Bank financial
support for the proposed Kosovo Power Project is linked to the forthcoming SFDCC External
Expert Panel review. It is envisaged that the new power plant be developed as an extension of the
Kosovo B power plant site and have some common facilities. Subject to a clearer definition of
scope, the associated infrastructure that might prospectively be needed would include an
electrical interconnection upgrade, a water buffer reservoir, a suitable disposal site for ash, as
well as other potentially associated infrastructure such as any necessary upgrades to the Iber-
Lepenc water canal.

The World Bank supports Kosovo’s energy sector through the Lignite Power Technical
Assistance Project (LPTAP) (P097635), which is helping the Government strengthen policy,
legal, and regulatory frameworks to attract private investment in the energy sector. LPTAP has
supported several key activities related to the possible preparation of the proposed project:
    x Preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of proposed mining and
        power generation activities in the Obiliq area
    x Preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan for Hade Village
    x Purchase of air monitoring equipment

Depending on the scope of any prospective engagement by the World Bank based on the
outcome of the SFDCC External Expert Panel review, the World Bank might consider
supporting the following additional items:
    x soil and water sampling
    x the preparation of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
    x engagement of an independent panel of experts to advise on the Social and
       Environmental Impact Assessment
    x preparation of a low-carbon growth strategy for Kosovo energy sector
    x preparation of an energy efficiency database (in collaboration with the Rochester Institute
       of Technology and the American University of Kosovo)
    x preparation of a wind power feasibility study (in cooperation with REPIC (Swiss) /AUK
    x a carbon capture and storage (CCS) assessment and capacity building, funded by the CCS
       Trust Fund
    x capacity building relating to environmental and social safeguards implementation

The main environmental issues of the proposed project would relate to:

(i)     direct and local impacts of construction, rehabilitation and operation of the thermal power
plants and the lignite coalmine, including land conversion and habitat loss; hazardous and non-
hazardous waste disposal; emissions to air, soil and water; and

(ii)    global climate change impacts from use of lignite coal as a source of energy for power
generation.

A Resettlement Policy Framework that is consistent with World Bank resettlement policy
guidelines has been prepared and approved by the Government. The Government is currently
preparing a Resettlement Action Plan for the Shala neighborhood of Hade Village for which
urgent access is needed to ensure that the Kosovo Energy Corporation (KEK) has continuity of
coal supply to the power plants. The Government has engaged the services of a specialized
mining resettlement firm, which is providing technical assistance and capacity-building. In
addition to the households from Hade, the Government has made provision to resettle households
previously displaced by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for safety reasons from mine subsidence areas in 2005. Most of these people, some 102
households, have been living in temporary accommodations since then.

D. Project location (if known)
The new power plant is proposed to be developed on the site of the existing Kosovo B Power
Station, about ten kilometers from Pristina and five kilometers from the new mining area (Sibovc
South Lignite Mine). Coal would be transported by conveyor belts from the mine to the power
plant and ash would continue to be transported as slurry to the Mirash mine for disposal. Any
prospective new mine would be adjacent to and north of the existing Bardh and Mirash mining
complex, ten kilometers from Pristina.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Ministry of Environmental and Spatial Development (MESP) was initially established as a
department within the UN caretaker structure and subsequently became a ministry in 2002-2003.
Environmental Impact Assessments are reviewed by the Environment Department at MESP, and
MESP forms expert groups when needed for the review of EIA reports. In 2007, the Kosovo
Environmental Protection Agency became operational under MESP and one of its tasks is
issuing opinions on environmental impact assessment and on environmental consents for
construction permits. The institutional structure for the review of EIAs and issuance of
environmental permits exists. The Cleanup and Land Reclamation Project (P096181) included
activities to support the Environmental Department of MESP to gain practical experience with
environmental cleanup projects as well as the EIA review and environmental permitting process.
Institutional capacity development would be part of any prospective engagement by the World
Bank.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSS3)
    Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4)
    Ms Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSS3)
    Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSS4)
    Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSS3)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
Based on the preliminary scope of the proposed Kosovo Power Project, the Government would
need to undertake a comprehensive (category A) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) based upon the specific site characteristics. The ESIA would also specify mitigations
measures as applicable to power plants in line with EU Directive 2001/80/EC on the limitation of
emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants (LCP Directive), EU
Directive 2008/1/EC concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (IPPC Directive),
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes        No         TBD
and EU Directive 2010/75/EC on industrial emissions (IED Directive) which will come into
force on January 1, 2016. The prospective ESIA would need to be based upon Terms of
Reference (TORs) designed to meet Government, EU, and World Bank policies and standards.
The ESIA would need to be prepared by independent international experts in these areas and
whose TORs would be approved by the World Bank. The ESIA would be subject to at least two
public consultations and disclosed in-country in the Albanian and Serbian languages and in the
Infoshop in English.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                              X
    To be determined by the ESIA.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
    There are no identified forests impacted.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                  X
    Use of pesticides and/or herbicides would be assessed in the ESIA.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                   X
    Although cultural resources are currently not expected, the ESIA would examine the area for
cultural resources. A chance find procedure would typically be envisaged.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
    Not applicable as the proposed project is not located in an area known to have indigenous
peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    The Government has prepared an OP 4.12-compliant Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
The RPF was publically consulted in January 2011 and was recently adopted by the Government.
The RPF is intended to guide current and any future resettlement that may be envisaged in the
New Mining Field Zone. The Government is also in the process of preparing a RAP for the Shala
neighborhood of Hade Village.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
    Not applicable.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                     X
    The proposed project would use water from the Iber River basin. The Iber River drains into
the Black Sea via Serbia, Bulgaria, and Romania. Kosovo would need to notify riparian states
with project details as required by OP 7.50.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X
    Not applicable.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

The substance and timeframe will be defined based, among other factors, on the forthcoming
SFDCC External Expert Panel review.
