                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                        Report No: AC150
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: AFGHANISTAN                                    Project ID: P080810
Project: Financial Sector Support Project               Task Team Leader: Samuel Munzele Maimbo
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 1, 2003          IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 17, 2003                         IDA Amount ($m): 18.00
Managing Unit: SASFP                                    Sector: Payment systems, securities clearance and
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)      settlement (34%); Banking (33%); General finance
Status: Lending                                         sector (33%)
                                                        Theme: Other financial and private sector
                                                        development (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
After more than 20 years of conflict, Afghanistan's formal financial sector is virtually
non-operational. The conflict has resulted in (1) the complete disruption of domestic and
international payments systems; (2) the virtual cessation of all lending activities within the
country; (3) significantly reduced deposit-taking activities; and (4) a stoppage of most
international banking relationships, particularly over the past seven to eight years, when the
Taliban government was subjected to international sanctions and accounts were frozen.

Financial institutions, including Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB, or the central bank) in some cases
(although it is now changing), lack basic banking hardware and software, and frequently have no
connectivity -- even via a basic telephone or fax line. More commonly, the banks themselves
have been so gutted from the last 25-30 years that basic management systems, procedures,
controls and personnel do not exist. Vaults and other basic safekeeping requirements do not
exist, or are insufficient. Confidence is impossible to restore under such circumstances. Thus, in
addition to physical and electronic infrastructure, the basic preconditions for safe and sound
banking do not exist.

In the absence of any real formal banking system, a large and vibrant informal market has
developed. The informal financial market, largely organized around the money exchange dealers
of Kabul, includes a domestic and international payment system, generally referred to as 'hawala'
. Although impressive, this informal market does not provide the full range of financial services
required for dynamic private sector-led growth. The limited financial sector infrastructure
continues to hinder the timely and effective delivery of reconstruction aid, private sector
investment, and individualized payments to civil servants, all of which detracts from efforts to
stimulate growth and restore confidence in civil institutions.

Consequently, private sector-led growth is likely to be highly constrained unless a functioning
banking system is developed to provide needed deposit safekeeping, lending, trade finance,
payments/transfers, and related services to underpin savings and investment.              Hence, by
reinforcing the foundations of a two-tier banking system for deposit mobilization, sound lending,

                                                        2
                                                                                                        ISDS



broad retail coverage, and most importantly, the re-establishment of domestic and international
payment systems, the project supports Afghanistan's overall economic growth and, in time, its
political stability.

 Addressing financial sector problems in Afghanistan requires a multi-dimensional approach.
 While ensuring that medium- and long-term solutions are also put in place, this project will
 assist the Government to address urgent short-term requirements, particularly restoring a basic
 international and domestic payments system, and providing basic retail financial services in
 secondary cities and outlying areas. In seeking to provide Afghanistan with a more
 comprehensive range of financial services, the project will work towards the following sector
 objectives:

     An independent central bank performing conventional central banking functions.
     Stable, lean and operationally viable state bank(s) that can be privatized by sale to strong
     strategic partners that meet licensing standards, including the fitness and propriety of
     proposed owners and managers.

 The proposed project is a first step, 'early win' financial sector operation to initiate the clean-up
 of the financial sector. The Project intentionally has a narrow focus. It does not address the
 comprehensive reform of the financial sector, which will require a larger structural reform effort
 of the banking and non-bank financial sector. The selected lead reforming bank(s) will be
 rehabilitated and subsequently prepared for privatization while a liquidation and divestiture
 strategy will be pursued with respect to the all insolvent banks.



I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
In the Central Bank, this targeted approach will include (1) training and equipment to support
development of a domestic and international payments system; (2) institutional legal capacity to
assist with the resolution (including liquidation) of bad assets and failed banks along with
methods of asset disposition; (3) accounts and accounting systems (including modern valuation
and appraisal standards, to the extent possible); (4) information technology, skills and equipment
as needed on a complementary basis to what is already being provided or programmed; and (5)
human resource development.

In the commercial banking sector, the World Bank will (1) use its regional experience in
State-owned Banking reforms to assist the government to define and assess the costs of bank
resolution options for each bank; (2) liquidate insolvent banks, and integrate what is salvageable
into an overall workout solution; and (3) identify the most viable banks to rehabilitate with the
clear understanding that the purpose of the rehabilitation process is to create stable, profitable,
well-managed and commercially viable banks that can be privatized by sale to strong strategic
partners within the five-year project time horizon.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
N/A

                                                           3
                                                                                                            ISDS




    B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

    Comments: The proposed project is not expected to result in adverse environmental impact


    C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
    (click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                         Policy                                         Triggered

        Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD

        Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD

        Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD

        Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD

        Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD

        Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD

        Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD

        Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD

        Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD

        Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No     TBD



    Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
    D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
    describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

    II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The Project Team has examined the type, location and scale of the proposed project as well as the
nature and magnitude of its potential impacts. It has determined that the project will not be expected
to result in adverse environmental impact

    II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
    due to multiple project component.
    Based on the projects current design, and the Team's perception of the projects implementation environment,
       none are expected

    II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
    Based on the projects current design, and the Team's perception of the projects implementation environment,
       none are expected

    II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
    N/A

    II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
    N/A


    II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                     4
                                                                                                        ISDS



In all financial sector missions to date, the World Bank has consulted closely with both key
implementing institutions ­ the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance. The Bank has also
consulted closely with the IMF, the DFID and USAID at every step of the project development
process that has involved (a) information sharing; (b) consultation; and (c) collaborations; and
(d) coordinated missions. Meetings have also been held with domestic and international bankers
and members of the private sector to review the proposed reforms.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

                                                   5
                                                                                                  ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Samuel Munzele Maimbo                              07/07/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: David J. Marsden                                       07/10/03
Comments
This is cleared

Sector Manager/Director              Joseph Del Mar Pernia                              07/10/03
Comments
This is cleared.

