Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC278 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 14, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P083908 
Project Name: Power Utility Investment & TA 
Task Team Leader: Julia M. Fraser / Pedro Sanchez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 100m 
IDA: 100 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Christophe Bosch 
Other financing amounts by source: Unidentified 
($170 m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to establishing reliable electricity supply to Kabul and to one or 
more of the following major cities: Kandahar, Mazar, Herat, and Jalalabad, corporatize the power utility 
and reduce the electricity subsidies.  The outcomes will include the rehabilitation and expansion of the 
power facilities, initiation of improved commercial operations, implementation of a cost-recovering tariff 
scheme as part of a comprehensive power sector reform agenda, and capacity improvement in both the 
Ministry and power utility 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The proposed project would consist of the following components:   
 
i) Investment 
($260 million)
 
a. 
Rehabilitation and Expansion of Distribution Networks in Kabul and other cities. 
($185m) 
b. 
Rehabilitation of Hydro Power stations (e.g. Naghlu – 100 MW) ($5m) 
c. 
Construction of 220 km, 220 kV transmission line from Pulikhumri to Kabul ($70m) 
 
ii) 
Technical assistance ($10 million) 
 
a. 
Commercialization of DABM:  
This activity will be undertaken by a 
consultant firm, which will eventually create a distribution company in 
Kabul. The firm will provide a team to assume key positions in the 
company, and their main outputs will be to: establish a customer database, 
identify assets and liabilities, create financial statements, improve billing 
and collection; select and train staff; and prepare and implement public 
awareness campaigns.  The firm will also propose to the MWP a private 
sector participation scheme to operate the distribution company in Kabul 
Page  2
 
 
on a commercial basis and improve its operations. This proposal will 
include designing the charter and operating license, identifying 
performance objectives for the distribution company, and effecting a 
multi-year tariff. 
 
b. 
Technical support for rehabilitation and expansion of the distribution networks.  
A 
small team of technical consultants will be financed under the Program.  They will advise 
and assist DABM in the least cost planning exercise to utilize the materials, which will be 
procured under the credit to rehabilitate, and complete and expand the electricity 
networks in Kabul, Mazar-e Sharif and Kandahar.  The consultants will be employed 
sufficiently in advance of the arrival of the materials to ensure (i) that they can advise and 
help DABM regarding the material’s safe storage and/or delivery to the provincial cities, 
and (ii) to supervise the contractors, who, with some of the proceeds of the credit, will be 
employed to erect the materials. 
 
c. 
Technical support to develop a gas-fired power station.  
The Program envisages 
financing a feasibility study for the gas-fired power plant in Sherbeghan/Mazar using 
indigenous natural gas, and technical support to help engender private sector participation 
(PSP) in its development and operation.  Following the feasibility study, the consultant 
will develop tender documents and provide marketing guidance to the Ministry in 
promoting private sector participation in the operation of the plant and will be required to 
advise on how the scheme could be funded. 
 
d. 
Capacity building and training for MWP and DABM.  
The Program includes a 
component for advisory services, wherein consultants will help implement the Power 
Sector Reform Roadmap, including assistance to restructuring the sector, and prepare 
new power sector legislation including for the establishment of a regulatory regime.  This 
work would complement and be coordinated with ongoing assistance from USAID and 
others. 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The project would be located in Kabul and in one or more of the following cities:  Mazar-e Sharif, 
Kandahar, Herat, and Jalalabad.  In addition, the provision of spare parts/rehabilitation of hydro power 
stations would likely include Naghlu (a few hours outside Kabul), Daruanta (close to Jalalabad) and/or 
Pulikhumri (in Baghlan province).  Lastly, the project may include the construction of a 220 kV 
transmission line between Pulikhumri to Kabul. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The Ministry of Water and Power and the Da Afghanistan Breshna Moassese (DABM), the power utility, 
will implement the project.  Their capacity is very weak and considerable technical assistance and training 
will be required to implement the project. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[N] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[N] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) [Note; if land acquisition is needed] 
 
 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[N] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[N] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[N] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [
X
] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The proposed project is not expected to have any significant negative environmental impacts. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [
X
] S
3
   [] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
No safeguards are expected to be triggered. 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare 
to mitigate them? 
The proposed investment activities are not expected to produce any significant negative environmental and 
social impacts.  
 
The proposed project will observe an updated version of the environmental and social safeguards 
framework that has been developed for emergency rehabilitation projects.  Potential impacts will be 
addressed in the design and implementation of projects mainly through codes of practices that will be 
outlined in the safeguards framework, and reflected in the implementation arrangements of the project. A 
focal point for safeguards monitoring will be established within MWP, and project’s consultants and 
contractors will be contractually responsible for the implementation of the safeguards framework, notably 
through a social and environmental management plan, which will be prepared by the design consultants. 
Capacity building of selected Ministry and implementing agency staff will be addressed under a separate 
IDA-funded Technical Assistance Program for Social and Environmental Management that will be carried 
out during 2004.  
 
Environmental and social considerations will be taken into account during preparation and implementation 
of the 3 main project activities: 
\01\02
rehabilitation and expansion of the distribution networks in the cities involving installation of 
poles, cables and substations on the streets. 
\01\02
rehabilitation of the electro/mechanical equipment of hydropower stations, which will not modify 
the water flow in the dam, and 
\01\02
construction of the 220 kV transmission line from Pul-e Khumri to Kabul.  
 
Environmental and social impacts will be minimized by evaluating alternatives and selecting the routes that 
have the least impact on social, environmental, agricultural and cultural resources, and minimizing the land 
acquisition for substations.  A resettlement action plan that defines principles of land acquisition, and 
enumerates affected properties (if any) along the alignment will developed. The census of affected 
properties will be done in phases as construction work progresses. 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
The Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework will be prepared in consultation with the principal 
development partners participating in reconstruction activities in the power sector in Afghanistan.  It will 
be disclosed by ITSA in both Dari and Pashto, as well as English, and it will also be made available at the 
World Bank’s Infoshop prior to approval by the World Bank. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
The Environmental Assessment Category of the project was defined as B. 
Special attention should be paid to eventual PCB waste in distribution transformers. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: NA 
 
