ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           A Worud Free of Povortk y
24622
I--infoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: AFRICA                                 Project ID: P075776
Project: Africa Stockpiles Program (ASP): Funding the  Task Team Leader: Michel Simeon
prevention and disposal of obsolete pesticides from
African Countries
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 29, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 24, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: AFTES                            Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  sector (25%); Health (25%); Sanitation (25%);
Status: Lending                                 Petrochemicals and fertilizers (25%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (S);
Pollution management and environmental health (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
2.1   Obsolete and poorly managed pesticides pose serious health and environmental hazards,
particularly for poorer communities. They are found in nearly every country in Africa, with more than
50,000 tons of obsolete pesticides and many thousands of tons of contaminated soils. This represents the
most critical chemical-related issue in Africa. Through a multi-partner and multi-year international
initiative the program aims at eliminating all stockpiles of obsolete pesticides from the African continent
and help effectively prevent their re-emergence.
2.2   The program has been conceived and designed by a group of NGOs (World Wildlife Fund
(WWF), Pesticides Action Network-UK (PAN-UK) and PAN-Africa), UN specialized agencies
(UN-Economic Commission for Africa, FAO, UNEP, UNIDO) and other international organizations
including the Organization of African Unity (AU), the World Bank, Secretariat of the Basel Convention,
and the private sector represented by CropLife International.
2.3   Global environment objective: To contribute to the goal of the Stockholm Convention on
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) to protect human health and the environment from POPs by
eliminating obsolete stocks of pesticides in Africa and helping prevent-their re-emergence.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The African Stockpiles Program is a multi-partner effort aiming at eliminating obsolete pesticides stocks
in the entire continent of Africa (i.e. up to 50 countries) and preventing their recurrence.



2
ISDS
Most activities would take place at country level, over a period of 12 to 15 years. Country programs
would include:
(i) preparatory activities: establishment of country program management units and multi-sectoral
steering committees, awareness raising and training, inventory, design of clean-up and disposal
operation, including an Environmental and Social Management Plan;
(ii) clean-up activities (i.e. clean-up of sites, transport and disposal of pesticides); and
(iii)prevention activities (awareness raising, improved policies and regulatory framework and
institution building).
Given the complex and specialized nature of clean up operations, country programs would be supported
by strong technical monitoring and supervision and by a number of cross-cutting activities (e.g.
technical studies, harmonization of policies, transbounrdary issues).
The institutional arrangements would include:
At program level: a Program Advisory Committee, a Program Funding Sub-Committee, a
Multi-Donor Management Unit (hosted by the World Bank), and a number of ad hoc Advisory
Groups;
At the level of each participating country: a project coordination unit and steering committee;
A Technical Support Unit hosted by FAO; and
A Cross-Cutting Activities Management Entity hosted by WWF
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The first-phase project would carry out the full set of the above activities in a number of countries
(Mali, Ethiopia, Morocco, Tunisia, Tanzania, South Africa and Lesotho) and only partial activities (i.e.
preparatory and prevention activities only) in an additional 8 countries (Nigeria, Cote d'lvoire,
Cameroon, Niger, Namibia, Botswana, Swaziland, Mozambique).
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Commnents: Environmental risks are principally related to clean up, transport and disposal operations since
the country projects are dealing with toxic and hazardous waste. Project design fully incorporates the latest
and strictest standards in dealing with toxic and hazardous waste. Training, inventory and inspection
activities also have potential for moderate risks to health and welfare of the participants and steps will be
recommended to ensure that appropriate health and safety precautions are taken to mitigate those risks.
The project has been categorized A because potential impacts are broader than the facilities subject to
physical clean-up and because the nature of clean-up and its difficulties are not fully known pending detailed
inventories at country level, and thus there are potential risks that are not yet identified.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   0 Yes -  No   0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      C)Yes *No     C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              0 Yes * No   0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                               03 Yes C No    * TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  0 Yes * No 0 TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       -'Yes 0 No   0 TBD



3
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  D Yes * No     C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                  O Yes *No      C! TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*             0 Yes * No     O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           O Yes * No     G TBD
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The table below gives an indication of the components of the project that will require most attention.
Mitigation and Monitoring Measures Needed - Initial Summary
Project Component              adverse              Mitigation measures    potential         Monitorin
environmental        needed?                environmental     Required?
impacts likely?                             impacts of these
measures?
1. COUNTRY PROGRAMS
Awareness raising             NO                    NO                     N/A               No
Develop and carry out training  Possibly            Normal precautions for  No               Yes
programs                                            human health & safety
required
Training for inventory taking, for Possibly         Possibly               No                Yes
collection & transport
Inventory update               Possibly             Precautions required -  No               Yes
human health and safety
Testing and analysis           Possibly             Normal precautions for  No               Yes
human health & safety
Regulatory & policy strengthening NO                NO                     N/A               No
Policies                      NO                    NO                     N/A               No
Enforcement & implementation of Possibly            Ensure proper health   No               Yes
regulation & policy.                                and safety and handling
precautions
Procurement                   NO                    NO                     N/A               No
Stock removal                 YES                   YES                    Possibly          Yes
Site remediation              YES                   YES                    Possibly          Yes
Testing and Analysis           Possibly             Normal health and      No                Yes
safety precautions
Transportation to disposal site  YES,               YES                    POSSIBLY          YES
Disposal / Reformulation /    YES                   YES                    POSSIBLY         YES
Recycling/ Destruction
2. TECHNICAL SUPPORT          NO                    NO                     N/A               NO
3. CROSS-CUTTING              NO                    NO                     N/A               NO
ACTIVITIES
4. PHASE 2 PREPARATION        NO                    NO                     N/A               NO
5. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT          NO                   NO                     N/A               NO



4
ISDS
Pest Management:The project should not have an impact on the level of use of pesticides. It will
promote awareness and improved regulations and policies for better handling of pesticides. It will also
promote the adoption by countries of Integrated Pest Management policies but will not deal with their
implementation. These activities do not appear at this stage to justify triggering the pest management
policy. This will be reviewed during preparation, once the scope of prevention activities is more
precisely defined.
Involuntary resettlement. Although current information indicates that pesticides are usually stored away
from people, the need might arise during implementation for condemning certain sites (warehouses,
district back offices that might have been used for storage, etc.) as being too contaminated for clean-up,
or for suggesting that some people may be living too close for comfort, thereby raising risks to their
health over time. If so, then compensation and re-housing, or the reconstruction of certain offices or
other buildings, may be needed, as in western country toxic sites. An other issue would be how to deal
with contaminated water, in particular wells. Although the contamination would be due to the presence of
pesticides stocks before the project, and not to the project itself, one would have to deal with the issue.
While the Involuntary Resettlement policy does not specifically extend coverage to this form of impact, it
is consistent with the policy to apply it in such cases. This is because the impacts may be sustained as a
physical effect of past projects which introduced the pesticides and pollutants to the site under scrutiny.
The ESMF will deal explicitly with the handling of "pre-project" liabilities, and spell out both the
processes and the limits of what the project would be expected to do. It would require the establishment
of clear criteria for condemnation of areas, structures, wells and the like, and sets clear standards as to
what is fair compensation and other compensatory measures for situations where the criteria have been
met for declarations of adverse impact, and procedures for dealing with losses. The application of the
Framework at given sites will require open public discussion of the degree of risk and possible remedies
to third parties who may be affected.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Significant cumulated impacts are not foreseen at this stage. The Strategic / Sectoral EA will assess such
risks and consider not only individual impacts of activities, but also cumulative ones. Potential cumulative
impacts will also be assessed in due course by country level disposal-specific EAs.
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project is designed to eliminate the long term impacts of obsolete stocks and is not expected to
have long
term negative impacts.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
1. Technical alternatives:
The country pesticide related waste profile as defined by inventory, will include many different but
related waste streams. Not all materials requiring disposal will need a high technology solution and no
single technology is suitable to deal with the wide-ranging waste streams. By applying best practice and
ensuring the application of best available techniques it will prove possible and preferable to treat many of



ISDS
the waste streams locally, in the country of origin. Each method used to treat the combination of waste
streams will require a terms of reference. In all instances the impact of any treatment process adopted I
proposed will be assessed in terms of real and potential impact on the population and the environment.
Only when internationally recognized standards relating to operation and emissions are met will a
methodology be accepted for inclusion as part of an ASP country/Regional project.
Typical options that will be considered as part of the design of disposal operations - including on the
basis of the EA - would include:
*   Local disposal: some of the waste streams identified as part of the ASP may be safely disposed
of locally.
*   Re-use: Certain non-POPs pesticide products may be reused under certain circumstances. The
country must ensure that any such product is used in priority to new stocks and that if possible
new imports of pesticide are suspended until the old stocks are used.
*   Reformulation /Reworking: For certain non-POPs pesticide products it can prove possible to
reformulate / rework out of date stock into a usable formulation.
*   Treatment By HighJer Technology Processes: Some waste streams will require destruction. The
ASP will ensure that destruction of obsolete pesticides carried out in projects it funds will
comply with the requirements of the Stockholm and Basel Conventions and also with relevant
national and regional regulations. Currently there are no hazardous waste destruction facilities in
Africa that can meet these criteria and waste is therefore expected to be exported to facilities in
Europe that do. It is not expected that the volumes of waste generated through ASP projects will,
on their own, justify the construction or modification of an installation in Africa. If a hazardous
waste destruction facility were to be constructed or modified in Africa and its management
expressed interest in destroying waste from ASP projects, it would be required to meet the same
criteria.
Within each of the above categories, alternatives will be considered in terms of technologies of disposal,
modes of packaging and transport, phasing, and feasible level of clean-up, including if need be the case
for prohibiting re-use of certain sites or buildings and/or the decommissioning of facilities.
2. Alternative institutional arrangements:
The first option is "business as usual or enhanced business as usual." This approach has been
rejected as it does not include the key elements of comprehensive, accelerated and coordinated
implementation: duplication of effort; lack of a clear funding stream resulting in long time delays which
render inventory data useless; and, no ability to create economies of scale through regional and
sub-regional efforts. Furthermore this model does not include the collective element designed to
incorporate each partner's specific strengths into an effort worth more than the sum of its parts.
The second option is the creation of an independent institution which accumulates all the functions for
a clean up, disposal and prevention operation for the continent. The creation of a new entity was rejected
since it would be costly, would not respond to the need for country drivenness, and would most certainly
be rejected by donor agencies hesitant to create new agencies. It could also take the form of a formal
institution hosted by an existing agency, including the Bank. Although the arrangements proposed under
section I.A3 are workable and provide the operational mechanisms required to implement the program, it
is acknowledged that there is a need to explore available alternative governance models that would offer
increased involvement of stakeholders and increase the sharing of ownership, and in particular would
allow better leveraging the core competencies of the private industry, while dealing properly with
potential conflict of interest situations, better mitigating reputational risks, and maintaining the Bank's



6
ISDS
fiduciary responsibility.
The third option is the packaging of the program for implementation by an other existing entity than
the Bank. No entity was found that would have the capacity or the willingness to do it at the required
scale, and on the other hand all the parties that have worked so far with the Bank to formulate the
program are actually asking the Bank to take the lead.
By implementing an integrated program of disposal and prevention that builds on known existing
initiatives and supports the development of new initiatives where gaps are found, the ASP intends to
overcome the weaknesses in existing efforts.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Most activities are only identified in generic terms at this stage. It is only at the time of implementation
that the project will carry out detailed inventories at country level that would be the basis for detailed
design of country level activities. A Strategic / Sectoral EA will be prepared as part of project
preparation. The SSEA will identify in generic terms,ifor each of the project activities, screening
procedures and the corresponding requirements in terms of specific impact assessment and mitigating
measures, in accordance with Bank policies (i.e. OP 4.01) and guidelines. The SSEA will consider not
only individual impacts of activities, but also cumulative ones. It will cover all components of the
project, i.e. in country operations, transport and final disposal in Europe. The EA will thus contain a
so-called Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), i.e. the procedure and process for
how tiered EAs will be done subsequently for country components, and will be used as a basis for project
implementation. In particular, the ESMF will specify the standards to be applied, in compliance with the
relevant international conventions, country standards when they exist and are satisfactory, and EU
standards when appropriate. The ESMF will also spell out the mechanisms that will allow the Bank to
properly exercise its fiduciary responsibilities regarding the implementation of its safeguard policies (e.g.
need for Bank no objection on the screening t ranking process, on TORs for EAs and on EMPs). The
Implementation Manual of the project will include the provisions of the ESMF.
Given the regional nature of the program, the preparation of the SSEA will be commissioned by the
group of partners sponsoring the proposal (see I .A2). Consultation and disclosure will be both at
international level through partners meeting and communication instruments (e.g. the ASP web site) and
at country level, with consultation focusing initially to those countries where a full country project will
be developed during the preparation phase.
When developing the ESMF, special attention will be given to the following issues: (i) wide information
disclosure in order to maximize the efficiency and the synergy of public and private efforts in dealing
with pollution and safety hazards, (ii) emergency and disaster preparedness plans, especially, during the
hauling and transfer of the hazardous products; (iii) the scope of the prevention activities in relation with
pest management; (iv) the handling of contaminated areas that might be too close (to dwellings or other
property) for comfort, in particular, compensation issues in cases where clean-up would be ineffective;
(v) the handling of contaminated wells and other water sources; and (vi) the need to take into
consideration the entire "chain of custody" during sampling, transport and disposal operations,
irrespective of their geographical location.
The criteria that countries would be expected to fulfill when seeking ASP support - which have been
applied to the countries provisionally selectecl for the first phase - are based on current FAO Guidelines.
They include country ownership and commitment, a well identified lead agency, stakeholder
participation and buy-in, and the availability of an assessment of the scale and scope of the problem. All



7
ISDS
clean-up operations will be managed in the context of the approved Environmental Management Plan
prepared for each clean-up and removal operation on the basis of the detailed inventory. In the absence of
suitable country standards, all operations will be done according to EU (or equivalent) standards. All
activities will be carried out according to the provisions of Rotterdam, Basel and Stockholm
Conventions, apply the International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code to any waste shipped out
of the country, and apply the requirements of relevant regional agreenients such as the Bamako
Convention. Experience from existing projects will be drawn on to define the best methodologies to be
used and the steps to be taken to ensure that impacts are properly mitigated. Contractors bidding on
contracts for clean-up and disposal must demonstrate experience and competence in this field. Quality
control will be through intensive technical supervision by the Technical Support Unit.
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Several countries have already carried out inventories and some have cleaned up their wastes. The
matter is a highly technical and specialized one and clean up can be a hazardous operation if it is not
carried out by properly trained and equipped personnel. The participation of local communities is
essential to avoid further problems, and for each country program an extensive awareness raising
program is part of project design, reaching out to the largest spectrum of civil society. Formal country
consultations were held in Addis Ababa in April 2002 with representatives of Botswana, Cameroon,
C6te d'lvoire, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, South Africa,
Swaziland, Tunisia and Tanzania and the results of the consultations are reflected in the program design.
The ESMF will also provide for country specific consultations at the time of implementation of country
sub-projects.
From the outset NGOs have made a major contribution to identifying the problem of obsolete pesticides
in Africa and elsewhere, and to the development of the ASP. In particular WWF and PAN-UK were
associated with the original concept and subsequently became Recipient and sub-Recipient respectively,
responsible for the preparation of the program under a PDF-B GEF Grant. These organizations have
helped motivate international organizations to take action on obsolete pesticides in Africa, and also play
a key role in lobbying other donors to contribute to the program. International, regional (e.g.
PAN-Africa) and local NGOs are also involved in raising awareness among recipient country
governments to become engaged with the ASP. NGOs are expected to continue to play a key role
during implementation at various levels, in particular to contribute to independent monitoring and
evaluation of ASP projects and activities to ensure that appropriately high standards are maintained.
Initial disclosure will be through the WB Infoshop, the GEF web site, and Government publication in
each of the countries involved in the first-phase project.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address



8
ISDS
safeguard issues.



9
iSDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           1/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/31/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  1/31/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Michel Simeon                              07/25/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                   07/30/2002
Sector Manager/Director:     Richard Scobey                             07/30/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
' S~EDDARC    _  SITE |AP    5I SHOWCASE  _ 



