Report No. 23795
Report No: I077580 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/27/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: AFRICA Project ID: P077580
Project: Multi-Country Demob. & Reint. Progr.    Task Team Leader: Markus
Kostner
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 11, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 18, 2002    IDA Amount ($m): 150.00
Managing Unit: AFTRS     Sector: MY - Non-Sector Specific
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall objective of the MDRP is to enhance the prospects for peace
and socio-economic development in the region. The immediate Program
objectives are to: (i) provide a transparent and comprehensive framework
for country-specific DRPs for ex-combatants for both government and
irregular forces; (ii) complement and reinforce efforts by the
international community in the political and security spheres; (iii)
provide a credible option for irregular forces to return to civilian life
either in their country of origin or elsewhere; and (iv) establish a
mechanism for donor coordination and resource mobilization for country
DRPs in the Region.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The MDRP would consist of four components: (i) country programs; (ii)
special cases; (iii) regional activities; and (iv) Program management.
Country programs would contain five components: (i) demobilization; (ii)
reinsertion; (iii) reintegration; (iv) special groups; and (v)
implementation arrangements. HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation measures
are also included as a cross-cutting issue. Special cases include
ex-combatants settling in third countries as well as activities carried
out in parts of country outside the control of the government. In both
cases, the guiding principles for country programs would apply to the
extent possible. However, these activities would require greater
flexibility in design and implementation. By its very nature, the MDRP
addresses cross-border issues which cannot be addressed solely through
parallel country programs. These activities may include: the establishment
and management of a comprehensive data base on beneficiaries of and
progress under individual country programs; the establishment and
operation of a financial management system to facilitate the tracking of
resources; the carrying out of studies that inform the implementation of
the MDRP and individual country programs; and semi-annual meetings of an
informal technical committee comprising senior technical management from
these programs. The MDRP and the complementary MDTF would be managed by a
Bank task team.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key



environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Countries in the greater Great Lakes Region would qualify for support from
the MDRP on the basis of several general and national eligibility
criteria. In the first phase of the MDRP, Burundi, the Republic of the
Congo (Brazzaville), the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda are expected to participate.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: For each country program, the task team would prepare an
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet for review by ASPEN and assignment of
both the EA Category under OP 4.01 and the overall Safeguard category for
the suite of activities proposed. When the country program activities
trigger any of the Bank's safeguard policies, a country-specific
assessment would be undertaken and plans would be developed to comply with
the provisions of the respective safeguard policies. It is expected that
in most cases appropriate actions could be addressed in an environmental
and social management plan or framework, including a resettlement plan or
framework where needed. If the country-specific program were categorized
A, a full EA would be required.
The timing of the preparation and disclosure of safeguards documentation
would depend on whether the country program is processed normally or under
OP 8.50 as Emergency Recovery Assistance. Under normal processing, the
safeguards documentation would be prepared, reviewed and disclosed, both
in-country and at the Infoshop, prior to appraisal. In the case of
processing under OP 8.50, safeguards documentation would be expected to be
prepared by program inception (or as agreed to in the ISDS according to
the urgency of a particular situation); the safeguards documentation would
be reviewed and disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop as soon as
it becomes available. The processing under OP 8.50 would be agreed to by
the RVP in consultation with ENV and LEG. Under both normal and OP 8.50
processing, detailed procedures would be spelled out in the program
implementation manual.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
-2-



II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The MDRP is an umbrella operation without specific IDA allocations or
disbursements. IDA financing would be determined on a case-by-case basis.
Disbursements would be effected within each of the country programs. The
MDRP would ensure that country programs are processed and implemented
according to the Bank's policies and procedures. No major adverse
environmental and social impacts are expected in advance. However, each
country program would be assessed as to its potential effects on the
environment and the social fabric. Particular issues of concern are
involuntary resettlement or displacement and potentially adverse
environmental effects, such as from medical waste of HIV/AIDS testing
materials, or potential small-scale infrastructure.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
N/A
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
N/A
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
-3 -



Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by         Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Markus Kostner  02/21/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:       Nina Chee       02/22/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Omar S. Fye     02/27/2002
Sector Manager/Director:        Hans P. Binswanger      02/27/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 4 -



