1                                        mv 37O
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                    AWorld Freeol Poverty
-ifoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/17/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: AFRICA                                        Project ID: P070543
Project: Control of Aquatic Weeds in SADC Region       Task Team Leader: Jakob Granit
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 18, 2004             IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 14, 2004                        IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: AFTUI                                   Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)    sector (50%); General water; sanitation and flood
Status: Preparation                                    protection sector (50%)
Theme: Water resource management (P);
Environmental policies and institutions (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) is a regional grouping of 14 sovereign states with the main
purpose of fostering co-operation for mutual benefit from the resources of this region Recognising the critical
importance of water to regional integration and economic development, SADC established the Water Sector in 1996
and subsequently developed, adopted and revised a SADC Protocol on Shared Watercourse Systems for the joint
management of shared water resources. A Regional Strategic Action Plan for Integrated Water Resources
Development and Management has also been approved and is being implemented through the SADC Water Sector
Coordination Unit (WSCU) to address key water management issues including, the control of aquatic weeds and
their translocation.
The proposed Project fits within the framework of the Regional Strategic Action Plan. It also is designed to build on
and strengthen national initiatives to combat aquatic weeds in the principle countries affected - Botswana, Malawi,
South Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Namibia.
The objective of the Project is to:
Develop a regional strategic approach to the effective management, control or eradication of aquatic weeds
in order to maintain biodiversity and improve livelihoods in the SADC region.
The project will be implemented at both the regional and the pilot basin levels. At the regional level, it will
*       Create an enabling environment at the national and regional levels to put in place appropriate
policy, legislative and enforcement mechanisms               including improved capacity in the technical
and institutional aspects of aquatic weed control and management.
*       Implement mechanisms for community education and participation in the prevention of aquatic
weed introductions and the control of existing               infestations



2
ISDS
At the pilot basin level, the project will
*       Draw on the wealth of information on the control and management of aquatic weeds already
available within SADC and identify the effectiveness and    sustainability of various methods of aquatic
weeds control or eradication for the major species of aquatic weeds through trials in pilot water bodies,
including the technical and institutional means to adapt and apply them throughout the SADC region
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Project will be implemented at the regional and basin levels. The first two components will be regional while
component 3 will be at the basin level.
Component I An enabling environment to support coordinated policy and legislative mechanisms
This component will focus on fostering regional cooperation in the field of aquatic weed control, management and
eradication within the larger context of integrated, transboundary water resources management. This includes
catchment management activities such as the reduction of point and non-point source nutrient inputs
Activities in this component include:
*      the development of a regional policy framework that harmonizes existing national policies for the
control of aquatic weeds
*      the elaboration of regional strategies, action plans or guidelines to control the spread of aquatic
weeds in the region's water bodies
*      strengthening of an existing institution to coordinate national actions so that they are effective
across the region
*      strengthening national institutions, where necessary, through the regional framework for the
effective implementation of weed management activities
*      the formation of a network of interested professionals and institutions and the development of a
regional data and information-clearing house on     aquatic weeds
Component 2 Regional community education andparticipation mechanisms
Community involvement is an essential feature of successful aquatic weed management The translocation and
spread of weeds can be reduced through an effective community education program; outbreaks of weeds can be
reported at an early stage and local weed infestations can be managed at community level; and nutrient reduction
activities can be improved through community participation. Activities in this component will include:
*      identification of existing, appropriate community based organisations in key areas across the
region
*      activities to educate the public in the problems arising from aquatic weeds, identification of aquatic
weeds and practical methods control them and to     prevent their spread
*      Encourage and provide support to communities to implement and manage their own aquatic weed
control projects at local level.
Component 3. Trials of weed management technique in pilot water bodies.
In this component, the effectiveness and sustainability of various aquatic weeds control and management approaches
will be trialed for five different species of aquatic weeds in selected transboundary pilot water bodies. Activities will
include:
*      both short-term control in restricted areas as well as longer-term control including integrated
control methods which, so far, have only been tested on     an experimental basis in South Africa (Vaal
River) and Botswana (S molesta in Moremei Game Reserve)
*      complementary programmes for the control of nutrient inflows into the water bodies; this is a vital
element in long-term approaches
*      community education and involvement in the trial to ensure that community benefits are realized
and that the trial outcomes are sustainable
*      Facilitate exchange visits between communities involved in aquatic weed management within and
between the pilot study areas.
*      identification of the technical and institutional requirements for applying these techniques at a



3
ISDS
regional scale, where appropriate.
Selection of pilot water bodies
The SADC Sub-Committee on Aquatic Weeds and Water Quality has identified three water bodies where these pilot
activities will be carried out:
*       Kwando/Linyanti/Chobe system and the Zambezi River floodplains in Namibia and Botswana,
*      the lower Shire in Malawi and Mozambique, and
*       the Caledon/Orange River basin in Lesotho and South Africa
These proposed pilot areas will be further assessed for suitability and the final selection of waterbodies and trial sites
within these will be identified during the project preparation phase.
These water bodies are transboundary and are infested with different species of weeds All require
downstream-upstream collaboration to control and arrest the spread of weeds  The Kwando /Linyanti/Chobe
represents a major transboundary case of Kariba Weed which affects not only Botswana and Namibia but also
neighboring countries through backwater flood flows The Shire River case represents an infestation by water
hyacinth that has affected the livelihood of the fishing communities along the river and has had a major impact on the
socio-economic conditions riverine communities. The Caledon/Orange River basin includes infestations of
Myriophyllum aquaticum and Azolla aquaticum in Lesotho and South Africa. If left unaddressed, they will spread
into neigbouring water bodies and affect the water supply sources for major cities and large towns.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Regional level
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) is a regional grouping of 14 sovereign states with the
main purpose of fostering co-operation for mutual benefit from the resources of this region. Recognising the
critical importance of water to regional integration and economic development, SADC established the Water
Sector in 1996 and subsequently developed, adopted and revised a SADC Protocol on Shared Watercourse
Systems for the joint management of shared water resources. A Regional Strategic Action Plan for Integrated
Water Resources Development and Management has also been approved and is being implemented through the
SADC Water Sector Coordination Unit (WSCU) to address key water management issues including, the control
of aquatic weeds and their translocation
Infestations of aquatic weeds in the SADC region have been manifested on a large scale in water bodies in the
Kwando/Zambezi-Chobe Linyanti river system (Botswana and Namibia), Okavango swamps (Botswana), Lake
Kariba, (Zambia Zimbabwe), Lake Victoria (Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda), the Kafue (Zambia), Shire River
(Malawi), Letaba River, Hartbeespoort Dam, the Olifants river, the Vaal River in the Parys area below the Vaal
Dam, the Umgeni catchment area and dam in Kwa-Zulu Natal; the Eastern Cape and along the coast through
Knysna and Stellenbosch to the Cape Flats (South Africa), Manyame River (Zimbabwe) and Roma dam
(Lesotho). The most common types of invasive aquatic plants found in the region are Salvinia molesta (Kariba
weed), Eichhornia crassipes (Water Hyacinth), Pistia stratiotes (Nile cabbage), or water lettuce, Myriophylum
aquaticum (Parrots feather) and Azollafiliculiodes (Water fern).
Mats of aquatic weeds have adverse impact on aquatic ecosystems causing problems across many sectors
These impacts are technical, socio-economical and environmental. Aquatic weeds form interlocking mats,
which are impenetrable by boats and seriously hinder access to fishing grounds and fish landing sites, and
impede the offtake of water for drinking purposes The mats, physically reduce the flow of water, increase
possibilities of flooding and reduce the capacity of reservoirs, as well as increasing the area of transpiration
They lead to the deterioration of aquatic biodiversity, and the alteration of aquatic ecosystems through altering
physical habitat and reducing sunlight penetration into the water which it affects the entire plankton-based life
cycle of dams and rivers. Indigenous flora and fauna will change as some species move away, other species



4
ISDS
adapt and new ones move in to fill the gap created by this change. Native aquatic vegetation is suppressed by
rapidly growing aquatic weeds. Organic debris from decaying weeds adversely affect the quality of water by
increasing water turbidity and carbon dioxide concentration and decreasing oxygen and water conductance,
resulting in reduced drinking water quality These weeds also provide habitat for snails and insects that act as
vectors for disease.
The economic and environmental losses due to these weeds are high as shown in other African waterbodies
(Senegal River, Lake Victoria). For example, Lake Malawi has 500-1000 endemic fish species  Water
hyacinth is present in the Lake and, if it spreads to the extent witnessed in Lake Victoria in the late 1990s, it
could have a major impact on the species that inhabit the littoral areas of the lake. The poor are particularly
impacted by aquatic weeds because of the effects on fishing, drinking water, health of those living near
waterbodies and degradation of ecosystem functions However, the breadth of impact renders them difficult to
estimate on the national and regional levels.
Basin level
The SADC Sub-Committee on Aquatic Weeds and Water Quality has identified three water bodies where these
pilot activities will be carried out.
Kwando/Linyanti/Chobe system and the Zambezi River floodplains in Namibia and Botswana,
the lower Shire in Malawi and Mozambique, and
the Caledon/Orange River basin in Lesotho and South Africa
These proposed pilot areas will be further assessed for suitability and the final selection of waterbodies and
trial sites within these will be identified during the project preparation phase.
These water bodies are transboundary and are infested with different species of weeds All require
downstream-upstream collaboration to control and arrest the spread of weeds. The Kwando /Linyanti/Chobe
represents a major transboundary case of Kariba Weed which affects not only Botswana and Namibia but also
neighboring countries through backwater flood flows. The Shire River case represents an infestation by water
hyacinth that has affected the livelihood of the fishing communities along the river and has had a major
impact on the socio-economic conditions riverine communities. The Caledon/Orange River basin includes
infestations ofMyriophyllum aquaticumand Azolla aquaticum in Lesotho and South Africa.  If left
unaddressed, they will spread into neigbouring water bodies and affect the water supply sources for major
cities and large towns.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments There may be potential environmental impacts from the trials of different aquatic weed management
techniques (Component 3). These impacts can arise from physical, chemical and biological techniques. The extent of
these impacts will be determined during preparation phase, but are not expected to be major.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                     Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                            * Yes C No      C} TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                                    DYes * No         TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                               DYes * No         TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                           * Yes O No     Q TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                       O Yes * No      C, TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                        C Yes * No     CTBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                               0 Yes * No      ?TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                            Yes 0 No       T TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                 0 Yes C No    C0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                         1' Yes 0 No     0' TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims



5
ISDS
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project does not envisage or entail any physical infrastructure or intervention beyond that applied in the
weed control trials. The design of the studies in the pilot basins may include the use of mechanical equipment,
use of biological controls or the application of chemicals.  Manual/mechanical harvesting can lead to
deoxygenation of the waterbody if the cut material is not harvested; biological control agents can damage
plants native to the area if rigorous screening is not carried out; chemical control can lead to unintended
damage to adjacent plants through wind-drift, etc if proper application techniques are not followed. Pest
management techniques to be used will be summarized in a pest management plan. Any environmental impacts
will be part of the EA.
The techniques to be used will be determined during project preparation. There is already considerable
expertise in parts of the SADC region in the safe application of these techniques The institutions carrying out
these trials will be selected partly upon their experience and track record in the use of these techniques Since
the successful techniques will be recommended for wider application throughout the SADC region it is
essential that environmentally safe techniques are developed and documented
The project involves shared international waters. However, all member states of SADC are aware of the
project and support it.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
See II.D.lc.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
This project will set up the institutional framework, coordinate the technical and administrative support systems
across the region and provide control options based on trials held on representative water bodies. The control
options will be implemented as part of a coordinated regional control plan for aquatic weeds, subsequent to
this project. Such an activity could have long term detrimental impacts depending on the effectiveness of the
trials, the quality of the documentation and training and the faithfulness with which the control techniques are
subsequently implemented. This can only be assessed at the time an implementation plan is developed
However, this project seeks to establish a solid foundation for the later regional control plan (and thereby
minimise any detrimental impacts) by developing strengthening national weed control capabilities, providing
access to technical expertise across the region, trialing and documenting various control options, and
establishing a regional coordinating body
Failure to undertake a regional approach to weed management will almost certainly result in long term impacts
on livelihoods of people dependent on aquatic resources.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Alternative treatment methods will be assessed as part of project preparation. The risks from methods such as
manual/mechanical removal, herbicides and bio-control will be factored into the selection of the preferred methods
for different weeds in each circumstance
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project does not envisage or entail any physical infrastructure or intervention beyond that applied in the weed



6
ISDS
control trials. The design of the studies in the pilot basins may include the use of mechanical equipment, use of
biological controls or the application of chemicals Manual/mechanical harvesting can lead to deoxygenation of the
waterbody if the cut material is not harvested, biological control agents can damage plants native to the area if
rigorous screening is not carried out; chemical control can lead to unintended damage to adjacent plants through
wind-drift, etc if proper application techniques are not followed.
The techniques to be used will be determined during project preparation. There is already considerable
expertise in parts of the SADC region in the safe application of these techniques. The institutions carrying out
these trials will be selected partly upon their experience and track record in the use of these techniques. Since
the successful techniques will be recommended for wider application throughout the SADC region it is
essential that environmentally safe techniques are developed and documented.
The project involves shared international waters. However, all member states of SADC are aware of the
project and support it..
The Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis will entail a Regional Environmental Assessment, including the use of
mechanical and pesticide use for the trials of control techniques. If the design indicates that there is scope for
implementing EMP, such a process will be undertaken before project appraisal
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Steering Committee will include all relevant stakeholders including members from the SADC Sub-Committee
on Water Quality and Aquatic Weeds. In addition, component 2 is directed at involving community groups in
aquatic weed management, and community groups will participate in the trials of different control techniques in
component 3 The ToR for the consultants undertaking the TDA/REA require them to identify the best mechanisms
for stakeholder involvement at both these levels.
The EA and the Pest Management Plan will be disclosed prior to appraisal and following a detailed situation analysis
carried out by a consultancy during project preparation. The reports are expected to be received upon completion of
the situation analysis consultancy on or about March 2003 Disclosure at the regional SADC level will be the
responsibility of the SADC Secretariat. The Project Steering Committee consisting of senior Government official
from each of the 14 SADC countries will be responsible for disclosure in each country. Disclosure at to the Infoshop
will follow standard Bank routines by the Bank's task team.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                 Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                        3/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    4/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                    4/15/2004



7
ISDS
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 3/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/15/2004
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Jakob Granit                                 01/02/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Serigne Omar Fye                        01/13/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte Bingham                         01/08/03
Sector Manager/Director:      Jaime M. Biderman                            01/02/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
;SEARCH        *ITEM                   A   P, S-



