Report No. 23791
Report No: I074525 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/04/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: AFRICA Project ID: P074525
Project: BOAD   Task Team Leader: Noel Kabamba Tshiani
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 30, 2002 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 17, 2002        IDA Amount ($m): 150.00
Managing Unit: AFTFS     Sector: FS - Financial Sector Development
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)     Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The proposed project aims for the development of an unified financial
market that will foster regional integration among the UEMOA member
countries. It will assist BOAD achieve the institutional capacity needed
to handle a growing volume of activities necessary to increase
developmental impact of its operation on the regional capital market. An
unified and well developed financial market in the UEMOA zone will
contribute to the development of a more larger capital market in the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) as a whole. It will
also promote economic growth and encourage private sector investment in
the sub-region by facilitating access to medium and long term finance of
public and private middle size infrastructure projects originated and
appraised by BOAD.
The proposed project would enable the Bank Group, with BOAD as
intermediary, to contribute to the provision of basic infrastructure
services by facilitating access to medium and long term finance to a broad
spectrum of developmentally important projects in and between the eight
resource poor UEMOA countries. Medium and long term resources are needed
to strengthen the supply response necessary to support the structural
adjustment and the ongoing economic integration process in these
countries. The eligible projects would otherwise be too small for cost
effective direct Bank Group lending (US $ 1-20 million cost range).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project comprises three components: (i) an Institutional Support or
technical assistance component; (ii) an IDA line of credit component; and
(iii) an IDA Partial Risk Guarantee facility.
Institutional Support Component
This component is intended to build up BOAD's internal capacities in those
specific areas where weaknesses have been identified, namely in
environmental and social assessment, management of assets/liabilities,
project supervision and monitoring, human resource management and
planning, internal management, and regulatory framework, in order to give
the bank the tools to manage, in a satisfactory manner, foreign exchange



risk, internal audits, risk management, and diversification of the body of
stockholders in such a way as to boost the presence of partners with good
ratings in terms of their callable capital. It also aims to position BOAD
to be a role model on WAEMU's financial market and to contribute to the
development of the sub-region's financial market.
The main activities under this component are regrouped into four main
sub-components:
A. Strengthening of BOAD institutional capacity, which includes the
following activities:
n strengthening of BOAD's institutional capacities with a view to ensuring
its sustainability and improving its productivity.
n improvement of the capacity to mobilize resources, including
asset/liability management.
n improved personnel management, particularly through implementation of a
training program for managers and support staff at all levels.
n implementation of recommendations emerging from studies of BOAD's
institutional and financial strengthening.
n improvement of current organization through the introduction of
analytical accounting.
n strengthening of the cash management function;
n strengthening of capacity in lending and financing operations;
B. Preparation of BOAD for its positioning as a reference player in the
regional financial market
preparation of BOAD to be rated by the rating agencies, so that it can
become a standard-setting issuer of bonds on WAEMU financial markets.
the preparation and implementation of the strategy of opening BOAD's
callable capital to well-rated new stockholders and investors.
acquisition of skills in managing issuance/underwriting as a
standard-setting issuer (of securities);
development of a primary market and of regulations concerning duplicate
securities listings ;
establishment of a system of buying and selling securities on the
financial market;
implementation of an effective communication policy, with a view to
increasing knowledge of BOAD's activities in the sub-region and in
international finance.
C.Revision of the regulatory framework by BCEAO and the Council of
Ministers of UEMOA
the revision and improvement of the regulatory framework applicable to
BOAD.
n    harmonization of the tax regime applicable to stocks and bonds;
D. Other aspects of the reforms
n coordination of actions with other key actors (e.g., the Regional
Council, BCEAO and Ministries of Finance) regarding the roles and specific
tasks to be accomplished with a view to developing the financial market;
n technical support to allow for coordination between the institutional
reforms envisaged at BOAD and in other development organizations in the
sub-region, particularly the CEDEAO Development Fund and the Fonds d'Aide
a l'Integration Regionale.
Line of credit Component
IDA line of credit component includes : (a) IDA line of credit in an
-2 -



amount of US$ 80 million equivalent ; and (b) contingencies and project
management funds in an amount of up to US$ 3 million. The line of credit
is expected to cover approximately 62t of BOAD's lending program for a 4
years period up to end-2005. The total amount of BOAD lending program for
the next four years is estimated at US$ 231 million. The credit will be
used to co-finance projects which foster regional integration. Eligible
borrowers will be BOAD, both public and private developers and operators
in agricutlture, industry, energy, transport, telecommunicaton and other
developementally critical infrastructure. This component is designed to
be directly complementary to the component dealing with BOAD's
institutional strengthening.
Private Investment Financing Guarantee Component.
The proposed amount of the IDA line of guarantee is US$50 million. The
guarantee line will be structured to foster private investment in
infrastrure, to deliver polical rsik coverage locally trough BOAD. The
approach will used combine MIGA and IDA resources and expertise and will
heavily rely on streamlined procedures to reduce bureaucracy and speed up
the project approval process. The objective of the guarantee component of
the project is to encourage and facilitate private investment in small and
medium infrastructure projects in UEMOA member countries UEMOA :     Union
Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africaine £ includes : Benin, Burkina-Faso,
C¶te d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. The proposed
IDA line of guanantee will have a maximum amount of US $50 million. The
line will be used to provide Partial Risk Guarantees (PRG) for eligible
investment sub-projects. Eligibility criteria will be determined during
appriasal and incorporated into the project's Guarantee Operations
Guidebook.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The roads component will finance roads to be selected from a list of
priority inter-country connectors after full assessment of each dossier.In
addition, in the border areas where these major ropads are to be located,
a limited network of rural market and feeder roads may be also be financed
in the UEMOA member countries.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: BOAD which is the beneficiary of the credit is the intermediary
through which financing is provided to projects that might have an
environmental impact
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
-3-



Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental assessment : Projects that would be financed under the line
of credit could have some environmental impact in the UEMOA countries. The
capacity for environmental and social management within BOAD is currently
weak. BOAD is asked to recruit a consulting firm or individual consultants
as soon as possible for implementation of its Environmental and Social
Assessment Study
The study will include An Environmental and Social Management Plan (Plan
de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale, PGES) that will have an
institutional analysis dealing with environmental and social management in
the roads sector and a plan for strengthening the capacities of
organizations responsible for the roads sector in the countries concerned.
This enhancement of country-level capacities in the area of environmental
and social management will be financed by BOAD out of project resources.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
BOAD will develop and implement an Environmental and Social Management
Plan (Plan de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale, PGES). All projects
that will be financed under the line of credit or under the guarantee
scheme would be reviewed by the bank to ensure compliance with requirement
in environmental requirements. In addition, Environmental and Social
Management Plan that will be developed by BOAD will include an
institutional analysis dealing with environmental and social management in
the sectors covered by BOAD's investment program as well as a plan for
strengthening the capacities of organizations responsible for the roads
sector as well as other sectors covered by BOAD investments in the
countries concerned. BOAD agreed that this enhancement of country-level
capacities in the area of environmental and social management will be
financed by BOAD out of project resources.
-4-



Second, this study will also analyze the specific environmental and social
impacts of projects selected for the project's first year of
implementation. All of these will likely be road projects. The
Environmental and Social Assessment Studies for the second year of the
project will be performed during the first year of the project, and so on.
For each subproject financed by the project, an Environmental and Social
Assessment Study will be performed about one year before construction
commences.
The final report of the Environmental and Social Assessment Study shall be
discussed with, and made available to, the affected population. This
report shall be submitted to the World Bank's Infoshop for perusal by the
general public prior to the appraisal mission and 120 days prior to the
project's presentation to the World Bank's Board of Directors.
A key third result anticipated from the Environmental and Social
Assessment study will be the development of a series of Standards (for
roads) and Procedures for Environmental and Social Management for all BOAD
investments, whether public or private.
The summary report will be submitted to the World Bank and sent to the
World Bank's Board of Directors and Infoshop prior to credit approval.
BOAD's Environmental Policy shall be approved by BOAD's Board of Directors
prior to the project's presentation to the World Bank's Board of
Directors. An Environmental and Social Management Unit will be put in
place during the first year of the project. This Unit is to continue its
operations after project completion. The project will finance the
strengthening of the unit's capacities within BOAD. The Procedures Manual
for this unit will be drawn up during the environmental and social
assessment study. The Environmental and Social Management Unit shall be
placed sufficiently high up in BOAD's hierarchy and shall be equipped in
such a way as to enable it to have an influence on decisions regarding
future investments. It must be capable of influencing the quality of road
projects and other BOAD projects from the environmental and social
standpoints.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Other stakeholders are the donors, countries in which the line of credit
will be used to finance project. during which their views will be heard
and incorporated in the project design prior to negotiations. These donors
are: EIB, ADB, etc Draft reports of the Environmental and Social
Assessment Study will be presented by the consultants before the end of
the study at a seminar to be attended by about sixty people from UMEMOA
countries, involving in the sector and all donors active with BOAD. The
purpose of this seminar will be to explain to BOAD clients and partners
the new working methodology, which consists of integrating Environmental
and Social management into all BOAD projects. The costs of organizing this
seminar and the introductory meeting will be covered by the consultant,
and these expenses will be included by the consultants in their bid. A
final report and a summary report, in French and in English, shall be
prepared at the conclusion of the seminar.
- 5-



E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     9/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop 10/31/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by         Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Noel Kabamba Tshiani
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Serigne Omar Fye        02/26/02
Sector Manager/Director:        Gerard A. Byam  02/26/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



