Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC327
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/03/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: AFRICA                                  Project ID: P069258
Project: Southern African Power Market (APLl)    Task Team Leader: Ludmilla Butenko
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 3, 2003        IBRD Amount (Sm):
Bank Approval: October 21, 2003                  IDA Amount ($m): 178.60
Managing Unit: AFTEG                             Sector: Power (80%); General energy sector (20%)
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  Theme: Regional integration (P); Infrastructure
Status: Lending                                  services for private sector development (P); Export
development and competitiveness (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
To facilitate the development of an efficient regional power market which would: (i) decelerate the increase
of electricity prices in the Southem African Development Community countries through increased
competition; (ii) increase industrial competitiveness of the region; (iii) create the conditions for accelerated
investment in the power sector, including by the private sector; and (iv) foster regional integration.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
This regional program is intended to facilitate multi-country electricity trade in Southern Africa and
support the operations of the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) by providing technical assistance to the
SAPP Coordination Center, strengthening regional transmission core and removing some of the physical
bottlenecks that inhibit growth. The main sector issues to be addressed by the program are: (a) insufficient
transmission capacity to maximize the benefits of regional power trade; (b) need to develop a fully
functional Coordination Center of the SAPP; (c) need to increase trade on the short term energy market; (d)
need to introduce clear rules of the game for private sector participation in the regional power operations;
(e) harmonization of regulation affecting cross-border power trade as the national utilities embark on a
reform process.
The program comprises the highest priority projects identified by the Integrated Regional Power Master
Plan (Pool Plan) prepared by the SAPP. This subset of interventions has been adopted by NEPAD and
SADC as priority areas in the energy sector. The program comprises three phases over a period of six
years. The first phase is planned to last from 2003 through December 2007, the second from 2004 through
2008, and the third from 2006 through 2009.
The first phase, APL1, will improve electricity trading in the Pool by making the information available to
all member utilities and improving the speed of transactions by providing technical assistance to the SAPP
Coordination Center. It will also make a significant block of hydro energy from Inga, the DRC, available
to the SAPP. This will have benefits both in avoiding the use of high cost thermal generation and will serve
in improving the quality of electricity supply throughout the region. This infrastructure component involves
rehabilitating and upgrading the converter and inverter stations on the DC transmission link from the Inga
hydropower station to Kolwezi in the Democratic Republic of Congo; maintaining the DC transmission line
from Inga to Kolwezi; rehabilitating and reinforcing the AC network from Kolwezi to Karavia substation
near Lubumbashi, in the Katanga region of the DRC; constructing a 220 kV line transmission from
Fungurume to Karavia and from Karavia to the DRC/Zambia border at Kasumbalesa; and constructing,



2
ISDS
with private sector funds, a continuation of the new transmission line from Kasumbalesa to Luano
substation near Kitwe in Zambia. The new line will run parallel to the existing 220 kV line and to a large
degree within the existing right-of-way.
The second phase, APL2, will finance connection of Malawi to the regional electrical network through a
transmission line from Mozambique. This initiative will benefit Malawi by increasing its power system
security and avoiding higher electricity cost in the long run, and it will benefit Mozambique by the revenues
it will earn from the use of the line.
The third phase, APL3, will make more hydro energy from the DRC available to the Pool and will
improve the stability of the interconnected grid. If the feasibility study done in the first phase shows it to be
economic, the third phase will also connect Zambian and Tanzanian grids which will facilitate the
connection of Uganda and Kenya to the Pool in the more distant future. This would expand the market
significantly and bring new trading opportunities to all members.
The ISDS is concerned only with the first phase of the program and is based on the studies of the
alignment, and the requisite environmental and social assessments that have been carried out for APL1.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
While the SAPM program ultimately will involve all of the member countries, the activities under APL 1,
and thus this ISDS, focus on reinforcing the existing transmission corridor in the Democratic Republic of
Congo and Zambia.
In the DRC, the transmission lines between the Inga hydropower station on the Congo River and
Kasumbalesa on the border with Zambia will be maintained and transformers and other equipment will be
upgraded. In addition, transmission lines will be rehabilitated between Fungurume and Panda (80 km) and
Panda - Karavia (70 km). A new right-of-way has been selected for construction of the transmission line
between Karavia and the border at Kasumbalesa. This new construction in the DRC will take place in
southern Katanga province, southeast of Kolwezi. In this province of the DRC, rehabilitation and
construction of transmission lines and related access roads will mostly take place in heavily degraded areas
dominated by open woodland Zambezian forest. The scarcity of flora and fauna in this location is the
result of intense pressure on available resources, due to cutting of trees for fuel and due to subsistence
hunting. No major waterways will be crossed by the proposed route, other than the Lufira River. There are
no protected areas near the power lines, no known critical natural habitats, nor any culturally or socially
sensitive areas. A number of urban centers in the province - Lubumbashi, Kolwezi, Likasi, and
Kasumbalesa, and several villages are located alongside the existing transmission lines. The population
living in the area depends on subsistence farming, hunting, and fishing, although the copper mining industry
was once the lifeblood of the economy.
In Zambia, a transmission line will be constructed by the Copperbelt Energy Corporation (CEC) and
financed outside this project. The line, starting at the Zambia-DRC border at Kasumbalesa and going 45
km to the Luano substation, involves clearing a 45m width within the existing wayleave. The new line will
be built alongside the existing 220kV line for which CEC has wayleave rights. The area is covered by a
mix of Miombo woodland species, and vegetation clearing will be one bf the major environmental impacts
during construction. Due to farming activities and poaching for the past years, big fauna has disappeared,
and only small animals remain. The proposed power line traverses two National Forest Reserves
(Kamenza Forest reserve No. 19 and Luano Forest Reserve No. 12), which are legally protected areas,



3
ISDS
classified as IUCN Category VI protected areas . The two Forest Reserves are critical natural habitats.
The proposed line route is sparsely populated; hence few people will be affected in terms of relocation.
Some settlers will be restricted from carrying out fanning activities along the wayleave during construction,
but alternative arrangements will be made for these people.
Both in the DRC and in Zambia non-critical natural habitats (wetlands, specific forest types) were
identified in the environmental assessments.
Both in the DRC and in Zambia no known cultural property sites are going to be affected by construction
and operation of the transmission lines. Construction crews will be instructed on how to handle chance
finds of archaeological resources.
(1) Zambia's Forest Reserves are classified as IUCN Category VIII in WCMC/World Bank, 1993. Ecologically
sensitive sites in Africa. Vol. VI. Washington, DC. The category no longer exists and was merged with current
category VI.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The program was assigned an Enviroinmental Category A due to its expected potential
environmental and social impacts. The DRC component was classified as a category A initiative because, at
the time, it appeared it might affect critical habitats and involve significant involuntary resettlement. The
Zambia component, which is a private sector investment using only corporate funds, was similarly classified
because it is viable only if the DRC segment of the lines, which is financed in part by the World Bank, is built.
A field reconnaissance was undertaken later to determine land-use along the right of way, the need for land
acquisition and, therefore, involuntary resettlement, and whether any (critical) natural habitats lie along the
proposed alignments. A principal mitigation measure of the impact of the transmission lines consists of
carefully siting transmission lines and access roads through low density development areas in order to
minimize physical relocation while also avoiding significant natural habitats.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (fronm PDS)
(click on EI for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                   Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)         0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                 0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                  0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                            0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*      0 Yes * No
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If in,formation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessaty data.



4
ISDS
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
In compliance with Safeguard OP 4.01 the major potential environmental and social impacts of the project
have been identified by two stand-alone environmental assessments, one for the DRC and the other for the
Zambia component of the project. These assessments have determined that two other key Safeguard
Policies are invoked: Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).
The major environmental issue in the DRC and Zambia is the management of natural habitats and, for
Zambia in particular, the management of critical natural habitats (two forest reserves) (OP 4.04). In
Zambia, the proposed power line traverses two National Forest Reserves (Kamenza Forest reserve No. 19
and Luano Forest Reserve No. 12), which are legally protected areas, classified as IUCN Category VI
protected areas. The two Forest Reserves are critical natural habitats. Indications are that the conversion
of the critical natural habitats for power line construction is not significant, as it does not threaten the
integrity of the forests involved. The existing right-of-way will be used (land already converted) and the
damage to the forest (which appears to be degraded) is expected to be very limited in extent.
The major social impact will be limited land acquisition for power lines and associated infrastructure (OP
4.12). The transmission lines generally have relatively limited impacts--productive trees must be removed
from the right-of-way (but farmers can usually continue to grow crops under the lines) and some houses
need to be relocated a few meters beyond the reserve. However, transmission lines usually do not affect
people's livelihoods in a significant manner. Power substations, by contrast, require reasonably sized
parcels of land, and can displace residents and other users, particularly if located near populated areas. For
this reason, the siting of power substations at Fungurume and Karavia, and Luano, emphasizes
minimization of impact, which means the substations are located far enough from populated centers to
significantly reduce the extent of social impact.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
It is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
More efficient power distribution should induce local development, which would have potential long-term
environmental and social impacts, both beneficial and adverse. The project monitoring program will track
such changes so that major adverse long-term impacts can be mitigated in a timely fashion.
Long term environmental benefits will result from the increased use of existing hydropower over
non-renewable energy (fossil fuels) in the SADC countries. Better exploitation of hydropower and
increased efficiency in the use of existing generation plants will reduce the airbome emissions produced by
coal-fired generation (NOx, S02, C02, and SPM), as well as local damage associated with mining and
transportation. Increased utilization of existing assets to defer the need for new generation development
makes sound commercial and environmental sense.
The population of southem Africa will benefit from the improvement of quality, lower cost and expansion
of electricity supply. Certain industries will become more competitive as the cost of electricity is held down
by the economies of scale available through the electricity market. An additional direct benefit to the
population of the DRC will be that offered by the integrated infrastructure inputs to communities along the
route of the new transmission lines built by the project. The concept is based on a possibility to use the
shield wire of the transmission line conductor for distribution of electricity along the transmission line
route. This technique overcomes the high cost of transformation that made such a scheme impossible in the



5
ISDS
past. It has been used successfully in Ghana and in parts of Latin America for the past 10 to 15 years.
Experience has shown that communities along the route can develop and poverty can be reduced if they are
supplied with electricity, but they can benefit more if supplied simultaneously with other complementary
infrastructure and health services. Such inputs will be modular and scalable. They will be based on a set
of consultations with the beneficiary communities followed by a package of hardware and training designed
to meet the needs and opportunities identified in the consultations. The consultations will seek to determine
the day-to-day needs of the community such as water supply and treatment, communication, electricity,
clinical care, etc. They will also identify the capability of the community to manage these inputs and
possibly to set up some of them, such as the communication, including intemet, as small businesses. The
necessary hardware will be packaged in containers the size of shipping containers so that they can be
shipped, brought by road using standard equipment and installed in a very short time. The packages can be
scaled to the size necessary for the particular community. This would be followed by an intensive set of
training, the formation of sustaining organizations (if necessary, with the help of NGOs), and monitoring.
For the communities, it will represents an opportunity to start some economic activity that would help
attack poverty; and for the utility owning the transmission line, it will result in reduced vandalism of the
line since the communities will have a stake in continuity of service.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The determination of the Kolwezi-Kasumbelesa line in the DRC and the Kasumbalesa-Luano line in
Zambia has examined not only the alternative of no-action but also the possibility of alternative alignments
and of alternative technologies. The present proposal has, in other words, been accepted only after careful
study to minimize resettlement and environmental damage, while also taking into account technical and
economic factors.
The altemative of no-action was rejected because prolongation of the current situation of insecure,
inefficient and expensive power impedes economic development and poverty alleviation efforts. The
proposed project components reflect actual priorities identified by the region for the development of the
interconnected power network and specified in the Integrated Regional Power Masterplan, which has
considered a full range of alternatives. They are a result of a collective effort of all member countries.
DRC. Determination of the alignment of the new transmission lines underwent an extensive study in order
to determine the optimal route from the technical, environmental, social and economic perspectives. The
original planning study for SNEL identified six options for delivering electrical power to southern Africa:
*      Option 1: reconstruct the existing 220kV Karavia - Luano line;
*      Option 2 : construct a new single-circuit 220kV line between Karavia and Luano;
*      Option 3: construct two new 220kV lines between Karavia and Luano;
*      Option 4: construct a new double-circuit 220 kV line between Karavia and Luano;
*      Option 4a: construct a new double-circuit 220 kV line between Karavia and the border and a new
single- circuit 220 kV line from the border to Luano;
*      Option 5: construct a new 330kV line between Karavia and Luano;
*      Option 6: construct a new 330kV line between Kolwezi-Karavia-Luano.
Option 2, which proposes a new 44 km long 220 kV line (with additional 45km in Zambia) line with an
optic cable conumunication system, between Karavia at Lubumbashi and the border near Kasumbalesa, was
selected for several reasons. This option links two substations with the same voltage, thus reducing the
investment cost substantially. It also enables SNEL to realize a long-term goal of electrifying certain rural
communities along the line route. Option 2, in short, is the simplest plan that resolves the various
considerations, including environmental and social concerns, as well as technical and economic matters, at



6
ISDS
reasonable cost.
The proposed alignment of the transmission line required verification because significant shifts in
population had occurred since the time of the original study. Consequently, the consultant, in addition to
the usual documentary research, undertook helicopter inspections of the proposed alignment and of
alternative alignments. The aerial reconnaissance trips were complemented by field visits to the originally
proposed and alternative alignments in order to verify the initial findings. This work determined that the
original alignment would require extensive physical relocation of populations, while an alternative
alignment between Fungurume and Kasumbalesa would greatly reduce the extent of the social impact of the
project. For this reason, SNEL accepted the recommendation of the consultant, and shifted the alignment
to the new routing that would avoid most of the physical relocation of people without greatly increasing the
distance to be traversed by the lines.
SNEL, and its consultant, considered four factors in this decision.
*      Minimize the distance required because, in homogeneous areas, costs rise proportionately with
distance;
*      Take advantage of existing infrastructure and equipment to the fullest extent possible;
Parallel existing routes in order to facilitate access and limit the appearance of new enterprises for
in order to minimize adverse environmental impacts;
*      Avoid zones where conditions might put the feasibility and security of the investment at risk (e.g.,
flood zones, erosion areas, landslide areas, rocky slopes). Reduce any environmental and social disturbance
to an absolute minimum;
*      Avoid built and densely populated areas on the ground that such occupation is incompatible with
electric transmission lines;
*      Avoid isolated areas where vandalism and theft could threaten the integrity of the investment
As a result, the present alignment significantly reduces social, and environmental, concerns to a bare
minimum, while taking into account technical and economic considerations. Notably, only a dozen
structures will now be affected by the alignment, in contrast.to the several hundreds of structures that
would have been lost under the original planning. Also, the extent of permanent and temporary land taking
is basically the same now that SNEL and CEC have agreed to allow farmers to continue subsistance
farming of low-level crops under their lines once construction is complete.
Zambia. The selection of the most appropriate routing for the construction of a new transmission line was
an iterative process that tried to secure the most environmentally acceptable route that is both technically
and economically feasible. The process commenced with the identification of constraints and then looked at
finding a route that avoided those constraints as much as possible.
The starting point was to investigate the route that provided a direct line between the points to be connected
and then identified reasons why this option could not be selected. The major constraint was the need to
avoid completely any sites with a high amenity value such as:
*      Areas of outstanding natural beauty
*      Heritage sites
*      Sites of special scientific interest
*      National parks
*      Recreational areas
In addition, for technical considerations, as well as to reduce the visual impact of any proposed lines,
heavily developed and residential areas were to be avoided as much as possible.



7
Placing of transmission lines within an existing route corridor provided significant advantages both in terms
of reducing visual impact but more importantly in reducing the environmental impact of the project. This
decision was based on the understanding that a wayleave carrying two lines requires less ground area than
two wayleaves each carrying one line. Therefore, the next stage of the iterative process involved looking at
existing lines and wayleaves to see if these can be included for some or all of the proposed new line.
Finally, the process concluded with a detailed analysis of a variety of options to ensure that the best
compromise of all the above factors was adopted.
Line Routing Options Considered. After a detailed desktop review of the possible line routing options,
three potential routes were considered sufficiently viable to warrant a further detailed investigation.
Option A - The Direct Route: This route was identified simply by creating a straight line between the
terminal substations of Luano (Zambia) and Karavia (DRC) and modifying the route of the line to avoid
any significant constraints. This option, therefore, identified the shortest possible theoretical distance that
could be adopted by the Project and was a useful means of identifying the constraints that exist in selecting
an appropriate line route.
Option B - Use of Existing Wayleave: This routing option utilized the space provided within the CEC
wayleave for the existing 220kV Zambia-DRC interconnector. The circuit runs adjacent to the existing
circuit from Luano to the DRC border.
Option C - Southern Routing: Recognizing the reduction of environmental impact arising from the use
of an existing wayleave, this option initially followed the route of the existing wayleaves for the 66kV
transmission line from Luano to Solwezi. After looping round the south of the city of Chingola, the line
route then headed approximately north in a relatively straight direction towards the border on its way to
Karavia.
Findings. Option A was considered not to be feasible due to the fact that the route would run very close to
the town center of Chililabombwe, as well as a tailings dam associated with Konkola mine. In addition, it
would need to cross existing Copperbelt Energy Corporation transmission lines. The visual impact due to
the proximity to residential areas would be much higher, and the line would require several large angle
deviations, as well as a crossing over the main road to Kasumbalesa. A high number of river crossings
would also be required for this route, and the generally wetter ground conditions could lead to increased
environmental damage during the construction phase.
Option B represented an increase in route length of only 2km over the most direct route, and followed the
sparsely populated route of the existing 220kV line. This route would require ground clearing to be
undertaken within the existing wayleave rights of the existing circuit, and would have a low visual impact
due to the terrain covered. This route is least onerous in terms of both river and road crossings, and has
suffered only a minor encroachment of farming activities within the present wayleave.
Option C again used existing wayleaves for part of its route, but represented an increased route distance of
20km over option B. While this route generally runs through sparsely populated areas, it would require a
higher number of road and river crossings than Option B. In addition, this route required a completely new
wayleave to be cleared for a distance of about 40km and an extension of the existing wayleave by about
45m for some 25km. Near the border, this route would traverse a number of farming plots.
In conclusion, route option B mitigated the environmental impact of the project significantly. The route is
efficient to the extent that it is less than 5 percent longer in distance than the direct route from Luano to the



8
ISDS
border crossing. In addition, the siting of the line within the boundaries of an existing wayleave
significantly provides the following benefits:
the line is constructed in an area that has not been significantly developed;
*      the visual impact of the line is reduced;
*      land clearance requirements to accommodate a line within an existing wayleave are significantly
lower than if a completely new wayleave had to be established;
*      the extent of physical relocation and other social impacts were significantly reduced to minimal
levels.
Altemative Technologies: Overhead lines versus underground cables. Further, the advantages of different
technologies, specifically, overhead transmission lines versus underground cables, were examined. Each
option offers distinct advantages, but suffers from distinct disadvantages. While overhead lines impact on
the landscape in rural settings and affect scenery in tourist centers, their impact is more pronounced in
urban settings. Underground cables, by contrast, show impacts only at sealing end points, as well as at
points where cable cooling systems are sited. For overhead lines the only land and habitat really lost is the
land around the tower base and the access routes for construction, whereas the cable option affects the
15-30 m width of the entire cable route. A greater degree of land will be sterilized with an underground
cable due to the restrictions that would need to be placed upon all sub-soil activities as well as the planting
of trees and bushes along the entire route length for safety purposes. An underground option would also
require large areas of land to be set aside to accommodate cable joint bays, and could cause pollution from
cable fluid leaks. Finally, as has been experienced throughout the whole of Africa, the economic case for
the utilization of an underground circuit cannot be normally justified at this voltage level, and this is
certainly the case for this project, as the cost of 220kV underground cable is 15 to 20 times higher than the
equivalent capacity of overhead line. For all of these reasons, the overhead transmission system is
environmentally, socially and economically a better choice.
IH.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental and social safeguard measures will be put in place by each country in the South African
Power Market program. Specifically, in the DRC, the environmental unit within the project management
unit in SNEL will be responsible for implementation of both the environmental management plan and the
resettlement action plan. In Zambia, the Copperbelt Energy Corporation (CEC) will take direct
responsibility for both of these instruments. Overseeing activities in both countries will be the
Environmental Subcommittee of SAPP, which has recently issued specific EIA guidelines for transmission
lines to be followed by the SAPP members.
Environmental Safeguard Issues. Each of the two agencies responsible for implementing the respective
environmental management plans, including specific environmental safeguard issues related to natural
habitat management, will implement some of the measures themselves or will instruct contractors working
on the transmission line to carry out instructions as defined in the respective environmental assessments.
The periodic reports on the implementation of the EMPs will be submitted to the World Bank for review.
Social Safeguard Issues. SNEL in DRC and CEC in Zambia have each adopted a Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) to guide implementation of any necessary land acquisition and resettlement. Each RAP has
been developed in close consultation with the affected populations. At the discretion of the World Bank,
the status reports on the implementation of the RAPs will be submitted to the World Bank for review.
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



9
ISDS
The key stakeholders include those proposing the project, those benefiting from the project, and those
affected by the project.
The project proponents include: the Governments of the countries involved in the interconnection, the
SADC national power utilities organized in the SAPP, and independent power producers. These
proponents are in constant communication over the design and implementation of the program and its
sequencing. The power utilities, through the SAPP Subcommittees (including Environmental
Subcommittee) and Working Groups, have directed project design and preparation. Subsequently, the
SAPP Coordination Center will be actively involved in implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
project, including safeguard issues.
The project beneficiaries, the customers who will benefit from improved power supply, are regularly
canvassed by their utility companies. The customers include both household consumers and industrial
consumers, who are represented by their trade groups. The utility companies thus receive the views of
consumers through individual and organized contacts, and can represent these views in regional forums.
The third group of stakeholders, the people affected by the project initiative, is the group of most concern
here. Their views and assistance have been -- and will be -- solicited throughout the project. During the
initial field reconnaissance, project teams contacted local leaders, and organized community meetings with
people along the proposed alignment in order to determine the optimal alignment and to identify owners and
users of affected parcels of land. In addition, people adversely affected by the project (PAPs) have been --
and will be -- advised regularly and in a timely manner of project developments, e.g. the sequencing of
construction, the negotiation of compensation, the lodging of complaints.
In the DRC, project preparation involved, first, contacting local authorities to inform them about the
project and to obtain certain general information about their areas. These initial meetings took place
between 31 January and 3 February 2003. Subsequently, in the second phase of the consultations, the
village populations themselves were convened for open meetings in order to determine their concerns and
hopes. These general meetings were followed by individual meetings with particular affected persons in
order to determine their particular concerns. These more substantive consultations took place between 12
and 22 March 2003.
In Zambia, an initial scoping of study issues was conducted with stakeholders. The project then undertook
a baseline survey to establish the existing ecological and socio-economic situation in the project area. The
Institute of Environmental Management was active in the study area from November 2002 to January 2003
in order to carry out this work. IEM collected primary data on the social and economic factors through
visits to the project area, and conducted interviews with the various stakeholders including council officials,
government departments, the affected farmers or individuals within the project area. This general study of
environmental and social conditions was followed by a comprehensive baseline survey of the project area in
February and March 2003 in order to determine environmental and social impacts, such as the exact extent
of physical relocation required.
Similarly, PAPs will have the opportunity to participate fully in the implementation of the program. For
example, they will be able to negotiate compensation rates for their lost assets and may file grievances if
they are unsatisfied, including compensation for unanticipated damages during construction.
Finally, prior to appraisal, the Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Plan, and
Resettlement Action Plan for each activity has been disclosed publicly at the World Bank InfoShop and



10
ISDS
made available at locales convenient to the affected population and NGOs, with at least the executive
summary translated into local language so that everyone may be appraised of, and comment on, the
proposed initiatives. Moreover, each RAP contains provisions that stipulate local populations are to be
consulted throughout the program, that compensation rates are to be published and made available, that
PAPs can negotiate the estimated values of their lost assets and have the right to lodge grievances with
impartial parties, and that payment to the PAPs will be made in a convenient and transparent manner to
them.
E. Safeguiards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermnediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/6/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           5/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            5/13/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         6/4/2003
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               4/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           5/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            5/13/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. Due to



11
ISDS
technical limitations of the system, the table above contains only the dates for the Zambian ETA, EMP and
RAP. The dates of review and disclosure for the DRC EIA, EMP and RAP are provided below. All dates
are actual.
Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan
Date of receipt by the Bank              05/05/2003
Date of in-country disclosure            06/02/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop           06/02/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of
the EA to the Executive Directors        06/04/2003
Resettlement Action Plan
Date of receipt by the Bank              05/05/2003
Date of in-country disclosure            06/02/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop           06/02/2003
Signed and submitted bv       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Ludmilla Butenko                            09/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  John A. Boyle                          10/01/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                         10/01/2003
Sector Manager                Yusupha B. Crookes                          09/30/2003



