Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No:  AC321 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/11/2003 
  
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: ALGERIA 
Project ID: P077753 
Project Name: Algeria Municipal Waste 
Management  
Task Team Leader:  Hocine Chalal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 06/15/2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 25 
Estimated Board Date: 09/23/2004 
GEF amount ($m.): 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
PCF amount ($m.): 
Lending Instrument: SIL 
Sector: Environment 
Theme: Urban Environment 
Other financing amounts ($m.) by source: 
TBD 
 
 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Sherif Arif (environment) and Mohamed Arbi Ben 
Achour (Social) 
 
B.  Project Objective 
[from section 3 of PCN] 
The overall goal 
of the proposed project is
 to contribute to the improvement of the 
urban environment in selected municipalities through the introduction of integrated 
and sustainable municipal waste management systems.  
The specific development objective 
of the project is the
 establishment of an integrated 
waste management system in at least two pilot municipalities in Algeria.  
The following 
indicators, that will be monitored by an independent entity for 
benchmarking purposes,
 are proposed to follow up PDO progress:  
\01\02
Number of people benefiting from integrated waste management as a 
percentage of total population 
\01\02
Number of people in poor areas benefiting from integrated waste 
management and as a percentage of total population 
\01\02
Quantity of waste properly treated and/or disposed of in sanitary landfills and 
as a percentage of total production  
\01\02
Level of cost recovery (user charge collection efficiency) 
\01\02
Percentage of waste managed by the private sector (collection, 
transportation/transfer and discharge/treatment) 
\01\02
Reduction of number of complaints from users. 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description 
[from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The project will include two separate components: 
An institutional and regulatory strengthening component:
 The objective of this 
component is to strengthen the managerial, technical and financial capacity of 
entities responsible for solid waste management at the national level and in 
selected municipalities. This component will include; 
(i)
 consultant services to 
prepare the development and implementation of integrated waste management 
plans that focuses on creating appropriate institutional incentives for sustainable 
service provisioning; 
(ii)
 training programs in all aspects of integrated waste 
management; 
(iii)
 design and implementation of a communication strategy that 
enhances public disclosure of information on solid waste and sanitation issues 
among municipalities and residents; and 
(iv)
 provision of office equipment, 
vehicles and equipment to conducting training and awareness campaigns, only 
after demonstrable improvements in the urban environment have been 
independently validated. 
Pilot investments at the municipal level:
  The objective of this component is to 
demonstrate the application of integrated waste management in one or two 
selected municipalities
1
 based on criteria to be developed during project 
preparation. These investments will include; 
(i)
 purchase of equipment for 
collection, transport, transfer and treatment of municipal solid waste, 
(ii)
 civil 
works for the establishment of sanitary landfills and/or rehabilitation of dump 
sites; 
(iii)
 financing of operation and maintenance costs for an interim period in 
order to attract the private sector in landfill operations; 
(iv)
 financing output-
based aid operation in poor and destitute areas, and 
(v)
 financing engineering and 
TA services for the supervision of implementation of the integrated waste 
management systems and for the establishment of a cost recovery system. 
 
The Borrower will be the Ministry of Finance and the Implementing Agency could be either the 
Ministry of Interior and Local Government (MILG) (which could in turn devolve some 
responsibility to participating wilayas) or the Ministry of Land Use Planning and Environment 
(MLUPE) subject to confirmation during project preparation. It is expected that the Ministry of 
Finance will provide the funds through grants to the participating wilayas. The Bank has 
proposed to the Algerian Government that the two pilot municipalities of Annaba (northeastern 
part of Algeria) and Tlemcen (western part of Algeria) be considered as potential candidates in 
view of their readiness to implement integrated waste management, the availability of public land 
for sanitary landfills, and the severity of the municipal waste management problems. 
 
The project is classified as an Environmental Category A project in accordance with O.P. 4.01. 
An environmental and social assessment will be conducted during project preparation. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The institutional strengthening component will take place both at the central and local level in 
participating governorates and municipalities. The investment component will take place in a 
couple of municipalities not yet identified and which will have to satisfy appropriate eligibility 
criteria. 
 
                                                          
 
1
 Here, municipality should be understood as a main municipality and the surrounding smaller 
municipalities engaged in an inter-municipal arrangement. 
Page  3
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
[from PCN] 
Given the severity and magnitude of municipal waste management issues, the Government now 
considers solid waste management as one of the most important development priorities for the 
country, and has, consequently, taken several measures to address this situation. 
The Government started by enacting a new Waste Management Law in December 2001, then 
proceeded with the preparation of municipal waste management master plans and implementation 
of emergency measures (replacement of waste collection equipment, preparation of sanitary 
landfills) in the 40 largest municipalities. The Budget law for 2002 nearly doubled the level of the 
waste user charges applied to households, retail stores, and small industries. The Government 
extended the institutional setup through the establishment of a parastatal agency in charge of 
promoting integrated solid waste management and providing assistance to municipalities in that 
respect. The Government also subsequently prepared an Operational Strategy for municipal waste 
management in order to correct the dysfunctions of the priority program (2001-2003) mentioned 
above.  
However, despite considerable efforts on the policy front there remain several key elements of the 
Operational Strategy that have not yet been adequately addressed by the Government: 
\01fi
Linking safe disposal infrastructure construction with financially sustainable 
solid waste collection systems; 
\01fi
Creating incentives for SWM collection organizations to undertake their tasks in 
a professional manner. 
   
These difficulties, which are common to all developing countries, are traceable to lack of 
incentives in municipal organizations to perform their traditional role of managing conservancy 
services effectively.   
 
In the Algeria context there are additional important obstacles impeding private sector 
participation, such as low economic strength and viability of municipalities, weak local private 
company ability to respond to tenders, absence of incentive instruments, risk of expensive 
contracts and monopolies of public sector entities, and lack of clarity in the bidding procedures 
for waste services contracts. Other serious obstacles include the lack of recognition of the 
informal sector, inadequate community awareness and inappropriate technical means which 
impedes waste segregation at the source. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[very concise summary]
 
Page  4
 
 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01)
An overall environmental assessment will 
be prepared and 
will include the impacts 
generated by the Project at the 
different stages of the ISWM process; 
i.e waste collection, waste transport 
and waste  treatment (if any) and 
disposal. It will also address the closing 
of the old dump
 
The EMP will also 
cover the mitigating and monitoring 
measures of the different stage of the 
waste management process.
  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
A involuntary resettlement framework will 
be developed during project preparation 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
X
 A   
!
B  
!
 C   
!
 FI   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
!
 S
1
   
 X
 S
2
  
!
 S
3
   
!
 S
F
   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[from 
PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard 
issues and prepare to mitigate them? 
An overall environmental assessment will be prepared and 
will include the impacts 
generated by the Project at the different stages of the ISWM process; i.e waste collection, waste 
transport and waste  treatment (if any) and disposal. It will also address the closing of the old 
dump
 
The EMP will also cover the mitigating and monitoring measures of the different stage of 
the waste management process. 
 
A voluntary resettlement plan will be prepared for the project. 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements 
be addressed? 
Consultation and disclosure requirements will be addressed in compliance with the local 
regulation regarding environmental assessment as well as in compliance with the Banks 
guidelines (O.P. 4.01) 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation : 
The Bank staff  who will review the EIA are: 
Sherif Arif 
Panneer Selvam 
Keith Rennie 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 04/15/2004 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Hocine CHALAL 
 
Date 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
Allan ROTMAN  
 
Date: 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
John Keith RENNIE  
 
Date: 
 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Sherif K. ARIF  
 Date  
 
Comments 
 
 
Sector Manager 
Vijay JAGANNATHAN  
 Date  
 
Comments 
 
 
 
WB11690 
P:\!UNITS\MNSRE\ARIF\ENVIRON\ISDS PCN Stage Template.doc 
July 16, 2003 1:55 PM
 
