Report No. 23792
Report No: I075664 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ALGERIA         Project ID: P075664
Project: ICT DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT          Task Team Leader: Paul Noumba Um
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 15, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m): 22.50
Bank Approval: January 7, 2003 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: CITPO     Sector: CC - Telecommunications & Informatics
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project objective is to create an enabling environment to : (i)
improve access to efficient and affordable information and communications
technology (ICT) services (see note in next paragraph for definition);
(ii) facilitate private sector growth in the ICT sector; (iii) improve the
competitiveness of national firms; and (iv) enhance the efficiency of the
delivery of government services. The project will support the Government
of Algeria's (GoAl) program to : (i) strengthen the ICT policy and
regulatory framework; (ii) leverage ICT to promote business and government
competitiveness; (iii) support "net-enterprise" development; and (iv)
strengthen communications strategy and capacity building.
(Note: ICT services are defined as hardware, software, networks, and
media for collection, storage, processing, transmission, and presentation
of information in the form of voice, data, text, and images, and in this
project they include telecommunications, information technology, and
postal services.)
The project will not entail or cover any civil work (building, floor, or
land acquisition). With regard to the Algiers Technology Park, the
proposed project will be limited to providing technical assistance and
advisory services. Hence OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) will not
be triggered.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
Strengthen ICT policy and regulatory framework
Leverage ICT to promote business and government competitiveness
"Net-enterprise" development program
Strengthen communications strategy and capacity building
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely



to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
NA.,
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: NA.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
NA.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
NA.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
NA.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
NA.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
NA.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
-2-



Key stakeholders will be involved in the preparation and implementation of
the National Information Society Program.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Paul Noumba Um  02/19/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Hocine Chalal/Person/World Bank 02/25/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Paloma Anos Casero/Person/World Bank     02/25/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     02/25/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Pierre A. Guislain       02/19/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-3 -



