Report No. 23495
Report No: I066199 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/29/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: AZERBAIJAN      Project ID: P066199
Global Supplemental ID: P077031
Project: Shah-Dag Rural Environment Project      Task Team Leader: Konrad Von
Ritter
Appraisal Date: May 15, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 3, 2002 IDA Amount ($m): 7.00
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.00
Managing Unit: ECSSD     Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective is for mountain communities and local
authorities in the Shah Dag Greater Caucasus area to adopt environmentally
responsible practices of forestry, grazing, and energy consumption. This
will serve as a demonstration for how environmentally responsible natural
resource management can improve living conditions in rural communities.
The global objective is to conserve biodiversity in situ, reverse land
degradation, and improve energy supply and efficiency in the Shah-Dag area
of the Azerbaijan Caucasus Mountains. This would be achieved through
promoting the adoption of integrated ecosystem management (IEM) concepts
in policy, planning, and implementation of development activities (GEF OP
12).
This project is being developed in close communication with the local
population. If successful, it will showcase sustainable natural resource
management practices and convincingly demonstrate tangible local benefits,
such that the local population will be motivated to adopt and replicate
these practices.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would support integrated ecosystem management in the Shah Dag
area including investments in forest, range and protected area management,
support for rural energy supply and conservation, capacity building, and
project management. The project includes the following components:
Component 1: Support Integrated Forest, Range, and Protected Areas
Management. This component supports conservation and sustainable use of
forest, range, and bioresources in the Shah-Dag mountain region through
support to: (i) protected areas management activities and (ii) improved
forest and range management in and around the protected area.
i) Improved protected areas management. This activity would support
improved protected areas management in the Azeri Caucasus Mountains ($0.0
million IDA, $ 2.5 million GEF, $0.4 million other). The project
activities are as follows:
(a) Technical and social studies and consultations for the creation and
gazettement of the proposed Shah Dag National Park area. The proposed park



would be created around five existing protected areas (Ismailli and Gusar
national reserves and Ismailli, Pirkuli and Altiagaj state sanctuaries).
Preliminary studies have been carried out on the areas of highest
biodiversity value and threat, and have recommended that the park cover
the altitudinal gradient from Shah-Dag Peak to the Caspian Sea, comprising
an area of over 100,000 hectares. However, further work and consultations
are needed to define the boundaries of the proposed park.
(b) Participatory protected areas management plan and establishment of
Shah Dag National Park. The project would prepare and implement a
management plan to improve protection and sustainable use of biodiversity
in the proposed Shah Dag National Park through: (1) improved public
sector management of biodiversity from technical, social, and financial
perspectives; (2) support to community-based user groups serving as
operational focal points for collaborative protected areas management and
capacity building exercises; (3) sustainable uses within the national park
and a transparent system for their regulation; (4) capacity building in
various aspects of protected areas management, (5) investments in
infrastructure to support park management and visitors; and (5) piloting a
revenue generation system for financing recurrent costs.
(c) Protected area plan for the Azeri Caucasus. The project would finance
technical studies and consultations needed to prepare and adopt a
landscape level network plan for protected areas in the Azeri Greater
Caucasus. The network plan would propose the locations and management
prescriptions for habitat connections between existing and proposed
protected areas. The project would finance key elements of the plan in
the Shah Dag region, including activities related to the creation and
operation of Shah Dag National Park (Components la, lb) and prescriptions
for improved forest and range management in habitat corridors identified
in the Shah Dag region. Network planning would be coordinated on the
regional level with proposed activities in Georgia and Armenia.
ii) Improved forest and range management. The project would finance
targeted investments to improve productivity of forest and range
management in and around the proposed Shah Dag National Park ($ 1.95
million IDA, $0.4 million GEF, $0.2 million other). These would include:
(a) Update and implement management plans for forest and range land
management. The Department of Forestry and local/regional governments
manage 150,000 hectares of state forest lands and 100,000 ha of
rangelands, respectively, in five districts surrounding the proposed Shah
Dag National Park. The project would finance investments needed to
improve productivity and ensure a sustainable supply of fuelwood and
summer pasture and fodder, and other ecological services (e.g., non-wood
forest products and watershed protection). These investments would be
implemented through: (1) support to the Department of Forestry; (2)
support to pilot community based management of former kolkhoz forests,
involving community groups, municipalities, and private leasors; and (3)
small grants to community groups and user groups in exchange for
afforestation and other works. (GEF funds not requested for this
sub-component)
(b) Promote land and forest and range resource use tenure. The project
would develop and implement mechanisms to improve access and transparency
-2 -



of leasing arrangements by local communities to forest and range resources
outside of the proposed Shah Dag National Park, and for sustainable use
zones inside the park. GEF funds would be used for surveys and
consultations necessary to identify forest stands and pastures with high
biodiversity values which should receive special management considerations
for their use.
iii) Eco-tourism Development. Eco-tourism has the potential to generate
local employment and to contribute to the sustainable financing of the
national park. The project would help create favorable conditions for the
development of the eco-tourism potential for the Shah Dag area through
financing an eco-tourism strategy, capacity building for local tourism,
nature guides, and handicraft production and marketing, and basic tourism
infrastructure. The project will closely work with the private sector and
NGOs already active in this field, as well as the Ministry of Tourism and
the Cultural Heritage Project which supports sites near the project area.
($ 0.5 million IDA, $0.5 million GEF, $0.1 million other)
Component 2.   Support to Rural Clean Fuel Supply and Energy
Conservation.
This component supports measures to reduce unsustainable fuel wood use by
creating an enabling environment for switching to cleaner fuels and using
energy more efficiently. The component will finance the (i) preparation of
a rural energy strategy and public awareness campaign, (ii) implementation
of demonstration projects to introduce LPG and other clean fuels in off-NG
network locations, (iii) higher efficiency wood and gas stoves for rural
home owners; and (iv) a public-private partnership to build and operate a
mini-hydro.
i)    Develop Rural Energy Strategy and public awareness campaign. This
activity would support the preparation of a rural energy strategy for the
project area, led by the Ministry of Energy and involving local
authorities, energy suppliers, and consumers. The strategy would provide
guidance, inter alia, on fuel wood markets (demand, supply, local income,
and relative share in forest degradation), rural household energy
consumption patterns, economic and financial analysis of various
alternatives to fuel wood under different price and subsidy scenarios,
environmental externalities, and how to take them into consideration when
setting rural energy tariffs and determining the boundaries of an
economically viable gas distribution network. The strategy should also
recommend demand side management measures, including tariff adjustments
and energy efficiency measures. Key messages would be translated into a
public awareness campaign directed to the rural population in the project
area using a range of media, including TV, radio, newspaper, and a rural
distance learning center. The Project team would rely on the SAC II and
the ESMAP funded work to drive the macro economic and energy sector
restructuring dialogue. The process of strategy formulation will help
build institutional capacity at national and local level needed to
implement the project and ensure its sustainability in the operational
phase. (IDA $250,000/GEF $100,000)
ii) Introduce clean heating fuels, such as LPG, in off-network locations.
The project would finance measures to create an enabling environment for
households and public entities to switch from fuelwood as their principal
source of heating energy to cleaner fuels. In locations where centralized
-3 -



distribution of Natural Gas through a network is not economically
feasible, the project would focus on the introduction of decentralized
distribution of LPG or other clean fuels identified during preparation.
Specifically, the project would provide matching grants to households and
public entities to convert building to the use of LPG or other clean
heating fuels. It will also provide matching funds to build local storage
infrastructure, such as gas storage tanks, in a number of pilot
communities that show an active interest in participating. The
demonstration project would be based on a market assessment of potential
demand and supply of clean fuels and extensive consultations with
potential users and suppliers of LPG. Production and distribution of LPG
and other clean fuels is expected to be undertaken by the private sector.
(IDA US$2 million)
iii)   Improve energy efficiency through higher efficiency stoves and
demand side management. The project would help create demand for
improved energy efficiency in households and public buildings through
public information and financing of demonstration projects in the project
area. Specifically, the project would provide matching grants to
households and public entities: (a) in communities not connected to the
natural gas network, to replace inefficient wood stoves with energy
efficient ones. This would potentially reduce the cost of energy for poor
households, the time household members spend collecting fuelwood, and
reduce fuelwood demand; and (b) in communities served by the natural gas
network, to replace old inefficient, and unsafe gas furnaces and
appliances with more efficient ones. In these areas, the project would
also provide matching funding for demand side management measures, such as
the introduction of gas metering and transition towards consumption based
payment for natural gas. During project preparation, agreement would be
reached on an appropriate level of grant funding to households and to
public entities based on expected environmental benefits, incremental
costs, and affordability. GEF funding for capital costs would only be in
form of time-limited subsidies for initial demonstration, necessary to
promote acceptance of technologies, with the expectation that these
subsidies must decline over time and that markets for higher efficiency
stoves or DSM measures would be sustainable after the project without
subsidies. It is expected that the improved stoves would be manufactured
in Azerbaijan, possibly locally as a means of economic development. The
project would provide technical assistance to support transfer and
adaptation of energy efficiency technology to Azerbaijan and to prepare a
bankable investment proposal for the manufacturing of energy efficient
stoves in Azerbaijan, possibly for financing under an IFC small credit
program. (GEF US$ 1 million)
iv)     Promote private-sector participation in the generation and
distribution of clean energy from mini-hydropower plant. The project would
finance technical assistance to develop the regulatory and contractual
framework for private sector participation in the construction and
operation of a mini-hydro power plant. The project could also help finance
part of the investment cost (IDA). GEF support in form of a loan guarantee
will be considered to enhance the credit worthiness of the project
proponent when seeking a commercial credit. During project preparation,
the proposal will be carefully reviewed as to its financial and technical
viability, to ensure that such investment would remain viable even when
the current gross deficiencies in the power generation and distribution
sector have been resolved. (GEF$0.5 million and IDA 0.5 million)
- 4 -



Component 3. Environmental Management Capacity Building and Environmental
Education. This component would assist the newly created Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources to establish capacity in three areas:
(i) protected area management, (ii) forestry management, and (iii)
environmental management, including review of EAs. Sustained improvements
in the environment can only be achieved if the public is aware of
environmental problems and possible solutions. The project would
therefore, in close collaboration with the Education Project, (i) support
the development of environmental education programs and their integration
into the primary and secondary school curriculum and (ii) support the
establishment of a rural distance learning center in the project area, for
the capacity building of local authorities, park administrators, and
community leaders, and to complement college level education in the field
of environment. The center would be based in a local learning institution
to be selected during preparation. (IDA US$1.0; GEF US$ 0.2)
Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring. The project will finance
the operation of a central PIU. This PIU has already been established
under the Ministry of Environment for the implementation of the Urgent
Environmental Investment Project. It is experienced with Bank financial
and procurement procedures but will need to expand its capacity in the
area of Natural Resource Management. The Project would also finance the
establishment and operation of a local Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
that will be located in the project area and will be responsible for
day-to-day implementation of the project and monitoring of project
performance. The PCU would have experts for both the natural resource and
the energy aspects of the project. It would report to the PIU for
administrative purposes (disbursements, procurement, reporting and would
coordinate with respective local and national natural resource management
and energy authorities on policy matters. (IDA US$0.8; GEF US$0.2).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The proposed project area is located in northeastern Azerbaijan in a
watershed that drains to the Caspian Sea. In its center is the Greater
Caucasus Mountain Range, with Shah Dag as its highest peak on Azeri
territory. To the East lies the Caspian Sea, to the North it borders with
the Russian Federation, to the West and to the South it reaches down to
the foot hills of the Greater Caucasus Mountains. The proposed park and
its surrounding buffer zones are situated in the territories of Gusar,
Guba, Divichi, Khachmaz, Ismailli and Shemakha districts. The project
would be implemented in the Shah Dag region of the Azeri Caucasus
Mountains, an area of about 300,000 hectares. An estimated 75,000 to
100,000 people live in 51 villages close to or within the future park
boundaries, which still need to be elaborated as part of the planning
process supported by the project. Towns like Guba and Gusar will be part
of the buffer zone, with an estimated total population of 500,000. The
proposed park and buffer zone forms a microcatchment which serves as a
conservation unit containing essential elements of the Caucasus mountain
ecosystem.
Capacity building activities in environmental management would also be
implemented in Baku.
-5-



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The entire project is an environmental mitigation plan as it
aims to: (i) protect watersheds and reduce deforestation by promoting
energy conservation, the use of alternative (non-wood) energy sources, and
improved forest management; (ii) promote biodiversity conservation and
protected area management; (iii) establish community based forestry and
rangeland management, and local participation in protected area
management. The project's outcomes are environmentally positive, and the
project is classified as Environmental Category B. An environmental
management plan (EMP), including a monitoring plan with local and global
environmental impact indicators, would be prepared during project
preparation to address the following issues:
Small scale construction of buildings and visitor use facilities, and
recreational activities within the proposed Shah Dag National Park;
Rehabilitation of a rural mini-hydro power station (less than 1 MW);
small scale construction of clean fuels (e.g. LPG) distribution and
storage infrastructure at the village level;
Small scale improvements in forest management infrastructure including
field offices and rehabilitation or maintenance of existing access roads.
Project preparation will undertake economic and social analysis to ensure
balance and targeting of project interventions to support improved
efficiency in use of fuel wood and its replacement with alternative energy
sources so as to most effectively remove incentives to harvest fuel wood
unsustainably. This would be augmented by participatory preparation of
forest and natural resource management plans.
Due to the lack of the scale of environmental impacts of infrastructure
developments the environmental category rating should be revisited
following pre-appraisal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environment: With regard to the environmental assessment, the project is
rated environmental category B. An environmental assessment and
- 6 -



environmental management plan will be prepared by the Borrower during
project preparation, and filed with the Infoshop prior to departure of the
appraisal mission. With regard to the Forestry, the project is consistent
with OP3.6. The project would:(i) reduce deforestation by promoting
energy conservation, the use of alternative (non-wood) energy sources, and
improved forest management, including afforestation; (ii) promote
watershed protection conservation and biodiversity conservation; (iii)
promote community forestry. The project region does not contain primary
moist tropical forest, and commercial logging will not be promoted or
financed under the project.
Involuntary Resettlement: While NO actual involuntary resettlement would
take place under the project, there is a likelihood that the involuntary
resettlement OD will be triggered due to the establishment of protected
areas because of possible involuntary restriction of access to legally
designated park. A resettlement plan, as such, is not required. Project
preparation and implementation envisages extensive consultation with and
participation of local population, and public awareness and outreach
campaign, which will be designed to build a clear understanding by all
stakeholders of the expected impacts of the project, and to involve the
affected population in the project design as well as of mitigating
measures, if any.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Involuntary Resettlement: The proposed protected area will minimize the
number of villages inside the area, in an effort minimize the constraints
placed on local resource use such as grazing animals and collecting fuel
wood. Where these activities do exist in the protected area boundary
traditional natural resource user rights will be recognized and
rationalized. If rationalization imposes transactions costs on households,
these costs will be financed under the project. Individuals that engage in
activities that pose a direct threat to the biodiversity of the park, such
as hunting, and depend on this activity for their livelihood, will be
offered training as wildlife guides and other alternative income earning
opportunities.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The alternatives analysis will include: (i) 'no project'; and (ii) a lower
intensity project(i.e., small total project cost).
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environment: The Borrower will be responsible for preparation of the EA
and EMP, which will be financed through the PHRD grant for project
preparation. The procurement plan indicates that the preparation unit
(within the MENR) will contract an international specialist in
environmental impact analysis.
Involuntary Resettlement: The borrower will be requested, as part of
project preparation, to prepare a "process framework" acceptable to the
- 7 -



Bank describing the participatory process whereby potentially affected
populations will participate in the design of the project and would be
compensated in case of restrictions to natural resource use as described
in OP 4.12.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include mountain communities and local authorities in
the buffer zone around the proposed Shah Dag protected area, as well as
the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and the Ministry of
Energy. During the project preparation, stakeholders will be involved in
the design of the project rationale, thereby building ownership for all
activities that the project supports from early stages. Consultations and
focus group with the local population have already been initiated during
project identification. These groups will be actively involved in social
assessment consulted as part of the EA and EMP preparation process. The
details of stakeholder analyses are described in the Para 6.5 of the PCD,
"Issues Requiring Special Attention" Section.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      7/1/2002        Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
- 8 -



Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Konrad Von Ritter       October 4, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Phillip Brylski/Person/World Bank        October 1,
2001 Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Project Safeguards Specialists 3: Approved by:
Name    Date Regional Safeguards Coordinator:          Bernard Baratz  01-10-02 Sector
Manager/Director:         Jane E. Holt    01-11-02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
Lucy Njuguna
W:\PIDs January 18, 2002\I066199.txt
January 16, 2002 12:13 PM
9



