Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: AC312 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 21, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P083341 
Project Name: Power Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader: Bjorn Hamso 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 40 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Regional integration (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source:                Borrower cofinancing 
7.4 $m. 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The primary objective of the project is to improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of electricity supply in 
Azerbaijan by financing investments that improve the management and performance of the high-voltage 
transmission network.  Reliable, cost-effective electricity supply will help to support social infrastructure and small-
scale and large-scale economic development, and at the same time reduce the fiscal burden of ensuring affordable 
electricity supply to low-income customers. 
 
Since the project has a focus on management of the high-voltage system (SCADA, energy management, metering, 
telecom), it will also facilitate expanded energy trade in the region. 
 
The key performance indicators that will be used to assess the fulfillment of the project’s development objectives are 
(i) reduction in transmission losses; (ii) reduction in the average fuel consumption per unit of electricity supply; and 
(iii) increase in the regularity and availability of wholesale power to the distribution companies. 
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
Following a countrywide blackout in July 2002, the Government has been increasingly concerned about power 
system reliability, and thus asked for assistance from the Bank.  It suits the Bank well to support investments in the 
transmission
 system which provide system reliability as well as increased cost efficiency.  The distribution license 
holders would preferably provide urgent investments in power 
distribution
.  Investments in the power 
generation
 
sector has higher risks relating to development of consumption and capacity requirements – and, nevertheless, is a 
sector that is more attractive for private investors. 
Page  2
 
 
 
The first project component (tentatively $25 mill.) would finance 
modern power dispatch
, and would include 
design, installation and operator training for a comprehensive SCADA/Energy Management System, covering the 
transmission network, substations and generating plants operated by Azerenergy.  This would include a master 
station at the National Dispatch Center in Baku, and 39 remote terminal units at substations and generating stations.  
In addition to the SCADA software and terminals, the component will finance the supporting telecommunications 
network and upgraded metering where necessary.  With these improvements, Azerenergy would overcome its 
considerable difficulties in operating the network in a stable, efficient manner, and it should be possible to defer 
capacity additions, reduce line losses, and to optimize the dispatch of power plants so as to reduce supply costs. 
 
The second component of the project would finance other urgent 
system rehabilitation
 in substations and/or 
transmission lines upgrades (tentatively $19 mill.).  The feasibility study will establish rehabilitation priorities, their 
costs and benefits, including assessment of environmental impact and development of environmental mitigation 
plan, procurement packaging, and implementation schedule. 
 
The third and fourth components would finance 
technical assistance
 for project implementation ($2.0 mill.) and 
incremental operating costs
 for the PIU ($0.6 mill.).  All components add up to about $47 mill., of which $40 mill. 
is planned for the IBRD loan.  
 
The overall size of the IBRD loan should be finalized during project preparation.  The simplicity of the project 
design, as briefly described above, is attractive in that Azerenergy would be fully in charge of all components.  
Nevertheless, the Bank’s project team should consider whether there are other high-priority investments or TA for 
the energy sector that could be rolled into this lending operation. EBRD and IBRD may share PIU resources for 
their respective lending operations with Azerenergy, but these and other known projects are not sufficiently 
interrelated to justify a co-financing approach. 
 
A regular investment lending operation is most suitable for the described Bank financing support to Azerenergy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
A significant share of the investments will take place at the Central Dispatch Center in Baku. Other investments will 
take place at up to 39 locations throughout the country (at substations and power generation plants).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The Government and Azerenergy (executing agency) have executed several IFI-financed projects (EBRD, KfW, 
JBIC) in the power sector.  The World Bank has no project experience with Azerenergy. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
X 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
 
 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
 
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Safeguard issues are benign and likely limited to environmental issues during construction. The Borrower will 
prepare an Environmental Management Plan and provide information to the public during project preparation. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
A public consultation meeting should be organized to discuss the draft Environmental 
Assessment with the stakeholders, and the Environmental Assessment should be disclosed in the 
country (in local language). 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
The safeguards review meeting for the PCN  pointed to typical environmental issues for this type 
project that the project team should attend to.  The project team should also look at the 
environmental aspects of the current operations along any existing transmission corridor that 
would be subject of rehabilitation under the project, and see if any improvements are needed. 
The institutional capacity of the relevant agencies to implement the Environmental Assessment 
recommendations and the Environmental Management Plan should be assessed and necessary 
institutional strengthening and training measures included in the project.   
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
December 2003.
 
