                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                              Report No: AC135
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/27/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BANGLADESH                                          Project ID: P075346
Project: Road Sector Reform Project                          Task Team Leader: Navaid A. Qureshi
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 1, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 17, 2005                                  IDA Amount ($m): 192.00
Managing Unit: SASEI                                         Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                              development (P); Other public sector governance (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the Project is sustainable delivery of a safe and efficient major road network system.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Physical Component.The physical components include network preservation, network improvement, and
highway safety enforcement sub-components. (i) The Network Preservation sub-component will finance
rehabilitation and strengthening of about 1000 km of roads and 4000 meters of bridges. The civil works will
be carried out on existing carriageways (without substantial upgrading or widening), and will include road
safety improvements identified through a corridor safety audit. The specific roads and bridges to be
improved will be identified through a feasibility study, on the basis of a network strategic analysis, the
available resource envelope and a local consultation process. To the extent possible, preservation works will
be concentrated on selected high priority corridors or zones to maximize development impact and avoid
spreading resources too thinly across the country. (ii) The Network Improvement sub-component will
finance widening, upgrading and safety improvements of about 150 km of existing road links (including
some bridges). The specific links and bridges will be identified through a feasibility study. The actual
financing split between components (i) and (ii) will be firmed up once the results of feasibility studies are
available. (iii) The Highway Safety Enforcement sub-component will provide equipment and logistical
support for establishing an effective Highway Safety Patrol. It is envisioned that this will be housed under
the MOC, as proposed in the National Land Transport Policy. The design of this sub-component will build
on successful models developed elsewhere in the South Asia Region.

Policy & Institutional Component. The policy support and institutional strengthening component
will support (a) implementation of key policy reforms and (b) provide advisory assistance and
capacity building support for various institutional strengthening activities to be implemented by the
Ministry of Communications (MOC) and Roads & Highways Department (RHD).
MOC Sub-component: MOC will (i) establish a secure and stable road maintenance funding and
management arrangement; (ii) undertake a Road Network Master Plan Study; and (iii) establish and
operationalize a Highway Safety Patrol;
RHD Sub-component: RHD will (i) implement RHD reorganization; (ii) commercialize equipment pool and
workshops; (iii) strengthen asset management practices, (iv) initiate corridor management approaches, (v)
improve financial management system and procurement practices, (vi) strengthen Environmental
Management and Resettlement capacity; and (vii) develop second generation Institutional Reforms. .

                                                        2
                                                                                                         ISDS



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Location and design of roads in Bangladesh are often influenced by two key factors: the physiography of the
country and the high population density. With the exception of Chittagong Hills in the southeast and the
low hills of Sylhet in the northeast, Bangladesh consists mostly of a broad deltaic plain (about 80 percent of
the landmass) with elevations seldom exceeding 15 meters above sea level. Larger parts of the country are
routinely flooded during the monsoon and drained by some 700 rivers. Most roads are traditionally
constructed on embankments from borrow material and require extensive cross-drainage structures ranging
from small culverts to major bridges. Thus, hydrology and drainage are in general the defining factors with
respect to environmental impacts associated with the roads. However, as the civil works will mostly consist
of rehabilitation and improvement of existing roads, the adverse environment and social impacts are unlikely
to be significant. The extent and magnitude of the impacts, which are likely to vary in terms of physical
locations of the selected roads and the socioeconomic characteristics of the would-be affected people, will
be determined through Environmental and Social Assessments.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The physical components of the project ( network preservation and network improvement), and
the proposed privatization of RHD's equipment pool and workshops will require environmental assessment
and mitigation measures that may vary in their significance, scope and content. The EA has been classified
as category B, since the project is not expected to finance any sub-project that alters existing land use
irreversibly or encroaches on wetlands and other sensitive areas (no new bypasses or road links on new
ROW). However, while improving the road, there may be small realignments to improve the geometry of
some roads which may require acquisition of land.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

                                                        3
                                                                                                         ISDS



Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) -- The two physical components and the RHD equipment
commercialization component will likely have different environment impact. As such, they are assessed
separately.

Network Preservation. Adverse environmental impacts could occur from improper construction practices
such as inappropriate disposal of bituminous waste and debris from construction sites, inappropriate location
and operation of rock crusher and asphalt hot-mix plants resulting in dust and smoke, material transport by
heavy equipment causing damage to existing roads and bridges while creating a road safety hazard, poor
management of quarries and borrow pits, pollution from spills of fuel, oil, lubricants and construction camp
wastes, cutting down of roadside trees and wood burning in labor camps, and higher incidence of road
accidents from poor traffic control at road and bridge construction sites. Most of these impacts can be easily
mitigated and are reversible. The mitigation measures can be addressed by changing construction
specifications and incorporating appropriate clauses and BOQ items in the construction contracts.

Network Improvement. . In addition to the impacts identified for network preservation works above,
irreversible impacts can result from road widening and improvement works, unless these are carefully
managed. These include cutting of slow growing hardwoods to permit road widening; and poorly constructed
embankments that can disrupt natural drainage channels and drain wetlands, resulting in erosion, siltation and
overall deterioration of water quality, loss of traditional fisheries, destruction of aquatic habitats,
eutrophication of water bodies, and an increase in disease vectors from poorly managed borrow pits and
stagnating waters blocked by the road embankments. By restricting this component to existing road links and
by excluding new bypasses, it is not expected to irrevocably alter existing land use or significantly encroach
on wetlands and other sensitive areas. Widening and/or small realignments related to safety improvements
may require acquisition of limited strips of land contiguous to the ROW in some reaches. Specific acquisition
needs and the associated impacts will be known after the ground locations and engineering design of the
improvements are finalized. A sectoral EIA and screening methodology and a sectoral EMP (except for a
few highly sensitive sites) and appropriate land acquisition and resettlement instruments should suffice to
ensure compliance with the Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies.

Commercializing of RHD's equipment pool and workshops. The proposed commercialization of RHD's
equipment pool and workshops or even the transfer of management of these units to private management
would require a prior EA to identify possible environmental liabilities that might transfer to the new owners
or managers of these units. These liabilities and the related mitigation measures might relate to disposal of
deadlined equipment and vehicles, and surplus hazardous materials used in the workshops; accumulated
aquifer pollution caused by leaking fuel tanks and uncontrolled disposal of waste oils, lubricants, and other
toxic materials; unsafe electrical wiring circuits and leaky fuel and water lines in the workshops, and unsafe
electrical and mechanical workshop equipment. RHD/GOB would either agree to cover future risks and
damages that might accrue from these liabilities or undertake appropriate mitigation measures before
transferring the facilities and equipment to the private parties.

Appropriate strategies will be developed during preparation to deal with well known key environmental
impacts from road projects such as this. These would include (a) borrow pit siting and rehabilitation; (b) tree
plantation; (c) drainage and water management; (d) protection and management of wetlands; (e) standard
environmental codes of practice; (f) environmental audits; and (g) supporting institutional and
implementation arrangements.

Natural Habitats (OP4.04) may be triggered, particularly if the project area includes coastal embankments
and mangroves. The feasibility studies will determine whether this policy is likely to be applicable, once
specific highway reaches for preservation and improvement have been defined. This will finally be confirmed

                                                      4
                                                                                                       ISDS



during the proposed environmental and social assessment study that will be carried out concurrently with the
detailed engineering design phase.

Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) may be triggered. Again, as indicated above, the likely applicability of this
policy will be determined during the feasibility study stage. It will finally be through the proposed
environmental and social assessment.

Indigenous People (OD 4.20) is triggered. An Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan will be prepared during project preparation. This plan
will include an entitlement and planning framework.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) Although the locations of roads and bridges remain to be
determined, the general nature of improvements anticipated as of now are likely to involve land acquisition
and/or displacement of squatters mostly from public lands. To the extent that physical works remain limited
to the existing carriageways, the Network Preservation sub-component is unlikely to require acquisition of
private lands. The modest carriageway expansions, wherever required, could be carried out on RHD ROW.
The widening and upgrading works suggested under Network Improvement, are likely to require a modest
amount of acquisition from private ownerships. Most of the widening works will be carried out on the
existing ROW, with a possible need for a small amount of strip acquisition at locations strategically
important for traffic efficiency and road safety.

The project, as a whole, is unlikely to cause large-scale significant
adverse impacts. The likely adverse impact under the Network
Preservation is the displacement of people (residential and commercial)
who may have been squatting within the ROW or on RHD-owned lands
along existing carriageways. Acquisition for widening works under
Network Improvement, as seen under other projects, usually affects a
large number of landowners, with adverse impacts associated with the
loss of relatively small amounts of lands. These works may also affect
people squatting on RHD and other public lands. The incidence of
impact on squatters under both preservation and improvement
sub-components is likely to vary depending upon the location of the
selected roads. In general, higher prevalence of squatters are expected on
roads sections in peri-urban areas and those passing through rural
markets/trading places. The scale of acquisition and magnitude of
impacts would be known during the project preparation process.
However, experience with Second (completed) and Third Road
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Projects, as well as other
Bank-supported projects suggests that the anticipated adverse impacts
arising out of the proposed project could be adequately mitigated by
designing and implementing a resettlement program, in accord with the
Bank's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The project proposes to
build upon the Entitlement Framework developed for the recently
negotiated Bangladesh Rural Transport Improvement Project.



 II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
 due to multiple project component.
 The proposed environment and social assessment will identify and determine the cumulative impacts, if any.

                                                      5
                                                                                                        ISDS




II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long term adverse impacts are anticipated.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Analysis of alternatives will be carried out as part of the various technical and environmental and social
assessment studies proposed during the project preparation phase.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A detailed Environmental and Social Assessment of all the proposed
project investments will be carried out by the borrower as part of project
preparation, through international Environmental/Social Consultants,
under a TOR satisfactory to the Bank. This will include preparation of an
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework (ESAF) to carry out
environmental and social screening of all corridor/link level sub-projects;
detailed sub-project level environmental and social assessments; detailed
time-bound Environmental Management Plans (EMP); a Resettlement
Policy Framework to provide the basis for preparing Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) in keeping with the phased civil works; an Indigenous
People's Development Plan (IPDP), which will include an Indigenous
People's Entitlement and Planning Framework,; and a stakeholder
consultation and participation framework. These will build on work
already done under the recently negotiated Bangladesh Rural Transport
Improvement Project, and be prepared in consultation with various
stakeholders (local communities and potentially affected groups of
people), as required by GOB laws and World Bank policy directives. The
Environmental/Social consultants will also prepare a draft Environmental
Code of Practice for Roads & Highways, recommend appropriate changes
in conditions of civil works contracts and BOQ pay items to ensure
compliance with safeguard plans, and propose an appropriate
organizational unit within RHD for environmental and social management
of highway and road programs. The Environmental and Social
Assessment will be subject to review and endorsement by the Bank.

The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will detail compensation and
entitlement principles and modalities, organizational arrangements and
mechanisms for implementation, a grievance redress procedure, and a
framework to monitor and evaluate the performance of the resettlement
program. This RPF will apply to the entire project and provide the basis
for preparing separate Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for each project
phase or yearly work program. These frameworks will contain monitoring
and evaluation systems which will also be used to monitor the project's
compliance with the Bank's social safeguard policies.

The proposed Environment and Resettlement Unit (ERU) within RHD is
expected to play a critical role. The project will aim to institutionalize the
policy frameworks for involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples, by
preparing them in a manner that can to be used on all future road sector
projects, with appropriate modifications as and when necessary.

                                                       6
                                                                                                           ISDS




OPN 11.03 on Cultural Property: Any possible impacts on cultural
properties will be investigated through environment and social screening,
once the roads for rehabilitation/improvement are selected and ground
locations of land acquisition are identified.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

In addition to the institutional stakeholders, such as the relevant ministries, district land administration,
and local governments, the other readily recognizable key stakeholders are the project affected persons,
civil society organizations/NGOs, road users, transport owners and workers, formal/informal community
groups, and individuals representing local interests and concerns. Social screening and other exercises
may also identify other persons/groups with influence on planning and implementation of the project's
safeguard aspects. RHD will consult them about the project's objectives, scope and impacts, discuss
mitigation measures and enhancement opportunities and gather inputs to sharpen the project's
development focus and expected social outcomes. Key safeguard documents will be translated into
Bangla (local language) and disclosed at the local levels.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[X] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected            Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/1/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/22/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/22/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected            Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/1/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/22/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/22/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected            Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/1/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/22/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/22/2004

                                                    7
                                                                                                  ISDS



Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Navaid A. Qureshi                                  06/26/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Asif Faiz/Person/World Bank                        04/21/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Teen Kari Barua/Person/World Bank                  06/18/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                                      06/27/03
Sector Manager/Director              Vincent Gouarne                                    06/27/03

