ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frae of Povarty
InfoShop                                                                24224
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/28/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BANGLADESH                              Project ID: P071794
Project: Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy  Task Team Leader: Subramaniam V. Iyer
Development
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 25, 2002   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002                     IDA Amount ($m): 190.98
Managing Unit: SASEI                              Sector: DI - Private Infrastructure; PD - Distribution
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  & Transmission; PY - Other Power & Energy
Status: Lending                                  Conversion
Theme: RURAL DEVELOPMENT; ENERGY;
PRIVATE SECTOR
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project aims to support Bangladesh's vision of attaining a higher level of social development and
economic growth by increasing access to electricity in rural areas.
The detailed project objectives include:
(i)    assisting the Rural Electrification Board to expand the reach, capacity and reliability of rural
grids and to improve the operational and financial performance of the rural electricity
cooperatives (Palli Bidyut Samities or PBSs);
(ii)   promoting use of solar home systems in rural areas unsuited for grid expansion;
(iii)  facilitating development of small power projects, using renewable energy sources where feasible,
to be owned and operated by the private sector or by NGOs/community-based organizations; and
(iv)   supporting initiatives in rural areas for productive use of electricity to increase household
incomes and improve the delivery of services, such as health and education .
The global objective of the project is to reduce atmospheric carbon emissions by overcoming market
barriers for renewable energy development, including high implementation costs.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
Al Rural Electrification System Expansion, Intensification and Rehabilitation
A2 REB Technical Assistance



2
ISDS
B I REB Solar Program
B2 REB Solar Technical Assistance
Cl IDCOL Renewable Energy Subloans
C2 IDCOL Technical Assistance
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area essentially covers Bangladesh and any rural household in Bangladesh is a potential
beneficiary.
B. Check Environmental Classiflcation: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
C. Safeguard Policies Trigered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes : No       TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                    _Yes * No                         TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes * No    .TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes *No       TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)           .             Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               *Yes     No     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                   Yes *No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*             Yes 0 No    .TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)  .         Yes * No     TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The Project is expected to have positive environmental benefits. The global objective is to reduce
atmospheric carbon emissions through removing barriers and reducing implementation costs for
renewable energy. Locally, the replacement of kerosene and other fuels used for lighting by Solar Home
Systems (SHS) would enable corresponding reductions in indoor air pollution. Expansion of renewable
energy sources like wind and mini hydros would likewise reduce the need to burn natural gas or oil for
power generation. The technical assistance and financial support which would be provided to improve
existing diesel based small generation systems in remote rural areas would result in efficiency
improvements and better housekeeping, leading to overall reduction of emissions.
Activities to be financed under the Grid Component of the Project that have a potential to trigger
environmental safeguard policies are, expansion, intensification and rehabilitation of electricity
distribution systems in rural areas and the small power generation sub-component. While direct IDA
investments will be made in the distribution system rehabilitation and expansion sub-component, the



3
ISDS
small power generation component will involve only the provision of technical assistance (TA) and
possibly investments in associated basic infrastructure development such as the provision of gas supply
facilities to plant locations (in accordance with the Rural Electrification Board (REB) program of support
for private sector financed small power generation). Regardless of IDA finances not being directly
involved in the small power generation plants, REB will ensure that World Bank's environmental and
social safeguards are complied with, by the private sector generators, since the project will be involved in
provision of TA and possibly investments for supporting infrastructure. Under the off-grid component,
the sub-components that may trigger World Bank's environmental safeguard policies are community or
private sector initiatives involving mini-grids (distributed supply options), which would include small
diesel or gas based generation systems (in the range of 1MW to 10 MW systems), micro-hydro and wind
energy projects which may be operated either by the private sector or cooperatives.
It is anticipated that the negative environmental impacts arising out of this project are not significant: (i)
minor and temporary land disturbances arising out of laying of new distribution lines and only in cases
where such lines do not follow existing way-leave along roads, streams, etc.; (ii) construction of
sub-stations, to be undertaken on unproductive, government or community donated lands; (iii) few pilot
mini hydro and wind energy plants; and (iv) small scale gas or diesel based power generation and
distribution systems in remote rural areas for which existing environmental standards (both the
Government's and World Bank) will apply. The General Environmental Guidelines in the World Bank's
Pollution Prevention Handbook will form the basis for identifying the mitigatory measures for grid and
off grid sub-projects except for the Remote Area Power Supply Systems (RAPSS) where the guidelines
for thermal power plants will be used.
REB will be the main agency responsible for overseeing the design and implementation of new
distribution line projects executed by respective PBS. The current practice is to limit land requirements
by using existing way-leave, such as following roads and pathways or paddy fields for laying distribution
lines. In respect of new sub-stations, the practice is to use government lands or those made available by
the community. Once the traces for the distribution lines have been identified, the extent of
environmental impacts will be known. Distribution routes will not go through forest or wildlife reserves
as well as other natural habitats. Potential impacts from construction and extension of distribution lines
could result from clearing of vegetation from sites. Substations will be the primary source of
construction related impacts under the project. The Government has agreed to make every attempt to
purchase any land required on a commercial basis. However, in the event any land acquisition and/or
resettlement is needed, the Government will adhere to the World Bank's OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement Policy.
It is envisaged that the project would support at best less than five mini-hydro and wind energy pilot
projects of less than 5 MW capacity each. These sub-projects may result in some minor environmental
impacts, particularly with regard to the partial dewatering of a section of the river bed from the intake
until the water is returned to the river downstream of the powerhouse and consequent impacts on aquatic
life in the dewatered section, potential soil erosion caused by flushing flows discharged from
sedimentation basins and by overflows at the forebays, potential ground instability caused by canal/pipe
construction, cutting of trees for use as power poles in micro hydro projects and potential interference
with bird migration patterns in wind energy projects. There is virtually no adverse environmental
impacts from SHS of the size financed under this project.
Environmental impacts from both the grid connected small power generators as well as RAPSS have the
potential for adverse environmental impacts such as air pollution due to combustion emissions and noise
pollution, which would need mitigatory measures incorporated into the sub-project designs. The
Guidelines for Thermal Power Plants in the World Bank's Pollution Prevention Handbook will form the



4
ISDS
basis for integrating mitigatory measures into the sub-project designs.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Considering the type of sub-projects eligible for financing under the Credit Line (described
above), it is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Since sub-project sites are yet to be identified, it is not possible to make predictions about potential long
term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area. Considering the use of renewable
energy technologies will yield net positive environmental impacts, with only minor reversible adverse
impacts, in general the sub-projects should not contribute towards cumulative adverse impacts due to
future developments in the sub project areas. In any case, each sub-project will undergo a sub-project
specific environmental and social assessment based on a Framework agreed with the Government, which
will identify and recommend mitigation measures for any potential long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the sub-project areas.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
REB has considered the options for rural electrification and identified that renewable energy options
such as SHS, micro hydro, and wind as well mini grids are the most appropriate way to provide
electricity to rural households that are in areas that are uneconomical to connect to the grid. This option
was selected based not only on economic/financial aspects but with due consideration to environmental
aspects as well. The distribution extension component of the project will undertake an environmental
and social assessment based on the Framework agreed with the Government and will explore alternate
route traces to identify the most sustainable trace, with minimal environmental and social impacts.
Therefore, alternative options, including the "no action" alternative has been addressed prior to
determining that renewable energy systems and RAPSS are the preferred option for electricity generation
and alternative route traces will be explored in the environmental and social assessment of the
distribution systems.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Since sub-projects, particularly with regard to grid connected small power plants, micro and mini hydro
plant locations and developers as well as wind energy sites and distribution line traces have not been
identified and/or finalized, site specific EAs are not possible at this stage. In view of this, an
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework (the Framework) which will serve as a template and
form the basis of undertaking site and sub-project specific EAs has been prepared jointly be REB and
IDCOL. The Framework is based on GOB's Environmental Protection Act I of 1995 and Environmental
Protection Rules of 1997, as well as the World Bank's applicable Safeguard Policies. It has been agreed
with the Government that all sub-projects to be financed under the Credit will be subject to an
environmental and social assessment based on the Framework.  Any sub-project requiring land
acquisition and/or resettlement will follow the World Bank OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
The project will be implemented by the REB through the PBS's and the Infrastructure Development
Company Limited (IDCOL). Both implementing institutions - the Rural Electrification Board and the
Infrastructure Development Company Limited, have a good record of environmental and social
responsibility. EAs will be conducted by respective PBS's and private sector developers. The Credit
will provide TA to the PBS's to obtain the services of a national consultant with expertise in
environmental assessment in the power sector to assist and train the PBS staff in preparation of EAs of
sub-projects to be financed under the Credit. The EA's will be reviewed by REB prior to submission to



5
ISDS
the Department of Environment (DOE) for formal environmental clearance. The REB has recently
established an Environmental Compliance Cell, headed by a Chief Engineer (Planning) and consisting of
two officials with post graduate degrees in Natural Resources Management. The Credit will provide TA
for capacity building of the Cell for training and for recruitment of a national consultant with expertise in
environmental assessment. The REB Cell will review the technical quality of the EAs prepared by the
PBS's and if the technical quality is good and the EA adheres to the Framework, Member (Engineering)
of the REB will sign off and the EA will be submitted to DOE for clearance. IDCOL will review the
technical quality of the EAs prepared by private sector developers prior to submission to DOE for
clearance. The technical capacity of IDCOL to undertake the environmental and social assessment
review has been demonstrated under the IDA financed Private Sector Infrastructure Development Project
(PSIDP) and any additional TA needs of IDCOL are addressed under PSIDP.
As an added precaution, IDA will review and clear the first 5 EAs prepared under this project to evaluate
the institutional capacity of both IDCOL and REB. In addition, IDA will review and clear any
sub-projects involving land acquisition, resettlement and sub-projects with power generation capacity
exceeding 5 MWs.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The REB/ PBS system is characterized by an established participation and consultation process. Social
involvement in rural electrification is part of the cooperative system of delivery of electricity services.
Member involvement in PBS administration is encouraged through a number of channels. Prior to
formation of the PBS, members are involved directly in the organizational process with direct input
provided via focus group meetings and membership drives. Member services personnel from REB
organize membership committees to encourage community participation in the organization and
formation of the PBS. Prior to energization and for all years afterward, members are involved in election
of board officers during annual general meetings. Members are kept aware of key issues by providing
information in the form of customer information bulletins that are circulated when bills are distributed
each month. Information is also distributed in area consumer meetings and through village electrification
committees. The village "advisor program" is a relatively new arrangement where community leaders
are invited to participate on a periodic basis with PBS member representatives to discuss the means by
which customer concerns can be most effectively addressed by PBS management. The village advisors
meet every six months and are most often selected from the community of school teachers serving their
respective communities.
Another issue that is handled well by the REB/PBS electrification program is the coverage of households
in an electrified village. The evidence from other countries indicate that more extensive coverage of
rural households leads to greater equitability and higher returns. The 'area coverage' concept adopted by
REB facilitates access and has proven quite successful in yielding satisfactory returns on investment in
distribution assets. The project will build on these positive features and increase emphasis on
'intensification' of network coverage (i.e. more laterals rather than extended 'back bone' lines to new
areas) to encourage greater electrification in the villages already supplied.
The project would seek to document the consultation and communication process, pointing out what
works and where it needs to be supplemented. In addition to the strong participatory nature of the rural
electrification program as outlined above, the involvement of community based organizations and
micro-finance institutions like BRAC and Grameen would be facilitated in improving the productive use
of electricity and promote greater grass-root participation in formulating rural energy solutions.
Furthermore, NGOs and MFIs are playing a lead role in implementing the solar program through
grassroots mobilization and household financing mechanisms. This adds to the participatory aspect of the



6
ISDS
project.
In addition to the on-going stakeholder consultations, the Environmental and Social Assessment
Framework was disclosed publicly in Bangladesh with an opportunity for any member of the public to
read and comment on its content as well as in the Bank's InfoShop. Public comments have been taken
into consideration in finalization of the Framework. While the Environmental Regulations of Bangladesh
do not mandate public consultations of EAs, the Government has agreed that all sub-project EAs will be
subject to public consultation and comment. This will provide an opportunity for affected local
communities to participate in the consultation process once sub-projects have been identified.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              11/14/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         1/19/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          2/5/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



7
ISDS
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Subramaniam V. Iyer                           5/23/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Sumith Pilapitiya/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                          5/23/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Penelope J. Brook                           5/23/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
S^[H 06R C. 6FEEDPArK         SME MAP        %HIlWCASE



