                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/28/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BANGLADESH                                            Project ID: P074966
Project: Primary Education Development Project II              Task Team Leader: Hena G. Mukherjee
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 29, 2003                     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 2, 2003                                IDA Amount ($m): 150.00
Managing Unit: SASHD                                           Sector: Primary education (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Education for all (P)
Status: Lending


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The principal program objective is to enhance the quality, access to, and efficiency of primary education.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The Government of Bangladesh (GOB) devised the program collaboratively with participating
development agencies, with the following objectives: (a) improve the quality of teaching and learning,
and enhance student achievement; (b) enhance access to schooling for the disadvantaged; and (c)
strengthen planning and management of primary education, and establish a national monitoring and
evaluation system for primary education.

Components:

     Component 1: Quality Improvement through Institutional Development
     Component 2: Quality Improvement in Schools and Classrooms
     Component 3: Quality Improvement through Infrastructure Development
     Component 4: Improved Access to Quality Schooling



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The Program would cover all primary education activities in all of Bangladesh, including tribal areas in
Chittagong Hill Tracts and other areas. According to the 2001 census, tribal groups consist of about one
percent of the population of Bangladesh. Most activities will be in rural areas.



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: : Given the potential for arsenic contamination in ground water sources and hence the need for
careful installation and testing of tubewells, the project is rated as an environmental category B.

                                                       2
                                                                                                           ISDS



C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                    Policy                                            Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes      No       TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes      No       TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes      No       TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes      No       TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes      No       TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes      No       TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes      No       TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes      No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Two safeguard operational policies are triggered for this project: Environment (OP 4.01) and Indigenous
Peoples (OD 4.20). The impacts related to this project are site-specific and not irreversible but require
adequately managed measures to compensate for any adverse impacts and to improve project
performance.

The principal environmental concerns of the Program relate to the need to ensure the provision in
primary schools of arsenic-safe drinking water and maintenance of adequate sanitation. To address these
issues, arrangements to guard against the arsenic contamination of drinking water have been agreed, and
guidelines have been developed to inform the design, maintenance and use of latrines under PEDPII.
These arrangements and guidelines will be discussed with the Government and made available prior to
appraisal. The protocol for installation of deep-end tubewells has been incorporated into the National
Arsenic Mitigation Policy, approved by the Government in June 2003. Procedures for the installation of
shallow tubewells have been established within the Department of Health Engineering (DPHE), and will
be disclosed as part of the environmental guidelines for PEDPII.

Tribal population: Enrollment rates remain very low for tribal population living in rural areas,
compared to mainstream population. Language is the major barrier for tribal children in accessing
education. All tribal groups have distinct cultural identities and distinct languages, which are different
from the mainstream language Bangla. As a result, it is difficult for tribal children to understand and
comprehend primary class room lectures delivered in Bangla, as most of them are not familiar with it.
Also, inadequate physical facilities and difficult terrain in hilly areas often create serious barriers for
tribal children in accessing education. Furthermore, most tribal children are from economically
disadvantaged families, and they start earning a living from early age. Majority work in crop cultivation,
food for work activities, stone collection, in horticulture gardens, tea leaves plucking, jhumcultivation
and fuel wood collection at a very low wage.

                                                      3
                                                                                                        ISDS



Civil Works: This project would carry out extensions and/or renovations of primary schools and Upazila
resource Centers (URC). New constructions are not foreseen and no land acquisition is required; the
additional extension and construction work will only be done on land in actual possession of the
government and where encroachers and squatters issues do not exist. The resettlement operational policy,
therefore, does not apply. All civil works contracts will however, include a statement that constructions
are on government land, without any displacement of people or their livelihood. If land is donated for
extension purposes and/or for new facilities to serve vulnerable population, proper documentations will
be required. All civil works will follow applicable construction building codes, including those for water
supply, sanitation, ventilation, safety and hygiene, as per relevant national codes.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

N.A.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N.A.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

Installation of Arsenic-Safe Water Supplies: Decisions regarding the installation of Shallow
Tubewells (STW) will be governed by the protocol established by the Department of Public Health
Engineering (DPHE). Under this protocol, a STW can be installed in an area where less than 20% of
STWs are arsenic-contaminated, provided there is no contaminated STW within 500 meters of the
proposed site. Once installed, the STW must be tested for arsenic, and it can be used for drinking water
only if the level is found to be below the national standard for drinking water (50 ppb).

In areas where STWs cannot be installed under this protocol, or where an installed STW is found to be
arsenic contaminated, other options approved by the Government under the national arsenic mitigation
program will be considered. These may include alternative sources such as deep tubewells, rain-water
harvesting, dug-wells or pond-sand filters, or arsenic removal technologies.

Testing for Arsenic Contamination: In addition to the testing at installation of new STWs, testing for
arsenic contamination will be completed of the remaining untested tubewells installed under PEDPI, and
all tubewells installed under both PEDPI and PEDPII projects will be tested twice yearly to safeguard
against future arsenic contamination as a result of changing groundwater conditions. For quality
assurance purposes, 5% of randomly selected samples will be analyzed in an independent laboratory with
proven credentials.

DPE will be responsible for contracting all testing services, and Upazila Education Officers (UEOs) will
be responsible for coordinating the process locally, recording results and informing School Management
Committees (SMCs). SMCs will ensure that all arsenic-contaminated tubewells are painted red,
following national practice, and will instruct students and staff not to use water from these tubewells for
drinking or cooking. SMCs will be encouraged to assume responsibility for regular testing, using local
NGO and private sector service providers.

Sanitation: Latrines will provided based on designs agreed by the Local Government Engineering
Department, MoPME, and Development Partners. These designs will include the twin double-pit,

                                                        4
                                                                                                             ISDS



six-ring latrines, including lower-cost alternatives. The Guidelines for Improvement of School Sanitation
will be used to help develop the menu of design options, and to guide the maintenance and use of latrines
supported by PEDPII. In all cases, latrines for girls will be provided separate to those for boys.

Awareness Raising: The Program will support a school awareness program in the management of
arsenic risks, hygiene and sanitation. Topics related to hygiene and sanitation, especially to arsenic
problems, will also be integrated into in-service training for teachers and stakeholders.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

In the case of ensuring arsenic-safe drinking water and provision of in primary schools, GOB has
agreed to follow the guidelines instituted for tubewells under the Bangladesh ­ Female
Secondary School Assistance Project II, with some modifications if warranted.

Please refer to II.D.2 above. Moreover, monitoring and evaluation activities under this subcomponent
will help ensure the quality of facilities installed, the quality of services delivered, their effective use, the
functionality of tubewells/water systems and latrines, and the status of their operation and maintenance.
Systematic learning and adaptation (new technologies, lower cost inputs) as well as documentation of
lessons will also be included.

The SMC will supervise the construction works and maintenance of water supply and sanitation
facilities, in conjunction with engineers from the Local Government Engineering Department

On the basis of reports submitted by SMCs, UEOs will be responsible for recording the installation of
new tubewells, the dates and outcomes of arsenic testing, the construction of latrines, and their operating
and hygienic condition. DPE will compile UEO records and will also contract annual audits of arsenic
testing. The records compiled by DPE and the independent verification of arsenic testing will be
submitted for review by DPs during supervision missions.

A Tribal Development Plan (TDP) has been developed by MoPME in consultation with tribal population,
local government, NGOs and MoPME officials. It is estimated that about 267,726 tribal children are in
within age group 6-10 years and about 148,625 (55%) are out of school. PEDP-II proposes to improve
access of the tribal Children into primary education using the following actions:

Extension and rehabilitation: Extension and rehabilitation of primary education facilities for the out of
school tribal children will be undertaken on a priority basis. These facilities will include existing
government primary school (GPS). MoPME will conduct a mapping of GPS during the first year of
project implementation to identify schools attended by tribal children and appraise conditions of these
schools and needs, and appropriate extension and renovation will be carried out during the next four
years.

Social mobilization: Social mobilization and inclusive SMC will be established in tribal areas for
motivating parents to send children to school. SMC membership and terms of reference (TOR) will be
revised to include parents of tribal children, tribal leaders, and SMC will be trained for promoting
primary education in their areas.

Supplementary reading material: MoPME will develop and print supplementary reading materials in
tribal languages.

                                                     5
                                                                                                        ISDS



Recruitment and Training: MoPME will recruit and train teachers from tribal communities for primary
schools in tribal areas.

Monitoring and Evaluation: Development and inclusion of tribal education and social development
data in the EMIS will be undertaken. MoPME will carry out a baseline survey on tribal education during
the first year of implementation and conduct annual assessment and monitoring of TDP.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out by Government to gain operationally relevant understanding
of the social underpinnings and incentives determining behavior and needs of various actors, specially
the poor communities, vulnerable groups, tribal population, NGOs, SMC, PTA and government. It used
both qualitative and quantitative methods of data collection. The qualitative methods included focus
group discussions with the vulnerable groups, SMC, PTA, teachers, students; consultations with
government, NGOs and academics. Quantitative data was collected from available literature. Relevant
social, gender and participation issues were identified and incorporated in the project design. A review of
major government and NGO activities and their performance was undertaken. Workshops were
conducted with different stakeholder groups for taking feedback and consensus on the design of the
program; and disclosure of tribal development plan.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              5/15/2003         6/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          8/7/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           8/7/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              5/15/2003         7/7/2003

                                                   6
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        6/5/2003         7/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         8/7/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Hena G. Mukherjee                                  7/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Paul Jonathan Martin/Person/World Bank             7/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Nilufar Ahmad/Person/World Bank                    7/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                                      7/28/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Michelle Riboud                                    7/28/2003

