                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                              Report No: AC250
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BANGLADESH                                          Project ID: P081969
Project: State Owned Enterprise and Banking Sector           Task Team Leader: Simon C. Bell
Reform
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 25, 2003               IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 18, 2004                                IDA Amount ($m): 368.00
Managing Unit: SASFP                                         Sector: Other industry (25%); Banking (25%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           General finance sector (25%); Agro-industry (25%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and
                                                             privatization (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of this project is to trigger urgently needed reforms within the State Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) and the Nationalized Commercial Banks (NCBs) -- as part of a wider reform of
rolling back state ownership and control within the Bangladeshi economy.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
i. Support to Voluntary Retirement Schemes. So far 57,283 employees (including 25,718 in
Adamjee Jute Mills) have been retrenched -- a reduction of about 17 percent ­ at a cost of
US$130.0 million/Tk 7.4 billion ($3,000 per employee). Over the next two to three years, the
Government plans to retrench a further 93,000 employees from 100 units identified for
privatization. The project (likely to be co-financed by DFID) will support retrenchment costs.

ii. Retraining and Counselling Services for Retrenched Staff of SOEs. Providing adequate
counselling and re-training support to retrenched workers are important social priorities under the
proposed project. The project will support this component.

iii. Refurbishment of Abandoned Assets of Loss Making SOEs. The Government wants to
convert the closed SOEs, like the Adamjee Jute Mills (310 acres) and Chittagong Steel Mills (over
200 acres), that are not feasible for privatization in their present state or where they lacked potential
buyers, into more productive industries. The Government is yet to come out with comprehensive
plans and policies to facilitate alternate utilization of these assets. It is, therefore, proposed that this
component support the government in developing plans for alternative use of these facilities --
including some renovation, some up-gradation of facilities, and some dismantling of obsolete
equipment to make them attractive for possible private sector investment.

iv. Strengthening of the Privatization Commission, the Board of Investment, the Export
Processing Zone Authority, and the Ministry of Industry. This component would support
capacity building of the Privatization Commission, particularly in the areas of asset valuation;
appraisal, monitoring and evaluation of SOEs planned for privatization, through training, services
of external consultants, provision of office equipment/facilities. Similarly the Board of Investment
(BOI), The Bangladesh Export Processing Zone Authority (BEPZA), and the Ministry of Industry

                                                         2
                                                                                                             ISDS


also have important roles to play in the privatization, investment promotion, production elements
of private sector activity in Bangladesh, and as such will be supported under the project.

v. Resolution of the Nationalized Commercial Banks (NCBs). The implementation of the
first phase of the NCB resolution plan has set the stage for moving to the second phase whose
implementation would be supported under this project. The specific activities agreed under the
second phase for each of the four NCBs include the following:

Rupali Bank Ltd. -- This smallest NCB is the first candidate for privatization. The special audit
initiated now will provide the true financial condition of this bank, which will then be the basis for a
due diligence by an investment bank to prepare it for privatization.                   The cost of hiring the
investment bank will be supported by this project.

Agrani Bank -- To assist Agrani in formulating its resolution plan based on the results of the special
audit, a management firm, whose cost would be supported under this project, would be contracted.
The management firm would be bound by the interim MOU and would be entrusted to develop
the business plan for moving the bank towards its ultimate resolution plan.

Sonali and Janata Banks -- In contrast to the Agrani Bank assistance through a wholesale management
change, these two NCBs would be provided with individual management experts under specific
Terms of Reference. These experts would also be bound by the interim MOUs and would assist
the CEO in developing the business plan to move them towards their ultimate resolution plan.

Staff Rationalization -- The implementation of the resolution plans would require rationalization of
existing staff at the four NCBs. To provide for an orderly exit of these staff, a separation package
will be offered to permanent employees, offering benefits similar to that offered to other public
service employees. The project will support the costs relating to staff rationalization.

vi. Public Awareness, Monitoring & Evaluation, and Tracking. In order to deal with the
negative public perception of privatization and to generate widespread support for the privatization
process a public awareness campaign financed under the project. There is also a need to monitor
and evaluate the reform agenda supported by this project and a small amount of funds will be
dedicated to this important purpose to ensure that the project is meeting its stated aims. Funding
will also be made available under the project to carry out both social and environmental tracking --
related to the privatization process.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Environmental liabilities may arise as a result of either past damage caused by the SOEs to be
privatized, or their continued operation in a condition of non-compliance with environmental legislation. To
identify such liabilities, and assign responsibility for their mitigation, it has been agreed that technical
assistance will be provided to the Privatization Commission (PC) in the form of an environment consultancy
under the project. This is intended to ensure that the PC undertakes sufficient due diligence in this regard, so

                                                         3
                                                                                                           ISDS


that such liabilities are identified, assigned and documented prior to the privatization of each entity.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                        Policy                                         Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes       No      TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes       No      TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes       No      TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes       No      TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes       No      TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes       No      TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes       No      TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes       No      TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes       No      TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes       No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. Local, reversible impacts may
 have occurred, however, as a result of the operations of the SOEs to be privatized, and could
 continue if these facilities are not brought into compliance with environmental legislation.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
 Technical assistance will provided under the project to help the PC identify and assign environmental
 liabilities arising as a result of the past and future operations of the SOEs to be privatized. Prior to
 appraisal the PC will (i) provide an initial set of guidelines outlining the procedures it will adopt in
 identifying and assigning environmental liabilities, and (ii) draft Terms of Reference and initiate the
 process of recruiting a consultant who will be contracted under the project to refine the environmental due
 diligence guidelines and conduct some initial environmental assessments.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                      4
                                                                                                           ISDS


The key stakeholders include the PC, potential buyers of the SOEs to be privatized, and
communities affected by the operation of these facilities. In completing the due diligence
appraisal of these SOEs, the PC will assess and document environmental liabilities, consulting
affected communities in the process, and providing potential buyers with the final assessments.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/5/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/25/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/25/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date

                                                 5
                                                                     ISDS


Task Team Leader:                 Simon C. Bell
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Paul Jonathan Martin
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Nilufar Ahmad
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                      Name                     Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: David J. Marsden          8/28/2003
Sector Manager/Director           Joseph Del Mar Pernia    9/2/2003
Comments
Cleared

