ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                        AWorld Free of Povfrty
-                                               ~~~~~~~24601
tInfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/23/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BANGLADESH                           Project ID: P076693
Project: Arsenic Public Health Project        Task Team Leader: Sundararajan Srinivasa Gopalan
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 6, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 25, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 40.00
Managing Unit: SASHD                          Sector: Health (100%)
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance  Theme: Other human development (S); Pollution
Loan (SIM)                      management and environmental health (P); Water
Status: Lending                              resource management (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Bangladesh is said to be facing what has been described as "the largest mass poisoning of a
population in history" because more than 25 million persons are estimated to be drinking water
that contains hazardous levels of arsenic. Without intervention, approximately 250,000
individuals may eventually develop cancer from the exposure and many more may develop
diabetes, neurological problems, debilitating skin lesions, and other health conditions. At this
time, the majority of the population is unaware of the hazard and ways to deal with it, their water
sources have not been tested; the majority of health care providers have not been trained to
recognize and counsel/treat affected patients; and crucial epidemiologic questions about
incidence, prevalence, and effective treatments of arsenical diseases remain unanswered.
The objective of the Arsenic Public Health Project (APHP) is to assist Bangladesh in reducing
the incidence and prevalence of arsenic-related diseases caused by arsenic contamination of
drinking water and strengthen national capacity to address public health aspects of arsenic in the
long term, including the capacity for surveillance, monitoring and evaluation.
The strategies through which the project seeks to prevent new cases of arsenicosis and to
improve the management of those already affected are:
(1) behavior change communication to educate the general public about arsenic contamination
of drinking water, its health effects, how to avoid exposure and the facts about realistic treatment
options;
(2) enhancing health sector capacity for the surveillance, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment



2
ISDS
of arsenic-related diseases, including counseling of patients;
(3) promoting research on prevalence, incidence, and treatment to enable sound public health
planning and intervention;
(4) developing patient management tools and techniques for individuals already affected by
arsenic.
Each of the above four strategies would be developed into a project component - discussed in
more detail in section C. The project will be managed as an integral part of the Health and
Population Sector Program (HPSP), and will complement arsenic mitigation activities underway
within the IDA-financed Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has four components: (a) behavior change communication (BCC) focusing on risk
reduction strategies and individual responsibility (to complement the information campaigns
carried out by the water sector); (b) capacity-strengthening, including training programs for
all health care personnel on identifying arsenicosis and counseling patients and diagnostic
facilities; (c) research on the epidemiology, prevention and management of arsenicosis,
including pilot activities that could yield scientific data on efficacy, safety, feasibility and costs of
treatment options; (d) management of patients, suffering from the consequences of arsenic
poisening. This last component will only be initiated as pilots to field test the feasibility of
present treatment options within the public health system. The project will not include water
testing or provision of drinking water alternatives, as these activities are under the responsibility
of Ministry of Local Government and are being covered under BAMWSP and numerous local
NGO programs.
The BCC component will focus on risk reduction strategies and individual responsibility.
Development of a BCC strategy with participation by important stakeholders will be necessary.
BCC will educate about arsenic and arsenicosis, including messages about the
non-communicability of the disease, and will urge prevention through the use of safe water,
while ensuring that public expectations about patient treatment are realistic (in terms of available
technology, costs, etc.) This activity will coordinate with and complement the information
campaigns carried out by the water sector describing water testing and safe water alternatives and
will be reinforced by the personal interaction by the field health workers. The campaign can
utilize all avenues for public communication, including television, radio, newspapers, banners,
signs, pamphlets, school programs, dramas, song, and dance. In view of capacity constraints in
the MOHFW to launch effective communication campaigns and organizational issues lingering
from the restructuring of the "Unified" BCC unit, most of the BCC activities will need to be
contracted out to appropriate firms or organizations in the non-governmental sector; but the
coordination of the activities may rest with the UBCC unit of MOHFW. This component will
begin immediately and will be nationwide in scope, with local activities timed to coincide with
campaigns for water testing and provision of safe alternatives whenever possible. Combined
with these campaigns follow up sessions through inter personal communications by field workers
will be organized
Capacity-strengthening includes human resources, non-human resources (equipment, supplies



3
ISDS
and facilities), and systems. Based on assessments of in-country capacity on various aspects,
including laboratory-facilities, behavior change communication, conduct of training, information
systems, procurement and logistics and financial management, this component would finance the
necessary training, system development (including quality assurance) and minimal infrastructure
development where essential. The scope and phasing of capacity-building activities will vary
depending on the specific capacity in question and still need to be detailed. The initial training
program for health care providers will focus on what is currently known about the
epidemiology of arsenicosis, the identification of patients with arsenicosis and those with
sequelae requiring referral to treatment facilities, and counseling patients for risk reduction, i.e.
by using safe water. A need assessment of training will be worked out. Awareness of
responsibilities of MOHFW staff in addressing the arsenic crisis needs to be ensured at all levels.
All training will include interpersonal communication skills, and separate technical content will
be prepared for health workers of different categories at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels
of health care. The training will be conducted by department(s) or institution(s) under MOHFW
or contract agencies (to be decided during project preparation based on assessment of
institutional capacity). This component will begin immediately and will be nationwide in scope,
with providers in areas where no training has been conducted to be reached first. A module will
also be developed for pre-service training of health staff so that future generations of health care
providers will also be able to manage and counsel their patients. Since training in Essential
Services for Health Assistants/Family Welfare Assistants has not been completed yet, there may
be an opportunity to include a module on arsenic in this training.
The research component would focus on questions that must be answered for informed
decision-making within the project and will not encompass issues that are primarily of academic
interest. The agenda will be set by a committee of national and international epidemiologists
with expertise in arsenic. This committee will be formed under the umbrella of the Bangladesh
Medical Research Council (BMRC), which is the primary organization for overseeing health
research in Bangladesh. The agenda will, at a minimum, include scientific assessments and
monitoring of the percentage of the population exposed to unsafe water and the incidence and
prevalence of arsenicosis and its sequelae, using active case finding methods, so that estimates
can be made of the number of patients who may require treatment as well as clinical trials of
proposed treatments to assess their effectiveness. As part of this component, a database of
relevant past and ongoing research in Bangladesh and around the world will be maintained and
publicly disseminated by BMRC to avoid duplication of effort and to inform research priorities.
It is expected that some studies may be sponsored or commissioned under the APHP, while
others will be sponsored by external institutions such as multilateral aid organizations and
foreign governments. The database will be constructed during project preparation so that the
committee will be able to begin decision-making immediately. Also during project preparation, a
workshop will be held with World Health Organization co-sponsorship that will bring together
local, regional, and international medical experts on arsenic to develop consensus guidelines for
the diagnosis and staging of arsenicosis patients. The applicability of findings will be nationwide
in scope. Pilot treatment activities, however, will be located in "hot-spot" areas to help those in
greatest need.
The scope of the patient management component would depend upon results from the research
component, which would include well-designed clinical trials and pilot activities. This



4
ISDS
component will likely include additional training of health care providers on identification and
management of arsenicosis and its consequences, and may include supplies and equipment to the
health sector. Which specific treatment regimens might be financed from the project will depend
on their efficacy, safety, operational feasibility, and costs. Also, once a realistic estimate of
case-load exists, an assessment will be made of the need for arsenicosis patient management
facilities across the country, with a view to strengthening existing health service facilities (public
and non-public) at the appropriate level(s). Because activities under APHP are to be part of the
overall program of MOHFW, all activities under this component must be of a cost and scope that
is concordant with overall health sector priorities and policies. (For example, it may be feasible
to provide simple outpatient excisions of localized skin cancers but perhaps not to provide
lengthy courses of treatment with expensive drugs for internal cancers) Ultimately patient
management will be national in scope, but activities will begin in districts that have been the
hardest hit and then phased in around the country.
Some evaluation/assessment of BCC and training components will be needed; such assessments
will be carried out as part of preparatory activities. Another area which needs to be considered
during preparation phase is an assessment of NGO capacity, and how far they will be able to
function within the Bank's procurement guidelines, selection criteria etc. since it is proposed to
utilize their services substantially.
A logical framework (log-frame) exercise was initiated as part of the identification mission, in a
workshop which brought together all major stakeholders (e.g. government officials, researchers,
NGOs, and potential co-funders), and the rough output is attached (Annex 1). The further
development of the log-frame will be continued in a broad-based participatory manner during
project preparation, so as to ensure both a wide ownership and a superior product.
Components:
a) Behavior Change Communication
b) Capacity Strengthening
c) Research
d) Patient Management



ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Nationwide in Bangladesh, in a phased manner
B. Cleck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: The proposed project will support communication, training and research, raising no
environmental concerns.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 3 No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C Yes * No   0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               C Yes * No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                C Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No   0 TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No   * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No   O TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           O Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Planned Social Assessment would determine the applicability of OD 4.20 (Indigenous Populations). No
other safeguard issues have been identified.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None expected
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



6
ISDS
None expected. The risks of raising awareness about arsenic while options for safe water are not yet
made available are recognized. However, developing safe water options and making them available are
not within the scope of the current project, which would only deal with the health sector issues. The
project proposes close coordination with the water supply sector (BAMWSP and DPHE) to ensure
appropriate sequencing of information campaigns along with the mitigation activities (the Project in
question does not propose to 'raise awareness' per se; rather, it would influence behavior change through
appropriate health related messages, currently missing from the information campaigns under BAMWSP.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
None required.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Planned Social Assessment will include consultations with indegenous population living in
arsenic contaminated areas to find out whether the project interventions would affect them
negatively. The OD 4.20 would be triggered if the IPs are at a higher risk of arsenic
contamination, or if their culture/language presents any specific obstacles or barriers to delivery
of the communication and training materials. If either of this is the case, then special
participation measures and communication mechanisms may be needed and those would be
documented in an appropriate IPDP for SASES review and disclosure befor appraisal. If needed,
for this project an IPDP should focus not only on communications with IP, but also measures to
include them in other components. assess the special needs, if any, of indigenous populations and
identify interventions to take account of their languages, culture, religious beliefs and way of life,
in an IPDP (e.g. educational materials translated into native languages).
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project preparation and implementation will follow a participatory process by involving key
stakeholder groups, and fostering a sense of ownership and commitment. The social assessment
will help detail the strategy for participation and social inclusion during implementation. The
key participatory activities during preparation will include:
i)     advocacy workshops at the national and local level for consensus building on the public
health response;
ii)    a stakeholder workshop to discuss the social assessment and NGO/civil society
participation;
iii)  log-frame workshops to detail the project design, and identify monitoring indicators and
risks;
iv)    consultations with vulnerable groups, indigenous populations, community health workers
and NGOs using focus group discussion to gain insights into the social, cultural and behavioral
facets of the arsenic crisis.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.



7
ISDS
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec; Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan'                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Sundararajan Srinivasa Gopalan              7/11/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Paul Jonathan Martin/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Nilufar Ahmad/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                        7/15/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Charles C. Griffin                          7/20/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here



8
ISDS
4slEA sCHoinW. I ITiE,A  __ I  -, - r5 ,' , 5   -



