ACllA
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/17/2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country. BANGLADESH                             Project ID. P053578
Project: Social Investment Program Project      Task Team Leader: Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 16, 2000   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 18, 2003                   IDA Amount (Sm): 18.24
Managing Unit: SASRD                            Sector: Other social services (50%); General
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  transportation sector (40%); Media (5%); General
Status: Lending                                 education sector (5%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P), Other
rural development (P); Gender (S); Poverty
strategy, analysis and monitoring (S); Rural policies
and institutions (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the project is to develop effective and efficient financing and institutional arrangements
for improving access to local infrastructure and basic services through the implementation of
community-driven small scale infrastructure works, and social assistance programs. The project area will
be Jamalpur and Gaibandha districts which rank among the highest in poverty incidence both in terms of
income and human development The pilot private financing of community utilities will be in anywhere
in Bangladesh where opportunities exists for introducing user fees.
T.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project aims to develop institutions, promote community driven principles, pioneer performance
based social assistance programs for the poorest, and leverage private financing for basic utilities. The
project is piloting novel approaches to develop procedures, test different products and approaches, and
demonstrate impact. At mid-term review, the project's implementation arrangement and design would be
assessed in terms of achievement of the expected outcomes and outputs and successful mechanisms
identified for scaling up.
The project will have the following four components:
(a)    Strengthening SDF: This component will ensure that SDF is able to communicate and leam
from project implementation so that it develops the capacity to spread, scale-up and
institutionalize the successful principles and mechanism arising out of it. There are four
sub-components: (i) information and communication (IC); (ii) capacity building of SDF; (iii)
monitoring and leaming (M&L); and (iv) project management support. The project will finance
technical assistance, monitoring and evaluation studies, establishment and operating costs of
SDF
(b)    Institutional development at the community level: This component will provide support to
the community in terms of raising awareness, motivating and engaging the rural poor to
participate in community-driven initiatives, changing attitudes and behaviors among local
stakeholders, development of organizations at the village level and preparation of Community



2
ISDS
Action Plan (CAP). This component will have two sub-components: (i) information and
communication campaign; (n) formation and strengthening of Village Development Committees
(VDCs), Community Groups (CG) and the project management committees of the CG, and
developing a demand-led CAP   The project will finance the cost of services related to
information dissemination at the local level, institutional development and preparation of the
CAP.
(c)    Implementation of Community Action Plans: The CAP will prioritize community's needs for
small scale infrastructure and social assistance based on informed choice and eligibility criteria
indicated in the menu of options in the Operational Manual (OM) of the project. The project will
also finance the cost of NGO services to implement the social assistance programs, including
one-time seed capital and cost of legal assistance for the very poorest and vulnerable groups.
(d)    Pilot Private Financing in Community Utilities: Under this component, SDF will finance
technical assistance and about ten pilot sub-projects. The technical assistance will help SDF to
identify, develop, appraise, and supervise the pilot subprojects in piped water supply in arsenic
affected areas and off-gnd electricity anywhere in Bangladesh where opportunities exist to
recover cost through user fees.
Components:
1. Strengthening of SDF
2 Institutional Development at the Community Level
3. Implementation of Community Action Plans
4. Pilot Private Financing of Community Utilities
I A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The SIPP will cover about 1400 villages in the Jamalpur and Gaibandha districts. The total area of
Jamalpur district is 2032 sq km, of which 7% is riverine and less than 1% under forest. The land is
alluvial floodplains and is prone to regular flooding and land erosion by the Jamuna on the west and the
Brahmaputra on the east. The range of habitats include open fields, artificial and natural water bodies,
wetlands, rural villages, homesteads, sandbanks and uncultivated sandbars (or charlands). The forested
areas are not protected. While the exact number of species of flora and fauna native to Jamalpur is not
known, there are some areas of Sal forests. According to the 1991 census, around 0.2% of the population
in the Jamalpur district is tribal, mostly Garos. The Garo population in the two districts have largely



3
ISDS
assimilated with the general population. They are supported by Christian missionaries and relatively
better educated than the Saontals. They are generally engaged in the service sectors and in agriculture.
Gaibandha district's total area is 2179 sq km, of which 0.6% is riverine. There are no major forest areas
in Gaibandha. The land is alluvial floodplains and is prone to regular flooding. According to the 1991
census, around 0.3 of the population is tribal, mostly Garos and Saontals. The Saontal population in
Gaibandha compnsing less than one third of the tribal population in the districts are generally migrant
agricultural workers who travel to neighboring districts in search of work. Literacy level of Saontal is
low and general health status poor. Several missionary NGOs provide health care and other services.
Some children are getting primary education in non-formal schools run by the NGOs. Bangladesh
Northern Evangelical Lutheran Church (BNELC) has special project for the tribal population in
Gaibandha district.
SDF held several consultations with the vulnerable groups, NGOs and local government members in the
two districts during March - June 2002 These consultations and the information collected from district
administration and NGOs working in these areas provide basic socio-economic information of the
population.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. An Environmental Assessment (EA) for STPP was carried out in 1999 and updated in August
2002. The project has been designated as Category B i.e. with moderate environment impact, which can be
remedied or mitigated
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on E for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        * Ycs U No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                  Yes * No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                   Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes @No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              ( )Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes ( No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      ( )Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          T  Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  ( Ycs * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*       Yes * No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sutmnary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all r elevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or in-eversible impacts.
Majority of the subprojects in SlPP are not expected to lead to environmental impacts of any



4
ISDS
significance. There is the possibility that a small number of subprojects may have environmental
ramifications, or result in adverse impacts, in case mntigation measures are not adequately implemented.
An environmental assessment of SIPP was conducted and accordingly, all infrastructure subproject
proposals submitted to SDF will be subject to environmental screening, based on which assessment at an
appropriate level of detail will be conducted to identify suitable measures to mitigate any environmental
risks. The project's Environmental Assessment Manual provides for: (a) a methodology and
administrative structure for environmental management; (b) forms for environmental management of
community infrastructure sub projects; and (c) an environmental supervision and monitoring plan.
No involuntary resettlement or impacts on cultural property are envisaged under the project, and the EA
Manual clearly state that those sub-projects which may require involuntary land acquisition or
resettlement would not be eligible for funding. The sub-projects would be community infrastructure
works which include improvement/repair of existing village roads, culverts, market, water supply and
sanitation, and would not require involuntary land acquisition Some investments may involve donated
land. The OM would include normal Bank standards specification for donated land, namely: the site is
free of squatters, was identified by the community, verification of donation from each donor, acceptance
of community-devised mitigation measures is obtained from any persons adversely affected, guarantees
of public access are given, and grievance mechanisms are in place.
Social assessment identified the tnbal population living in the rural areas (about 0.2% of total
population) as among the poorest and vulnerable groups. Therefore, World Bank's Operational Directive
4.20 related to Indigenous People is triggered in STPP and a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) is proposed
as an integral part of the SIPP (Annex 2, Attachment 11 of the Project Appraisal Document). SIPP
interventions would bring positive impact on tnbal population. They will be eligible for support under
the project on a pnority basis. The IC program targeted at tnbal population will be made culturally
sensitive and need based. In areas of tribal concentration, participation framework would ensure that they
are members of VDC and able to form CG for accessing community investment sub-projects Social
assistance programs will specifically target tribal population groups who are in need of support for
improving their social and economic opportunities.
The SDF Operational Manual includes a framework to guide the identification, preparation, appraisal and
implementation of the CAP taking social issues into consideration. The framework provides the basis for
an ongoing social assessment process, which will guide decision making related to designs, community
participation, and maximizing the positive social impact of the project. It also contains the principles
upon which support mechanisms are to be based for positive social impacts.
The social risks of STPP are low, as the sub-projects will be demand-driven. The potential for positive
social outcomes is hligh.
I1.D.1lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to applicationi of more thani one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Support for multiple sub-projects raises the possibility that cumulative impacts may occur. It will,
however, be difficult to distinguish such effects from the impacts of other local development activities.
To address this concem, the Environmental Assessment Manual for the project contains guidelines on
environmental evaluation and monitoring, in order that emerging environmental concerns may be
integrated into subproject design
II.D Ic Describe any potential long tern impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



5
ISDS
The potential long-term impact due to SIPP will depend upon the design of the sub-projects which are to
be proposed by the community. Generally, the long term impact of SIPP will be an improvement in the
standards of living in the project area, with any minor environmental risks mitigated through
implementation of environmental management procedures as set out in the SIPP Environmental
Assessment Manual.
IT.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable.
H.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on1
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the poor and vulnerable groups, tribal population of the project districts, NGOs,
private sector, local government institutions and distnct based government oficials. General meetings and
focused group discussions were held with these groups duimg project preparation stage. The draft EA
manual was discussed with the community and the TDP discussed with the tribal groups. These
documents have also been shared with the NGOs. The documents are available with SDF, the two local
distncts, and also posted in the Bangladesh external website of the Dhaka office of the World Bank for
easy access.
Participant   Identification/  Implementatio          Operation
s         Preparation          n
Beneficiarie  IS/CON         IS/COL          COL
s/
Community
groups
Private  IS/CON          CON/COL         COL
Sector/
NGOs
Local  IS/CON           IS/CON          IS/CON
Government
Other  IS/CON           IS/CON          IS
Donors
[Note. information sharing
(IS), conslultation (CON), and
collaboration (COL).]
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP) Category is detennined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.



6
ISDS
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or uTeversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2 - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionially manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
SF - Financial intennediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programimiatic approach to address
safeguard issues
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/30/1999
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           10/10/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            10/14/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Sunmnary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resetllement Action Plan/Framework                          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework-              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               9/22/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           10/10/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan                                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submiussion to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan                                  Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of subimssion to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Jeeva A Perumalpillai-Essex                November 12, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Paul Jonathan Martin/Person/World Bank  September 23, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Nilufar Ahmad/Person/World Bank        September 25,
2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
ADproved bv:                 Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                       November 12, 2002
Comments



7
ISDS
Richard Ackenrnann, Sector Director SASES provided clearance on October 7, 2002.
Sector Director              Constance A. Bemard                         November 12, 2002



