ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                          AWorld frce of Poverty
U____ 
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/17/2003                        25634
Section I - Basic Information                            March 20, 2003
A. Basic Project Data
Country: B1HUTAN                                Project ID: P074114
Project: Bhutan Education Program Development   Task Team Leader: Chingboon Lee
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 12, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 29, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: SASHD                            Sector: Secondary education (50%); Tertiary
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance  education (20%); Primary education (1 5%); Other
Loan (SIM)                       social services (15%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Other human development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Project will support Bhutan's 9th Five-year Education Plan to expand and improve the
quality of education at all levels. Specifically, the Project will: (i) increase the enrollment at the
secondary level; (ii) improve the quality and relevance of education at all levels; and (iii)
strengthen the management of education at the Center, dzongkhags and at the school levels.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will support development of the education sector under Bhutan's 9th Five-Year Plan. The
core of the investment program comprises: #)Building/upgrading 30 secondary schools in different
parts of the country; (b) Improving the quality of education through review and
improvement of curriculum, in-service training, institutionalizing standardized tests and
continuous assessments, and enhancing the learning resources in schools through reading
program, school library development, expansion of Resource Centers, introduction of
information technology; and the establishment of a Secretariat for the National University, and
(c) Enhancing the capacity at the Center, Dzongkhag and school levels to support management of
education and improving the functioning of the DoE through the construction of a Ministry
Complex and the Education Center Stores.
Within the plan, but outside of activities potentially supported by IDA is a program for early childhood
education which will be developed and piloted for implementation in the 10th Plan, the existing special
education program will be improved to cater to children with physical disabilities and learning handicaps,
and the adult literacy program will be expanded to cover half of the illiterate population by the end of the
Plan period These activities have been earmarked for specific support by other donors. Additionally, a
National University will be created out of a federation of degree awarding institutes initially comprising



2
ISDS
of Sherubtse College, the two National Institutes of Education, the Royal Bhutan Polytechnic Institute
and the Institute of Language and Cultural Studies.
Indicative Costs (US$)
The total costs of the education program including recurrent and capital expenditures, is estimated at
US$216 million over the five years of the 9th Plan.
Components:
* Primary Education;
*   Secondary Education;
*   Teacher Education and Training;
*   Higher Education;
*   Improved Education Management.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The national program covers the entire country.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The proposed project would not raise any significant environmental issues. Those considered are
primarily related to siting (land clearing), construction operation and maintenance. These impacts can be
managed by development and implementation of good environmental practices. Bidding documents will
include criteria for environmental management and appropriate codes of practice will be followed for
buildings, water and sanitation.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0D No   C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                           C0 Yes 0 No    ^' TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C Yes 0 No    C: TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes * No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes * No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes C, No   Q TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       O Yes 0 No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    CQ TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         O Yes * No      T TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 C' Yes * No   O TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



3
ISDS
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
As the objective is to support the 2002-2007 education sector plan of Bhutan, indigenous peoples areas
may receive direct and indirect benefits of IDA financing of schools and education system quality,
including improved access to basic education, as would the rest of the country.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required.
I1.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The national consultative process prior to and during project execution including indigenous peoples
areas will be documented and a draft disclosed prior to Appraisal.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The education plan is based on analytical work undertaken by the MoHE soon after the country
published its Vision 20/20, a product of extensive consultation within Government and civil society.
Three inter-related tasks contributed to the development of this plan. First, was the analytical work
carried out by the MoHE using support from different stakeholders within Government, representatives
of employers and technical training, as well as donors (The World Bank, Switzerland and DANIDA).
The current status of the education sector was assessed, issues identified, alternatives weighed and the
principle strategies to achieve the goals enshrined in Vision 20/20 defined. This led to the Education
Sector Strategy, a paper that was widely discussed and finally endorsed by all the dzongkhags and
MoHE. Second, was the formulation of a bottom-up geog (block) based, Dzongkhag Education Sector
Masterplan for access to basic and secondary education. Coordinated by the dzongkhag administrations,
this engaged every community in a review of its status and established a framework for every child to
access basic education in their own dzongkhag. A third task was the work undertaken by education
boards and commissions to address education-related issues such as youth and employment, IT, private
schools and Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). These have been synthesized to
develop the Education Plan. A similar consultative process is envisaged for the mid-term review of the
Education Plan to be undertaken in 2005. This will involve independent assessment reports of major
components, and discussion forums involving key stakeholders including participants from civil society
and the govemment.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues



4
ISDS
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/15/2002    3/11/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/30/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/4/2002     3/17/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Re. Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan: See Section IB comments. Bidding
documents will include criteria for management of siting and appropriate codes of practice for buildings,
water, and sanitation will be followed.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Chingboon Lee                               July 9, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Frederick Swartzendruber/Person/World Bank  July 10, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2- Warren Waters/Person/World Bank         July 10, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved bv:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                        July 10, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Michelle Riboud                             July 10, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
Us5(Afl____      LFtVACK __    r rE MAP  - - ,  HOWEASE  _ | -



5
ISDS



