24639
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 09, 2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
COUNTRY: Bolivia                             PROJECT ID: P070338
PROJECT: Removing Obstacles to Direct Private-  TTL: Elizabeth Monosowski
Sector Participation in In Situ Biodiversity
Conservation
APPRAISAL DATE: not applicable               IBRD AMOUNT ($m): 0.68
BOARD DATE: not applicable                   IDA AMOUNT ($m):
MANAGING UNIT: LCSEN                          SECTOR: Environment
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: GEF MSP Grant            STATUS: Final Project Brief
Project Objectives (From PDS)
The main objective of this project is to consolidate methodology, policy and innovative procedures in order
to facilitate and develop private conservation initiatives that will contribute to globally-significant
biodiversity conservation in high-priority ecoregions.
Project Description (From PDS):
In order to produce the above outcomes, the following four project components will be implemented:
Rezulatorv and Incentive Framework: The objective of this component is to strengthen the regulatory
and incentive frameworks for private conservation.
Pilot Areas Creation and Management: The objective of this component is to demonstrate the benefits
of private conservation instruments and incentives through four pilot area experiences.
Capacity Buildine for New Initiatives: The objective of this component is to encourage and enable
landowners outside of pilot sites to participate in private conservation.
Dissemination: Project results will be documented and disseminated over the Internet and by mail to
project stakeholders, national and international NGOs, national and local authorities, academic
institutions. Project results will also form part of a broader dissemination campaign in Bolivia
targeting the public in general, and communities in and around key protected areas.



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, describe
steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
The project will seek to harmonize the practices of landowners, resident and user communities in each
private protected area (PPA) with the conservation of ecosystems.
Any restrictions on natural resource use will be voluntarily imposed by landowners. Potential
livelihood issues might arise related to newly imposed restrictions, if any, on access to natural
resources by local people.
2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Describe
any potential cumulative or long term impacts.
Given the scale of the present project, activities are not expected to have significant negative social or
environmental impacts on either group.
3. In light of I and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable
4. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A process framework has been developed to address the potential livelihood issues of local people in
case their access to natural resources is restricted.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project targets two major social groups: small and large landowners. In addition, the social
assessment identified, as key stakeholders, the following groups: campesinos, indigenous groups,
large-scale cattle ranchers, large-scale farmers, non-active landowners, NGOs and government
During the project design process (PDF), stakeholder involvement first took place through the
consultation workshop ("Formulation of Policies for Private Conservation in Bolivia" - Sept. 14-15,
2000), in which policies for private conservation were suggested and agreed upon and actions were
identified to "put the policies into practice." These consensus-based actions have been incorporated as
GEF project activities. In this workshop, stakeholders were presented with the GEF project idea and
their participation was solicited for future project implementation.
During project implementation, the final selection and implementation of Pilot Areas will be made
from identified groups and individual stakeholders, and all potential participants in private
conservation will be invited to participate in the project's Initiative Development Activities including
the BPCG. The participation of the owner/managers of Pilot Areas 1, 11 and III in dissemination and
capacity building activities based on their pilot experiences will be required.  Among potential
stakeholders the project will attempt to channel public interest into new initiatives, creating a pattern
for public participation to be sustained after the project's conclusion. Finally, a Technical Advisory
Committee will be formed in order to channel stakeholder input into project management.
E. Safeguards Classtfication (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis
of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues



Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of the
area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
o   Pilot Area I will constitute Bolivia's first Private Protected Area (PPA), the 5,000-hectare "El
Corbalan" Reserve located in the Bolivian Chaco. The area is property of the proponent
organization PROMETA, who will manage the land throughout the project. This experience will
demonstrate the conversion of a Natural Heritage Private Reserve (NHPR) to a PPA, and will test
policies and methodologies for management plan formulation and implementation, monitoring,
and the application of incentives in the form of technical assistance.
o Pilot Area II will be an existing NHPR in the Chiquitano Forest in eastern Bolivia, and will
demonstrate policies for NHPR creation (based on past experience), management plan formulation
and implementation, and financial and legal incentives.
o   Pilot Area III will demonstrate the creation of Bolivia's first Conservation Easement on a
"Tahuamanu" Brazil Nut-producing property, located in the Southwest Amazonian Moist Forest
ecoregion in northwestern Bolivia. The experience will be disseminated nationally, and in
particular to the more than 35 landowners of 150,000 hectares of similar Brazil Nut properties.
o   PilotAreaIVwill demonstrate the process of purchasing and managing land for conservation. In
the Adopt-an-Acre program of The Nature Conservancy, funds raised from across the United
States are donated to an NGO in another country for the purchase and management of land. For
the project, PROMETA's acquisition experiences with the 2,500-hectare "Alarachi" property will
be systemized and disseminated (GEF funds will not be used for land acquisition). The property
forms part of the Andean Yungas "Tariquia-Baritu" International Ecological Corridor which links
the Tariquia Flora and Fauna National Reserve in Bolivia to Baritu National Park in Argentina.
B. Check Environmental Classifcation A [ ], B [ , C [xl, Fl [ ], TBD [ I
Comments: The proposed project will have a positive impact on conservation of biodiversity in Bolivia as
it would support and facilitate the creation of new private protected areas in the country.
C Applicability of Safeguard Policies (from PDS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for fill policy
Yes     No     TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                      I I    [xI     I I
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         [ 1    [xI     I 1
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 [1     [x]      I []
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   [1     [xI     I I
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     [ 1    [xI     [ I
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                             I     [XI r   rI1
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                   ]     [xI     I I
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                 r 1    [XI     I I
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                    1 ]    [x I    I I
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           [1     [x] I   II
By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas



