25558
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
Qfo S-ho
'Mc W" KUL
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BOLIVIA                                 Project ID: P073367
Project: Bolivia: Decentralized Energy, Information and  Task Team Leader: Dana Rysankova
Communications Technology for Rural Transformation
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 6, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 29, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: LCSFR                             Sector: District heating and energy efficiency
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  services (34%); Information technology (33%);
Status. Lending                                  General energy sector (33%)
Theme: Other rural development (P); Infrastructure
services for private sector development (S); Other
urban development (S); Poverty strategy; analysis
and monitoring (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to expand and improve delivery of electricity and ICT services
through private-sector led mechanisms as a catalyst for the development of rural areas in Bolivia. Phase I
activities will be confined to the following specific interventions in the identified project areas: (i)
increasing access to rural infrastructure services by using innovative, output-based, decentralized service
delivery models with increased private-sector participation and community involvement; (ii) defining and
implementing improvements in policy, regulatory and institutional frameworks, and strengthening the
respective key institutions; (iii) identifying and developing applications for the productive and social uses
of electricity and ICT; (iv) intensively promoting the new services, including market development and
training of local users, service providers and authorities; and (v) implementing rigorous monitoring and
evaluation programs.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The National Rural Infrastructure Strategy TA will assist the Vice-Ministries of Energy and
Communications in developing effective strategies to improve and accelerate electricity and ICT
coverage expansion in rural areas, particularly addressing the following aspects: availability of financing;
efficient planning and prioritization of investment projects based on "bottom-up" identification of
demand and binding cost-minimizing criteria; efficient private-sector participation in investment,
operation and maintenance (O&M); competitive allocation of subsidies; adequate user contributions
based on capacity to pay; appropriate O&M arrangements ensuring long-term sustainability of
investments; and introduction of adequate technical standards and regulations for rural areas.



2
ISDS
The Rural coverage expansion component aims at direct expansion of electricity and phonle service into
rural areas through a competitive award of subsidies to private-sector operators. Its sub-components are:
the Solar PV Market Development sub-component, which will implement private-sector led off grid
service delivery models, providing up to 20,000 new rural households, micro-enterprises, schools and
health posts with sustainable electricity by offering a menu of decentralized service options (opening the
Bolivian market for the first time to solar home systems below 40 Wp); the Grid Densification
sub-component, which will develop new regulatory standards, build capacity and implement a
demonstration investment project that densifies existing grids within a radius of 1 km; the Telephone
Coverage Expansion sub-component, which will extend cell phone coverage to 42 municipal sections
with populations of between 2,000 and 10,000 inhabitants that do not have cell phone service and/or a
central telephone; and the Other Energy and ICT Investment sub-components, which will pilot
additional small interventions related to the coverage expansion component, primarily pico-hydro
stations (very small, household-based hydro units).
The Productive and Social Uses component will identify, develop, facilitate and promote productive
and social uses of the installed infrastructure. The Promotion, Communication and Capacity Building
component will provide a common platform for community consultations, promotion campaigns and
training of users in using the new infrastructure efficiently and productively. The Project Management,
Monitoring and Evaluation component will focus primarily on monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
including: development of M&E indicators, baseline and methodology; periodic evaluation of progress
toward achieving the identified targets; and final evaluation upon project completion.
l.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Zone 1 (Departments of Oruro and Potosi) includes 26 municipalities. This region is characterized by
its elevation-between 3,000 and 4,000 meters above sea level. The main productive activities include
quinua, llamas and alpacas (cameloids), potatoes, and minerals. The government competitiveness
program (Unidad de Productividad y Competitividad) has identified this region as a potential export area,
where three productive clusters are being formed-quinua, cameloids and tourism-and recommended
for inclusion in the project. This zone has a total population of roughly 200,000 people, and its index of
unsatisfied basic needs (NBI) is 3 1.8%, and electricity coverage is only 3 1.1%.
Zone 2 (Valles Mesotermicos de Santa Cruz y Cono Sur de Cochabamba), which includes 20
municipalities and a total population of around 183,000 people, has an NBI of 31.1 % and electricity
service coverage of 35.9%. This zone covers the Valles Mesotermicos (1200 to 1800 meters above sea
level). Production in this area of fruits and vegetables for the national market (mainly tomatoe and
onion) has been on the rise. Zone 2 also includes the Cono Sur de Cochabamba, characterized by the
Andean valleys, with a traditionally high production of potatoe, corn, barley and cattle. The ethnicity in
both regions is Quechua. (According to the latest census, 90% of the people in the Cochabamba vicinity
identified themselves as indigenous).
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes O No



3
ISDS
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                           0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  O Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is nol available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
An environmental assessment of the project has been undertaken, identifying any possible negative
environmental effects due to the installation of equipment and other minor works. The assessment has
concluded that the probability of negative environmental effects is very small. In fact, the project is
expected to have a positive environmental impact due to the use of renewable energy technologies
(photovoltaic systems), reducing CO2 emissions.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are no anticipated negative cumulative impacts.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No negative long-term impact are foreseen. Due to the reduction of CO2 emissions, the project is
expected to have a positive environmental impact. The project anticipates receiving additional support
through the Community Development Carbon Fund (CDCF), which will buy CO2 emission reductions
produced by the project.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each sub-project will be developed during
implementation. The EMPs will follow a prescribed format, including adequate monitoring indicators.
Mitigation measures will be included in the contractors' bidding documents and environmental indicators
will be monitored by the implementing agencies. The overall impact of the project on greenhouse gas
reduction will be monitored as a key output indicator.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main direct beneficiaries of the project will be roughly 20,000 rural, low-income households that
will be offered electricity service and over 25,000 new cell phone users in rural towns. Farmers, small



4
ISDS
businesses, schools, clinics and community centers in the project areas will also be served by the addition
of electricity and ICT services and their related applications. Ultimately, the project would benefit the
rural population in the rest of the country through replication on a larger scale.
Indigenous communities are among the most significant beneficiaries of the project. Almost 80% of the
people in the project areas identified themselves as indigenous in the 2001 census. In addition to
household electricity, indegenous people will benefit from improved social services in schools, health
posts and community centers, as well as from improved communication through ICT. All content and
applications developed under the Productive and Social Uses Component, as well as their dissemination
and training activities, will be specifically adapted (for language and cultural considerations) to reach
indigenous groups. The communities will participate actively in project implementation to ensure that
the project effectively responds to the real needs of indigenous people and their communities.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



5
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requiremnents
Environmental Assessmnent/Analysis/Management Plan.         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/7/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/7/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/6/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/6/2003
Pest Managemnent Plan.                                      Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Damn Safety Management Plan.                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sihned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Dana Rysankova                              March 9, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                         March 7, 2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Danny M. Leipziger                          March 7, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
@l iOrEav                     3VTA1111111SM



