25683
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
1itfoShop
'Mc W -dd Bk
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BOSNIA-HIERZEGOVTNA                      Project ID: P079161
Project: FOREST DEVELOPMENT AND                  Task Team Leader: Christian Albert Peter
CONSERVATION PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 13, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 12, 2003                      [DA Amount ($m): 4.15
Managing Unit: ENV                               Sector: Central government administration (73%);
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  Forestry (27%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Land management (P); Other environment
and natural resources management (P);
Environmental policies and institutions (S); Rural
non-farm income generation (S); Other public sector
governance (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the project is to assist with the implementation of mandated reforms in forest
organization and management, which are expected to lead to better forest management, increased
revenues from forest resources, and participatory approaches in forest land use planning through pilot
learning activities.
In addition, the project is expected to improve ownership of the reform process at the canton level.
Although the two entities (Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Federation); and Republika Srpska
(RS)) are at different stages of readiness to implement the reforms, the project will be active in both of
them, to ensure that the reform momentum developed under the current Forest Project is maintained.
Importantly, the lessons of institutional reform developed under the project could also be relevant for
other sectors.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1. Accelerating the implementation of new legal, institutional and economic
frameworks
This component will sustain BiH's ambitious reform program in the forestry sector, which was initiated
in 1998 with support from the soon-to-be-completed Forestry Project. The new TA operation will help
both entities complete ongoing legal reforms; implement follow-on institutional re-organizations; and
make necessary adjustments to optimize the contribution of forests to the overall economic development.



2
ISDS
The project will also help both entities monitor progress in implementation of those changes at both
central and local levels.
Activities under Component 1 will be conducted in both entities, independently but concurrently. The
legal, institutional and economic reform process is at different stages in both entities; and legal and
economic reforms are placed under the responsibility of entities' governments.
In thie Federation, amendments to the new Law on Forests were prepared by a working group with
support of the Forestry Project and has been submitted to the Parliament. The privatization of production
functions has been completed in several cantons. The law and its amendments call for a profound
institutional re-organization with redistribution of mandates and contractual agreements between the
Federation and the Cantons. The new project will assist through:
A.     Improving the economic and financing framework. The project will fund an financial review
of the forest and wood processing sector, focussing on an examination of budget structures and financial
flows, for both expenditures and revenues. The outcome of this analysis will be an action plan to guide
the government in the development of a coherent financing and taxation system that should: (a) ensure
that the "public good" functions of forests are adequately financed; (b) optimize the revenues accruing to
Forest Services and to the Budget from the sale of timber raw material; (c) ensure re-investment of forest
revenues to guarantee an autonomous and self-financing forest sector; and (d) improve the incentive
framework for the development of the private sector in forest operations, for increased local employment
and for higher valued-added processing industry. The analysis would be done in two phases. The first
phase, beginning immediately after project Effectiveness, would examine the sector's potential and actual
contribution to the economy, witlh a particular focus on revenues, and within the overall objective of
sustainable management of forests. It would then suggest specific areas for further investigation. They
are likely to include: (i) the extent of illegal forest activities and forest sector corruption; (ii) an
examination of: the processing sector; alternative timber sales systems (such as leasing or concessions);
(iii) accounting and financial management practices within forest management companies and
enterprises; (iv) human resources needs; and (v) revenue potential from tourism and biodiversity. The
second phase would then undertake the specific studies and action plans in these areas.
In addition, the project will provide facilitation skills and support to working groups as well as economic
and technical analysis to help build consensus among the parties, design a phased action plan and
monitor its implementation. In particular, it will facilitate coordination between concerned ministries
(Agriculture, Industry and Finances) at the Federal and Cantonal levels.
B.     Supporting the sector's institutional re-organization. As noted, much work remains in order
to achieve the gains to the sector arising from the recent changes to legislative framework and regulations
in the Federation. The project will provide technical assistance to ensure coherence between the cantonal
and Federal level, as the cantons continue with their institutional reorganization. Technical assistance
will focus on creation of new staffing and business plans, which will developed through working groups
which are representative of affected sector personnel. TA will also focus on assisting with completion of
the contractual agreements between the Federal and Cantonal levels, so that responsibilities are clearly
defined, as stipulated in the law. The project will also provide limited basic office equipment, on a
case-by-case basis, where a determination of need for such equipment is made during the development of
business plans. The TA is needed in all cantons, and critically, in the cantons which are moving more
slowly, the TA will provide the extra incentive and necessary tools to make the required changes.
C.     Providing training to cantonal companies and recently privatized enterprises. T-raining to



3
ISDS
private forest enterprises will aim to introduce new management methods and technological processes so
as to promote local industry and improve competitiveness on international markets. Training would also
be provided to forest inspectorates to improve transparency and forest governance, which would assist
the inspectorates to tackle ongoing illegal logging and corruption. Additional training will be provided to
newly-established cantonal forest companies in order to improve their capacity in financial and human
resources management. Implementation of this sub-component will be preceded by an assessment of
training needs. Training related to illegal logging would follow from the diagnostic work on this issue
performed in the context of the economic review above.
Republika Srpska (RS) recently amended its forestry law and completed a privatization process, at least
on formal grounds. The new TA project will focus on:
A.     Improving the economic and financing framework. This sub-component will be developed
along the same lines as in the Federation. Although the solutions to improve the economic framework of
the sector may differ from the Federation, the deficiencies of the sector are similar and can be tackled
through a similar approach combining technical analysis with participatory working groups both in the
design and the implementation phases of the change process.
B.     Supporting the sector's institutional re-organization through provision of facilitation skills,
workshops and working groups, organizational and financial management expertise. In particular, the
project will help implement the Government's decision to reduce the number of State Forest Enterprises
within Srpske Sume from 40 to 24.
C.     Providing training to state forest enterprises and recently privatized companies. This
sub-component will be developed along the same lines as in the Federation.
Component 2.     Strenethening of Technical Capacity for Sustainable Forest Management
This component will facilitate the implementation of economically and environmentally sound forest
management at the level of Forest Management Units (FMU) in both entities. It will set up technical
instruments that are critical to ensure monitoring and sustainable use of BiH's forest endowment.
This component include two sets of activities, each of them covering both entities:
A.     Development of a GIS-based Forest Management Information System (FMIS). The project
will provide technical assistance, software, hardware and training for the setting up and maintenance of a
comprehensive forest information system. This GIS-based system would be used as a tool for managers
in the field and in head offices for planning, management and monitoring forest operations as well as by
the forest inspectorate for supervision. It will ensure transparent and efficient public forest administration
functions, and will help enforce forest regulations and combat illegal activities as well as
over-harvesting, which deprives the country from economic benefits and threatens the sustainability of
forests. Technical, economical and geographical information will be entered into the system at the FMU
level and be consolidated at the national to serve as a basis for overall management decisions. The FMIS
will cover all public forests, and private forests where ownership is formally registered. This component
will also support current initiatives launched at the cantonal level to set up digital log-tracking system
with a view to supporting future certification operations. It will comprise of three inter-related modules
*   the technical module: covering data from forest inventory, silvicultural and regeneration operations,



4
ISDS
records and forecast on harvesting volume;
*   the economical module: covering financial information such as results from timber sales, collection
of fiscal revenues, and accounting of forest enterprises;
*   the geographical module: each FMUJ will be mapped and digitalized, with identification of
conservation areas, road network and harvesting operations. This GIS-mapping module will be
developed in synergy with the protected area GIS-planning effort under component C, and both
together will provide the foundation of a Bosnia-wide forest and environment land-use planning.
The introduction of a FMIS has already been initiated by Srpske Sume in Republika Srpska. In the
Federation, cantons are unequally advanced in the setting up of information systems and some cantons
still need to go through profound institutional re-arrangements. Based on these considerations, the FMIS
component will be preceded by an overall feasibility study that will assess the information systems
currently in place and under development, and the potential for harmonization. It is likely that, based on
this initial assessment, the component will be implemented first in Republika Srpska, and in pilot cantons
of the Federation which are further advanced.
B. Implementation of a Bosnia-wide forest inventory. A comprehensive methodology for a national
forest inventory, under consideration of a special focus to biodiversity and forest protection, is currently
being developed by GTZ, in both entities. The project will provide technical assistance to the
implementation of the inventory over a two-year period, as well as supporting collection of data in the
field and computerized processing of data. The inventory will provide updated and integrated data on
forest stand and health, quality of management, biodiversity potential, and cadastre. The TA operation
would ensure that in addition to a typical forest inventory, information on critical forest ecosystems
would be supplied, to provide a base line for forest and biodiversity conservation. In addition, it would
assist in the development of Forest Management Standards in both entities. The Bosnia-wide forest
inventory will be carried out in both entities simultaneously and in synergy with the development of the
FMIS.
Component 3.     Promoting Biodiversitv and Forest Conservation in both entities
This component will address the fact that only 0.55% of BiH's territory is formally protected. It will
respond to political determination in both entities to take better advantage of the country's position in the
middle of Europe, and its unique landscape and biodiversity endowment. Bosnia's natural habitats and
game resources have the potential to support a significant tourism industry and provide employment in
rural areas. This component will be executed with support from the Italian Government. Importantly,
this component will pave the way for a GEF project on biodiversity conservation/protected areas in
CY2004.
This component will be conducted jointly in both entities under the leadership of the Environmental
Steering Committee comprised of both Ministries of Environment.
The project will develop three complementary sets of activities:
A.     Developing a National Biodiversity Strategy, which would following up on the recent
ratification of the Convention on Biological Diversity and finalization of the National Environmental
Action Plan (NEAP). The project would support formulation and adoption of approaches and actions for
the protection and sustainable use of bio-diversity, through a participatory process involving the public
and private sectors and civil society. This national Biodiversity Strategy would be supported by the
folowing two sub-components.



5
ISDS
B.     Drawing up of a GIS-based proposal for developing BiH's protected area network up to 5%
of the territory in both entities. This effort will include identification of the areas which are of critical
importance for biodiversity conservation and where the legal status of protection could possibly make
sense from a social and economic point of view. The proposed network will include different categories
of protected areas, allowing for full protection status in core areas and for multipurpose management in
surrounding buffer zones. The project will support the GIS-based mapping effort, and ground-truth
operations. Together with the FMIS (component B), the project will provide the foundation of a
Bosnia-wide forest and environment land-use planning. However, the project will not create any
protected area. The effective gazetment of any proposed area shall follow the comprehensive
consultation process developed under the sub-component 2.
C.     Setting up the standard procedures for a comprehensive consultation process that will
include all stakeholders in the decision-making process towards establishment of any new protected area
in BiH. The proposed procedures will be tested with the specific case of the Igman/Bielasnica area
which has been proposed as a National Park by a feasibility study funded by the forestry project. Since it
overlaps both Republika Srpska and Federation, this area calls for harmonized consultation procedures at
the State level. The project would support technical assistance, socio-economic assessments,
consultation activities in the field and study tours to relevant countries.
Component 4.     Proiect implementation. Monitorine and Evaluation
A.     Project Management: The project will be managed by two small Project Implementation Units
(PIUs) within the two entity Ministries responsible for forestry with the overall responsibility for the
implementation of the TAC including procurement, disbursement, accounting and coordination.
Permanent staffing would include two PIU directors each supported by an administrative assistant. This
component will also aim to strengthen donors coordination around the national forest agenda and will
look at the feasibility to harmonize donors procedures with a view to prefigure a future multi-donors
national program.
B.     Project Monitoring: The PIUs will be responsible for monitoring the progress of the project
based on a comprehensive system of indicators to be developed during project preparation, and provide
quarterly implementation reports and activity plans in a format acceptable to the Bank. Both PUJs in
charge of the implementation of the Forestry Project will be assigned the same mandate for the
implementation of the TAC operation.
L.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be active throughout the country. Forest resources in Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH) are
amongst the richest in Europe in terms of the extent and variety of stock relative to the size of the
country, covering almost 50% of the land area. This unique situation can be contributed to: (i) BiH's
position inside the central part of the Dinarides; (ii) the high percentage of broken relief and mountainous
terrain (about 66% of the territory); (iii) geological doiversity; and (iv) the collision of two climatic areas
(continental in the North and Mediterranean in the South). BiH's forest cover total compares with 24%
for pasture land, much of it close to forest areas, and only 10% for arable land. The forests also have
important watershed protection values for much of the middle and lower Danube.
57% of the population of 3.9 million live in rural areas, and for them forests are an important source of



6
ISDS
employment (in forest industries), energy (fuelwood for heating, largely from forest residues) and
recreation. The rural population relies on fuelwood for heating purposes, and official estimates show that
BiH produces about 700,000 m' of fuelwood. Fuelwood often comes from coppiced forests, timber
residues and fruit trees. The collection of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) is of importance for the
local population both in terms of traditional cultural values and potential income source. These products
include herbs, spices, mushrooms, and wild fruits, as well as game meat. In relation to the latter, hunting
has a long tradition for the rural population in all former Yugoslav republics, and was understood as the
production, rearing, protection and rational use of game. Game animals and birds made up the basis of
the hunting industry, as a natural resource. The use of these products is usually managed at the local
level and regulated in the new forest legislation. The project will help to ensure the continuation of
people's access to the timber and NTF products through assistance in participatory planning approaches
that will provide state forest companies with the tools needed to plan for the continued access of
communities to traditional sources of livelihood.
The project will not be active in any culturally or socially sensitive areas.
B. Chieck Environmental Classiflcation: C (Not Required)
Comments: Because of its emphasis on capacity building, training, and planning new regulatory and
institutional instruments, the project as currently designed is likely to have no adverse environmental
impacts. As such, no EMP will be prepared. There are no works to be implemented (i.e. no visitor centers
or similar park facilities, or roads) and neither any logging nor any extractive activity will be financed by the
project. The project is expected to have an overall positive environmental outcome in both the short- and
the long-term. The legal and institutional framework will be strengthened and clarified; forest
administrations will be given the opportunity to elaborate a national FMIS which will improve their
management capacity; and innovative multipurpose forest inventory and local consultation procedures will
help structure an open dialogue on national land-use planning with a positive impact on environment. The
project will pave the way for sustainable management of forest and biodiversity resources in BiH's complex
political and institutional environment.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                  0   Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                           0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      * Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                0 Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



7
ISDS
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
As noted above, because of its emphasis on capacity building, training, and planning new regulatory and
institutional instruments, the project as currently designed is likely to have no large scale, significant
and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
The project is consistent with the objectives of the Bank's Forests Policy (OP 4.36), since it will be
strengthen BiH's institutional framework for sustainable forest management. Specifically, and again
consistent with the policy, it aims to harness the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable
way, integrate forests effectively into sustainable economic development and protect vital local and
global environmental services and values of forests.
The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). A social assessment conducted
during preparation will help to ensure that management plans are prepared to continue to provide access
of local people to forests and subsistence needs. The project's Operational Manual will contain relevant
procedures to help ensure continuing user rights to forests. The project will also support a broad-based
consultation process which will guide the decision as to whether to create a National Park
Igman-Bjelasnica and what its boundaries and management regime would be. These consultations will
help design of a Process Framework, should a decision to be made at a later date to create such a park.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
It is important to emphasize that the current project seeks to assist the government to implement new
forest legislation, particularly in the set-up of the new cantonal administrations and public enterprises, to
provide them with the innovative administrative and technical tools to meet their responsibilities. This
will result in a long-term positive impact, as the public enterprises are able to monitor the forest resource
more effectively. Improved administrative capacity will also assist the public enterprises to respond to
the local communities and other forest stakeholders more efficiently and transparently. Enterprise
operations will be positively strengthened by the further development of the legal and regulatory
framework for the sector.
The multi-purpose forest inventory is expected to have a long-term positive impact, by establishing the
baseline for future measurement of the effectiveness and sustainability of enterprise operations and by
creating the basis for multi-stakeholders concertation on land-use planning.
There are significant potential long-term impacts associated with the possible future expansion of the
protected area system, which are primarily positive. Benefits would include recreation, employment
opportunities from tourism, watershed protection as well as the maintenance of gene pools for forests
products harvested and used by the local population (berries, mushrooms, snails, etc.).
1I.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required.
I1.D.3. Describe arrangemeni for the borrower to address safeguard issues



8
ISDS
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A survey of stakeholders will be undertaken as part of the preliminary social assessment, which will be
completed prior to project Effectiveness. During implementation, and in anticipation of a possible GEF
operation, a full social assessment will be carried out, with the following objectives: (a) to assess the
existing socio-economic conditions of the target population; (b) to consult stakeholders inside and
bordering to the envisaged NP area on the perceived constraints and opportunities envisaged under the
project; and (c) to identify suitable participatory scheme mechanisms for the various stakeholders.
The assessment will also determine the most effective consultation and disclosure strategy, based on
interviews, household surveys, and focus groups. Following this assessment, the project will engage
relevant stakeholders in a process to detail foreseeable impacts, and make recommendations on the
appropriateness of creating a park, given the economic, environmental, and social impacts. It should be
noted that in most European countries economic activities take place within National Parks consistent
with sustainable management of the ecosystems. It might be determined that creating a park is not
desirable, or it might be determined that overall there will be positive repercussions of related-economic
activities, and therefore a park could be created. Nevertheless, compensatory measures for potential
negative impacts would need to be designed and agreed through a consultative process. Feasibility
studies indicate that tourism has a great potential for generating local incomes in the area of
Igman/Bjelasnica. Consultations will also focus on how to agree on optimal park boundaries.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3.-No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Managenment Plan.         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Franmework:                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank



9
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Danm Safety Management Plan.                                  Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Christian Albert Peter                        03/21/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                               03/24/2003
Sector Manager/Director:       Marjory-Anne Bromhead                        03/23/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
S              FeKOSACK       S   A?            WS11



