Report No. 23750
Report No: I057950 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA      Project ID: P057950
Project: Solid Waste Management Project (Ex. Environmental Infrastructure
Protection Project)      Task Team Leader: Seema Manghee
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 11, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 0.00
Bank Approval: June 20, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 18.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE     Sector: VP - Pollution Control / Waste Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's objectives are to: (a) improve solid waste services cost
effectively in participating priority areas; (b) increase administrative
and technical capacity for solid waste management at the local and entity
level; (c) improve the cost recovery mechanism of the sector to encourage
private sector involvement; and (d) correct environmental problems and
reduce health hazards caused by inadequate waste collection and disposal
systems.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will support the development of regional waste disposal
districts, based on the cooperation of multiple municipalities, and
rehabilitation of existing landfills to be used for disposal of the waste
generated within these distracts.    Consolidation of existing landfills is
necessary for Bosnia Herzegovina (BiH) in affording sanitary landfills.
This approach is consistent with the Nationwide Solid Waste Management
Strategy for BiH (2000), funded by the European Union (EU). Based on an
analysis of the EU Strategy, adapted in the context of affordability and
implementation capacity, the Government has developed a three-phase Solid
Waste Management (SWM) strategy covering the period of 2001-2015, and
asked the World Bank to assist with implementation of phase one (2001-06),
and the development of phase two.    Phase one of the SWM plan focuses on
the most urgent investments for rehabilitation of existing landfill sites,
safe methods of disposal, public awareness raising, training of sector
staff, and extension of collection services to areas that are not
presently covered. The strategy reflects a calculated decision not to
invest in costly high-technology waste processing options at this first
phase. The project will finance planning for the second phase of the
strategy, under the institutional strengthening component.     The practical
experience gained with this project would serve as input for the further
development of the BiH SWM strategy.
The project components are:
Component A. Waste Management Component



Rehabilitation of existing disposal sites: rehabilitation of landfill
sites to meet sanitary standards, including upgrading of infrastructure.
Wild Dump closures: equipment and civil works needed to permanently close
wild dump sites in an environmentally sound way and institute long term
environmental monitoring. The goods used for this component would
eventually be reassigned to other landfill sites once the closures are
complete.
Collection Infrastructure and Support Equipment: finance equipment such
as collection bins, support vehicles, and other related equipment.
Transfer Stations: finance a limited number of economical transfer
stations handling residential, commercial and institutional waste for
consolidation to regional landfill sites.
Component B. Institutional Strengthening
Community Participation and Public Education Program: support community
activities required for efficient operation of the solid waste system.
This will include professional training to personnel the sector, public
awareness and introduction of environmental subjects in education programs
on the need for safe collection and disposal of household refuse and
potential health/environmental problems created by inappropriate disposal
of wastes in wild dumps, rivers and mines.
Business Plan - medium term: includes a Government strategic plan for the
medium-term development of the SWM system. The plan would address the
medium-term approaches and investments required to maintain the SWM
system, enforcement and its upgrading to international standards. This
sub-component would also involve development of financial management
capacity for the system to operate on a commercial basis and measures to
be taken to be ultimately privatized as appropriate. This would include
training related to disposal, landfill operations and closure and design
of future landfill designs.
Project Assistance and Management: assist project management activities
to include financial management , preparation of bidding documents to
purchase goods and implementation of works, as well as hiring of
consultants to carry out the various studies under this sub-component.
Component C: Engineering Services/Technical Assistance
Engineering Services/Technical Assistance. This component will finance
technical assistance for the feasibility studies, and the financial,
environmental and social assessments of landfill sites yet to be
identified. It will finance preparation of the final designs and bidding
documents; and provide support with the bidding procedures, for the
investments and services provided under Components A and B. Investments
would be chosen based on operational priority and cost.
This component would also fund equipment for operations including
environmental monitoring.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
- 2 -



environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is nation-wide, covering both entities, and includes, at this
time, four landfills servicing the following cities - Livno, Mostar, Banja
Luka, and Tuzla. Feasibility studies and environment assessments have
been conducted on these four existing landfills and confirm that all four
sites are appropriately sited, although in various stages of disrepair.
Varying levels of rehabilitation are required for the landfills with one,
Uborek (Mostar), having been recently upgraded by the EU, already meeting
EU requirements as a sanitary landfill. Here, the project will focus on
the collection, transfer, and institutional aspects of waste management
for the Mostar region. The other three landfills will require upgrading to
meeting sanitary landfill standards. The environmental and social
assessments of the four landfills have determined that the sites are not
proximate to any protected areas, sites, or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.
Not all the landfills to be rehabilitated have been identified during
preparation, by design. Approximately 35t of credit proceeds will be
allocated to the "to be determined " site category, which allows other
regions to be included in the project during implementation, assuming
environmental, financial and other relevant Bank requirements are
fulfilled.   Already, a fifth landfill covering the Banja Luka region has
recently been proposed for inclusion. The feasibility study and the
financial, environmental, and social assessment for the Banja Luka site
will be conducted during project implementation.
The illegal landfills, or wild dumps, to be closed are those within the
regions to be serviced by the landfill sites supported by the project.
This supports the strategy that with a well-functioning, sanitary
landfill, transfer and collection system in place, illegal landfills will
not be necessary.     Approximately 30-40 transfer stations will be funded
by the project. Transfer stations will be sited on existing illegal dump
sites closed under the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Environmental
Summarize significant environmental issues and objectives and identify key
stakeholders. If the issues are still to be determined, describe current
or planned efforts to do so.
By improved collection, transfer, and disposal of solid waste, and the
reduction of illegal dumping in environmentally sensitive areas, the
project is expected to have positive benefits to human health and to
reduce adverse environmental impacts of waste disposal.     Additional
positive impacts include: (i) improved waste collection would lessen the
quantity of uncollected waste; (ii) improved collection methods, landfill
design and management practices will separate municipal wastes from
medical wastes and provide for the separate, and proper disposal of each;
and (iii) closure of illegal dumps will eliminate future contamination and
health hazards. While resource recovery and recycling are desirable in the
long term, there is currently no market that will provide adequate
payment for recyclables to fund the additional costs associated with waste
separation.   Recycling, including composting of solid waste,    will only
be considered for inclusion in the project scope if there is solid
-3 -



evidence of a long-term market potential and customer willingness to pay.
Potential negative environmental impacts associated with solid waste
management include contamination of soil, groundwater, surface water and
air quality.    These impacts would be associated with construction;
collection, transfer and storage; operation of the landfill; leachate
and gas emissions from landfills and transfer stations; and
decommissioning of the landfills. Improper landfill siting is not a
consideration as no new   construction is planned.     The Environmental
Assessments of each site includes analysis of the site's location and
environmental quality, when available. There is limited amount of data
but it appears groundwater is contaminted by leachate at some of the
landfills in BiH. Throughout the period of the operation of the landfill,
there will be an increase in the leachate discharge. It is important to
monitoring the quantity and quality of the leachate to prevent potential
groundwater contamination. The Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
describes mitigation measures to be taken to address each of the potential
negative impacts noted above. The EMP describes the institutional roles
and responsibilities for monitoring, reporting, and enforcement. It
describes the monitoring programs for the landfills which includes
establishing a baseline. The project will finance training related to
environmentally sound SWM including disposal, landfill operations,
decommissioning of landfills, design of future landfill designs, and
environmental assessment, monitoring, and enforcement.     The EMP includes
guidelines for the environmental review of additional landfills proposed
for rehabilitation during project implementation.
The investments financed will not affect any known archeological or
historical site or any natural habitat, nor affect indigenous people.
The social assessment has determined that there are no scavengers active
in the landfills included in the project; and there are no people living
on the existing landfills or illegal dumps.
Environmental category and justification/rationale for category rating: B
- Partial Assessment.    Category B is proposed for this project, as it is
not likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are
sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
- 4 -



proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the citizens of the regions to be serviced by the
project's rehabilitated sanitary landfills. During project preparation
stakeholders, including local and national NGOs, were involved in
workshops, local level community meetings, and public consultations. The
project includes a sub-component on "Community Participation and Public
Education" which will foster communication between the communities and
the SWM authorities. The EA and EMP have been discussed during project
preparation stakeholder workshops and will be publicly disclosed.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/8/2002        2/8/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/4/2002         3/4/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   2/14/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected        Actual
- 5 -



Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Seema Manghee
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Rita Klees/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   2/19/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         MotooKonishi; Hossein Razavi     2/19/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



