                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/06/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BRAZIL                                            Project ID: P075379
Project: Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Integrated Ecosystem   Task Team Leader: Alvaro J. Soler
Management in Production Landscapes of the
North-Northwestern Fluminense (GEF)
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 30, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m): 0.00
Bank Approval: December 16, 2004                           IDA Amount ($m):
                                                           Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 6.73
Managing Unit: LCC5C                                       Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
Lending Instrument: UNIDENTIFIED (??)                      (80%); Other social services (10%); Sub-national
Status: Lending                                            government administration (10%)
                                                           Theme: Other environment and natural resources
                                                           management (P); Civic engagement, participation and
                                                           community driven development (P); Biodiversity (P);
                                                           Land management (P); Climate change (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project aims to increase and sustain smallholder agricultural production and productivity and
assist in the sustainable use of natural resources, by promoting the adoption of sustainable land
and water management, at the microcatchment level, with full involvement of the farming
community.

The global objectives of the project are threefold: (i) to address threats to biodiversity of global
importance, (ii) enhance carbon sequestration in the agricultural landscape, and (iii) reverse land
degradation in public and/or fragile lands.

These objectives would be achieved primarily through promoting the adoption of an integrated
ecosystem approach in rural areas compatible with the GEF Operational Program on Integrated
Ecosystem Management (OP 12), and by directly addressing the identified threats and constraints
that are preventing the adoption of ecosystem approaches in Rio de Janeiro, which are also
identified in other parts of Brazil, particularly in the Atlantic Forest ecoregions.




I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS)

The proposed project would be implemented over five years and would have a base cost of US$
8.3 million. The project direct beneficiaries will be the farmers' families living in the five priority
watersheds, encompassing 22 municipalities of the North-Northwestern Fluminense (NNWF)
regions of Rio de Janeiro State. The project would have four components:

                                                  2
                                                                                               ISDS




Component 1 - Planning for Sustainable Land Management (US$ 2.5 million, 5.5% of total
project cost). This component is oriented toward policy formulation and action planning, all key
elements needed in the development of a dynamic framework for rural and environmentally
sustainable decision-making to be supported under the project. The component consists of three
subcomponents: (i) Development of Policies, Regional Plans and Regulations: would support
studies, workshops and public consultations to define the policy, legal and regional planning
framework for ecosystem management in the NNWF; it would include the development of
watershed management strategies, formulation of a proposal for the creation of an environmental
services fund and support to the implementation of Serra do Mar biodiversity corridor in the
NNWF; (ii) Local Land Management Planning: would support activities that would orient
intervention efforts and the regulation of conduct by rural producers regarding preservation of
natural resources and management of ecosystems as landscapes. Activities under this
subcomponent would include: (i) formulation of Microcatchment Implementation Plans (PEM) in
critical and/or unique microcatchments identified from project watersheds; (ii) participatory
preparation of Terms of Adjustment of Conduct for Responsible Natural Resource Use for each
microcatchement, establishing principles and standards applicable to the conservation,
management and sustainable use of natural resources; and (iii) strengthening of environmental
vigilance and enforcement activities, including the promotion of community participation in
legislation enforcement.

Component 2 - Incentive System for Sustainable Land Management (US$ 37.0 million,
83.0% of total project cost).This component aims to provide incentives for small farmers and
other relevant ecosystem managers at the microcatchment, municipal and watershed levels to
move from existing conventional and unsustainable smallholder agriculture to sustainable
livelihood activities which enhance biodiversity and carbon sequestration in the agricultural
landscape. It would finance technical assistance, investments and targeted research demands
identified in the WMSs and PEMs. The component comprises activities for: (i) Financial
Incentives for Sustainable Agriculture: to provide appropriate technical assistance and supporting
incentives (goods, small works, extension services) to rural producer and stakeholder groups
leading to adoption of improved production and environmental management practices within
selected microcatchments; and (ii) Support to Adaptive Management Practices: would support
the adaptation of existing soil management practices and/or adequate technological solutions to
unsustainable land use issues identified by the farming community at the microcatchment level.

Component 3 ­ Organization and Capacity Building for Sustainable Land Management
(US$ 3.3 million, 7.4% of total project cost). This component would include training, education
and community engagement efforts to facilitate the creation of environments favorable to the
formation and strengthening of rural organizations for self-management of natural resources. The
component consists of two subcomponents: (i) Community Organization: would support
diagnostic studies of the existing community organizations and facilitate the development and
implementation of community self management activities; and (ii) Training and Environmental
Education: . Under this subcomponent, training and environmental education efforts will be
carried out among beneficiaries and relevant intersectoral and extension staff to enhance local
capacities and increase support for sustainable natural resources management.

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS




Component 4 ­ Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 1.9 million, 4.2% of
total project cost). The component comprises activities for: (i) Participatory Management of the
Project: would finance the establishment and implementation of a Project Management Unit under
the aegis of the State Secretariat of Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development (SEAAPI); (ii)
Monitoring and Evaluation: would support technical assistance and operating costs for project
monitoring and evaluation; and (iii) Project Dissemination: would support the design and
implementation of an information dissemination strategy for the project.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in North and Northwestern Fluminense (NNWF) regions of Rio de Janeiro
State. The project would be implemented in five watersheds (total of 6,579 km2) representative
of the four major ecosystems of global significance in the Atlantic Forest biome situated in the
NNWF. These ecosystems are: (i) floodplain forests; (ii) tropical semi-deciduous forests; (iii)
tropical moist broadleaf forests; and (iv) coastal ecosystems.

This richness of the NNWF can be perceived in the extraordinary wealth of its ecosystems
characterized by a number of distinct natural aquatic and terrestrial habitats, endemic biodiversity.
In addition to forest habitats, this region holds one of the best-preserved restingas of Brazil (
Jurubatiba), which also support important endemics. The Jurubatiba National Park is considered
a refuge for species already extinct in other regions of Rio de Janeiro where restingas are
degraded or have already disappeared. The NNWF holds an important portion of Serra do Mar
Corridor, a subregion of the Atlantic Forest with the greatest concentration of i) endemic species
for many groups and ii) threatened species of birds. The Corridor presents one the most important
network of protected areas of the Atlantic Forest, including Desengano State Parks located in the
NNWF that harbor an extremely high concentration of endemic and endangered species.

Selection of target watersheds and microcatchments. Targeting of project watersheds and their
priority microcatchments is based on the application of criteria that combines social and
environmental considerations. Watersheds selection criteria include: environmentally sensitive or
critical areas, particularly those which are highly vulnerable to erosion; land use patterns; presence
and size of sites considered as national conservation priorities; presence of Protected Areas;
natural vegetation cover; rural poverty; percentage of rural population; and the percentage of
small producers among all producers. Microcatchment selection criteria will be developed in
further state of preparation.

Key stakeholders are small farmers and rural poor (especially women and youth). More specific
information and precise estimates will be obtained upon completion of the social assessment to be
undertaken as part of the on-going Block B phase.



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Based on the assessment of potential impacts presented below (see Section II.D.1.a), the
project is proposed for a Category B designation. It is being designed to ensure compliance with the

                                                        4
                                                                                                       ISDS


requirements of the Bank umbrella policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Despite the
largely positive or neutral project impacts anticipated, submission of an EA and respective EMP was
considered prudent to ensure conformity with the aforementioned Bank policy. The borrower will
submit a first draft EA by November 2003 (and a final by February 2004). The approval of this draft
EA will be a condition for negotiation.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on  for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                          Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes      No    TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes      No    TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes      No    TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes      No    TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes      No    TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes      No    TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes      No    TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes      No    TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes      No    TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes      No    TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment: The project would be very positive from an environmental standpoint
and few of the proposed project activities are likely to have potential environmental impacts
would mostly be those financed the financial incentive program for sustainable agriculture
(Component 2) that would be implemented to promote packages of improved environmental
management and sustainable agricultural practices, such as organic agriculture, eco-tourism,
small-scale processing of farm products, traditional crafts, as well as of mitigation measures to
arrest and revert reverse on-farm and off-farm erosion and sedimentation. The impacts of the
majority of these packages would be positive or neutral: for example, from the introduction of
on-farm soil conservation and soil stabilization measures, and re-vegetation and reforestation of
riparian forests utilizing native species. In any case, environmental impacts are expected to be
localized and preventable through responsive mitigation measures. Environmental screening and
evaluation procedures as well as proposing mitigation measures will be built in the management of
the financial mechanism to be adopted under Component 2 (see Section 4 below).

Natural Habitats. The proposed project would support natural habitat conservation and improved
land use planning and management by integrating into existing national and regional rural
development programs the conservation of natural habitats and the rehabilitation of degraded
natural habitats, within the context of integrated ecosystem management. Project activities would
not significantly modify or degrade natural habitats. In terms of policy dialogue, the project would

                                                       5
                                                                                                          ISDS


assist GOP with strengthening the state and local institutions in the rural and environmental
sectors, providing them with enhanced capacity to guide and monitor the conservation and
sustainable use of natural resources.

Forestry. The proposed project would support the adoption of conservation measures: e.g.
reforestation, natural forest regeneration, measures to support the implementation of the Serra do
Mar Biodiversity Corridor in the NNFW, and sustainable production systems, including
agro/silvopastoral systems to lower the impacts of agricultural and livestock production on the
functionality of project watersheds. The project M&E system would track compliance for
monitoring project implementation. This would also apply to investments in forestry-related
activities that may require attention to forestry management standards.

Social Assessment. Based on a preliminary analysis carried out during Block B preparation, a key
social issue is the organization of communities in support of the adoption of improved
environmental management objectives and approaches. Currently, a socio eocnomic survey among
stakeholders is being undertaken within the 5 project watersheds. Associated social assessment
(SA) will be carried out as part of project preparation with the following objectives: (a) to
evaluate existing patterns of the project watersheds, natural resource and land ownership,
management, access, and use among different groups and institutions in the proposed project
area; (b) to identify stakeholders, who should be involved in preparation, implementation, and
evaluation and to obtain their inputs on project scope and design; (c) to identify potentially
negative impacts of proposed activities on vulnerable groups in the population, low-income
producers, women, and rural youth and design measures to prevent or mitigate these impacts; and
(d) to identify opportunities to build the capacity of local governments, producers and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative or long tem impacts are foreseen.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No cumulative or long tem impacts are foreseen

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment: Mainstreaming of EA procedure and responsibility for EA and
institutional arrangements.

Mitigation measures will be integrated into the screening, evaluation, approval, and monitoring
procedures for small investments/"sub-projects" supported under Component 2. Depending on the
nature and magnitude of their potential impacts, "sub-project" proposals would be classified into a
specific category of impact (for example, no adverse impacts, low impacts, or moderate impacts),
so as to determine related requirements to reduce or eliminate potential environmental impacts.
Screening and approval procedures would be incorporated into the project design. They will be

                                                      6
                                                                                                           ISDS


built in the management of the financial instrument to be adopted under Component 2 (that is,
integrated into sub-projects screening, evaluation, and monitoring procedures), so that mitigation
measures proposed are cost-effective and are not overly burdensome. The EMP will also include
specific responsibilities for EA and institutional arrangements, as well as provisions for
strengthening EA capacity within SEAAPI and establishing mechanisms to monitor
implementation and measure impacts.

Social Aspects. The expected outputs from the Social Assessment include: (a) participation plan
developed to support the involvement of local organizations of farmers and rural poor (especially
women and youth); and (b) target activities for small and medium producers, women, youth and
other key stakeholders.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are small farmers and rural poor (especially women and youth). More specific
information and precise estimates will be obtained upon completion of the Aocial Assessment.
The interest of these key stakeholders would be primarily represented through their participation
in preparation of the Watershed Management Strategies (WMS) and in preparation and collective
implementation of associated Microcatchment Implementation Plans (PEM). The PEMs would be
implemented in critical and/or unique microcatchments identified from the 5 project watersheds.
More specifically, the project would bring economic and social benefits to the target population
mentioned above, particularly through the provision of appropriate training, technical assistance
and supporting incentives to rural producers and stakeholder groups leading to adoption of
improved production and environmental management practices. Both training and
implementation support for beneficiary stakeholders would emphasize the mechanisms,
entitlements, obligations and skills implicit in fully participatory development. Project operational
procedures would rely upon demand-driven mechanisms in order to ensure a participatory mode
of operation.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           2/13/2004

                                                     7
                                                                                                     ISDS


Date of submission to InfoShop                                           2/16/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Available
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Available   Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Available   Not Available

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Available   Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Available   Not Available

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Available   Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Available   Not Available

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Available   Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Available   Not Available
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Alvaro J. Soler                                    Aug 27, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Judith M. Lisansky/Person/World Bank               Sep 30, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Katia Medeiros (FAO/CP)                            Sep 30, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: George Ledec                                            Aug 28, 2003
Sector Manager/Director               Abel Mejia                                         Sep 30, 2003

