Report No. 23527
Report No: I049265 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/23/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BRAZIL Project ID: P049265
Project: RECIFE URBAN UPGRADING PROJECT          Task Team Leader: M. Vitor Serra
Appraisal Date: August 30, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m): 55.50
Bank Approval: May 21, 2002      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFU     Sector: UU - Urban Development Adjustment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Improve the wealth and well being of the urban poor in the Recife
Metropolitan Region by increasing the nstitutional capacity of public
(state and local), private and civic entities to plan for, deliver and
maintain basic shelter and urban services for the low-income in a
coordinated and sustainable manner in the Recife Metropolitan Region (RMR).
This effort will commence with a focus on improving the built and natural
environment of the Beberibe River Basin of Metropolitan Recife which will
improve the urban living conditions of the basin's approximately 500,000
people, including 150,000 individuals (35,000 families) living in
low-income settlements along the margins of the Beberibe River.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
A. Infrastructure
1. Beberibe Level Investments
2. Beberibe Low-Income Investments
B. Unallocated Amount
C. Complimentary Urbanization Actions
D. Program Management and Institution Building
Front End Fee
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[XI S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
-2-



I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       M. Vitor Serra   10/25/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Dean A. Cira     10/25/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Paula Dias Pini 10/25/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Kirsten Oleson   10/25/2001
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Juan D. Quintero         10/25/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Danny M. Leipziger       11/06/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 3 -



