ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Free ol Pavorly
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/26/2002                                  24902
Section I - Basic Information                                   September 26, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BRAZIL                                 Project ID: P060555
Project: Small Municipalities Integrated Water Supply  Task Team Leader: Martin P. Gambrill
and Sanitation
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 14, 2002   IBRD Amount ($m): 60.00
Bank Approval: February 27, 2003                IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFW                            Sector: Sanitation (50%); Water supply (50%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Access to urban services for the poor (P);
Status: Lending                                 Rural services and infrastructure (P); Poverty
strategy; analysis and monitoring (P); Water resource
management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overarching development objective of the project is to improve access to, and the quality of,
sustainable integrated water supply and sanitation services (water supply; wastewater collection,
treatment and disposal; local drainage; and solid waste management) in small (<20,000 inhabitants), poor
municipalities througout Brazil.
I.A.3. Project Description:
1. Sustainahle Integrated Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Municipalities in the Northi and
Northteast This component is designed to review, develop, implement, roll out and disseminate
innovative approaches to the planning, design, execution, management and monitoring of sustainable
integrated water supply and sanitation (WS&S) systems in municipal capitals and the other urban
agglomerations of some of the poorest municipalities in the country. The component will target poor
municipalities, with less than 20,000 inhabitants, and with the lowest indices of development and quality
of life as measured by the ICV well-being indicator. The component will support the preparation of
municipal 'local integrated sanitation plans' incorporating institutional, technical and financial
arrangements for service delivery, in a highly participatory and consultative manner. For those states,
municipalities and communities which adhere to the project criteria, the component will finance the
resulting physical and institutional interventions for the building, rehabilitation, improvement and/or
expansion of the integrated WS&S systems in these municipalities. The component will also provide
capacity building to strengthen new and existing integrated WS&S service providers, as well as to
municipal stakeholders and community organizations in WS&S service planning and provision, and in
environmental sanitation and health issues.



2
ISDS
2. Capacity Building and Best Practice Dissemination The second component foresees the provision of
capacity building activities to states and municipalities not targeted in Component I which are interested
in adopting best-practice approaches to sustainable integrated WS&S service delivery in small
municipalities. The component will also review, analyze and document best-practice examples of WS&S
service delivery in small municipalities both within Brazil and elsewhere, and will disseminate the results
throughout the country. The component will promote articulation with federal, state, municipal,
community and non-governmental stakeholders on the sustainable delivery of integrated WS&S services
in small municipalities with the goal of producing a strategy to this end.
3. Project Management This component will finance conventional project management activities, such
as: operational costs; PMU contract staff and equipment; project management and financial management
monitoring and evaluation systems; and project audits.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be located in a large number of municipalities and localities in a number of states in the
poorest regions of the country. These states and municipalities will be determined following the ranking
procedure described in the PCD, and will be dependent on stakeholder acceptance of/adherence to eligibility
criteria, and so their locations are not at present known. The proposed environmental screening process,
however, will ensure that key environmental and social characteristics and sensitivities will be identified in
advance, so that any necessary mitigation measures can be taken to minimize potential negative impacts and
maximize the project's positive impacts on the area in question.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The 'B' environmental classification is justified because the relatively small size of the
subprojects means that they will not have a significant negative effect on the environment, and because
many of the subproject interventions will, in fact, by their very nature, have positive cumulative effects on
the local environment. Given the nature of the project interventions, no substantial nor irreversable
environmental impacts are foreseen. Furthermore, the subproject interventions will entail no population
resettlement due to the small scale nature of the proposed investments in each locality; in addition the
subproject screening process will reject any subprojects that necessitate resettlement.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   0 Yes Cl No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      0 Yes * No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              0 Yes * No    C' TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                O Yes * No   C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  DYes * No     C) TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      O Yes * No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               C Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                3 Yes * No    iTBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          G Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes 0 No    IC TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas



3
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The only safeguard policy triggered by the proposed project is the Environmental Assessment policy but, as
described above, any negative environmental impacts caused by the project are expected to be minimal, with
appropriate mitigating measures incorporated into the project design. An environmental impact assesment is
being carried out which will include: (i) detailed environmental screening procedures to be followed for
each subproject; (ii) detailed procedures for environmental licensing of subproject interventions in the
beneficiary states (all of the licensing procedures in the targeted project states are being evaluated in the EIA
report); (iii) environmental screening, identification and mitigation procedures which will be incorporated as
an integral part of subproject planning, design, construction, monitoring and evaluation procedures; (iv)
appropriate environmental guidelines for the siting and construction of subproject interventions; and (v) an
environmental education program for execution in each of the project beneficiary communities. This
documentation will draw on the materials, tools and experience of the environmental procedures used in the
Bank's Proagua, PMSS2 and rural poverty aleviation projects. The project also intends to benefit from the
water resources information available under Proagua, and the Ceara and Bahia state water resources
management projects, to increase the environmental information and awareness in the project areas of
intervention.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No potential cumulative impacts are foreseen.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities are foreseen.
II.D.2. In light of 1. describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As described in Section E5.2 of the PCD, a preliminary version of the EIA report has already been
submitted to the Bank for review, comment and guidance, in advance of the SEDU project preparation
team finalizing it. T he SEDU team will have a number of consultations with state environmental agencies
concerning the content of the EIA report and the proposed environmental assessment and screening
procedures for subprojects contained therein.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders participating in the project are listed below.
Municipal Development Consultation Bodies ('conselhos de desenvolvimento municipal): These are
composed of community members (80% of total membership) and representatives of civil society and
municipal authorities (20% of membership). These 'community councils' will be a key actor n the
planning process in order to define community WS&S priorities and promote and ensure community
adhesion to project rules and criteria. The community councils will also sign 'Implementation
Agreements' (Termos de Adesdo) which formally commit the communities and other local stakeholders to



4
ISDS
the specific subproject conditionalities. These entities play a fundamental role in mobilizing communities
and promoting their participation in local decision making, as confirmed by the broad and thorough
participatory experience achieved by the Bank's rural poverty alleviation projects.
Community Associations: Community associations are groups which are legally constituted by
community members. The creation and/or strengthening of such community associations will be fully
supported by the project - both technically and financially. The project will also provide capacity
building to these community associations in order to better prepare them to fully participate in the
planning, implementation, management, operation, maintenance and monitoring of integrated WS&S
services at the local level.
Users Associations: User associations will be created in the larger localities where the water and
sanitation services are managed by a public or private service provider. The project will fully support the
creation and strengthening of these community bodies, with a view to improving the communities'
understanding of roles, responsibilities and rights of service providers and consumers.
Local Executing Agencies (UELs): These community bodies will be created or strengthened (where
'community councils' or other community associations already exist and have social legitimacy) by the
communities under the auspices of the project, with the direct support of the project's social mobilization
activities undertaken during the initial phase of the preparation of the PDIs. These entities will interact
with project interlocutors (during the participatory planning phase and the decision making process)
whilst the formal community associations or user associations are constituted.
River basin committees and othler regional associations/committees: Ongoing initiatives throughout the
country in the sphere of water resources management, as a result of consolidated WRM legislation,
policies and institutional frameworks in different states, are providing opportunities for civil society to
organize itself in regional water basin committees. These committees, together with other regional
associations (such as those formed under the 'Sisar' and 'Central' federation of water associations bodies
in Ceara and Bahia, or municipal associations) provide the proposed project with ideal fora for
interlocution concerning intra- and inter-municipal solutions to sustainable integrated WS&S service
delivery.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of'receipt by the Bank
Date of'"in-country" disclosure
Date of'submission to InfoShop



5
ISDS
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Martin P. Gambrill
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Paula Dias Pini/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                          05-28-02
Sector Manager/Director:      Danny M. Leipziger                           05-28-02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH  - -                  r SEEDBAC.K  _ i s,ff,E ",,ZZ3  SHOWCASE -



