ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWortd Frec of Poverty
InfoShop
Initegrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/31/2002                            24262
Section I - Basic Information                                  May 31, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BRAZIL                                   Project ID: P077044
Project: GTA Institutional Strenghtening Project  Task Team Leader: Ricardo L. B. Tarifa
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 30, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: January -1, -1                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSRF                              Sector: BI - Institutional Development
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: ENVIRONMENT
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective oi the proposed project is to strengthen the Institutional capacity of
the Amazon Working Group (GTA) to efficiently represent the civil society of the Brazilian
Amazon in the Pilot Program to Conserve the Brazilian Rainforest (RFPP). The Amazon
Working Group is a coalition of 500 grassroots Amazonian NGOs. The project aims at
improving the participation of civil society in the RFPP.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component I - Improvement of GTA technical and operational capacity. The objective of this
component is to improve GTA', management and financial systems to become a more efficient
organization, to qualify its technical staff, to establish a strategic planning process and to provide to the
affiliate organizations training on management and financial systems.
Component 2 - Improvement of GTA fund raising and financial sustainability. The objective of this
component is to establish a series of mechanisms to help GTA to reach financial sustainability in the long
run. It will support the establishment of a fund raising plan based on diversification of sources of
funding, a study of the profile of prospective donors, the implementation of a dissemination strategy
targeting donors, the establishment of a fully funded contingency fund, the establishment of procedures
for donor relations, and training on fund-raising to GTA local affiliate organizations.
Component 3 - Improvement of GTA internal and External Communication The objective of this
component is to develop and esxablish an strategy to improve GTA communication with its affiliates, the
government, donors and the society in general. This strategy have several objectives: First, to
communicate to the government and the population the voice of the grassroots civil society of the
Amazon. Second, to aims to in:form GTA affiliate organizations about policy issues that affect the local
population and about the work of GTA regarding these issues. The project would support: (i) a census



2
ISDS
about all 500 GTA affiliate organizations to review their institutional and technical capacity and to
identify promising initiatives, (ii) the development of communication instruments (folders, videos,
newsletters) and procedures; and (iii) training to GTA local affiliates organizations.
Component 4 - Improvement of GTA political and institutional capacity to represent Amazon NGOs.
This component will support the: functioning of the GTA network and a institutional strengthening
process. It will fund the salaries of the National Board of Directors, regional seminars on public policy,
meetings of the national deliberative forum, field visits to the affiliate organizations, National and
regional assemblies, strategic planning exercise and the training of the affiliates
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
GTA Nacional office is located in Brasilia, Brazil. GTA regional offices are located in the following cities
in the Brazilian Amazon Region: Rio Branco-AC, Altamira-PA, Benjamim Constanti-AM, Macapa-AP, Sao
Luis-MA, Itaituba-PA, Belem-PA, Maraba-PA, Manaus-AM, Porto Velho-RO, Boa Vista-RR, Tef-AM e
Palmas-TO. This is a institutional strengthening project, thus it will not have adverse impacts in the
population.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments. The Project will finance only institutional strengthening activities, such as training, workshops,
preparation of communication strategy and strategic planning. Thus the overall project is environmental
benign
C. Safeguard Policies Triggere,
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   C Yes * No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                Yes    No     TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes * No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        Yes * No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 Yes * No    _ TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            Yes * No    . TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        C Yes 0 No    _, TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obiain necessary data.
Il.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Not applicable
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.



3
ISDS
Not applicable
ll.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Not applicable
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders of this project are the Amazon grassroots NGOs, which are also the beneficiaries of the
project
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1.- Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediarv projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure



4
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Ricardo L. B. Tarifa
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2.:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Alonso Zarzar                              March 13, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Maria Teresa Serra                           March 13, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
4HFitrit r   -:t- FEEDACK    S  MAP T LIAP



