                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                             Report No: AC149
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/09/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BRAZIL                                            Project ID: P006525
Project: Rio de Janeiro Early Childhood Development        Task Team Leader: Ricardo Rocha Silveira
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 15, 1998                  IBRD Amount ($m): 60.00
Bank Approval: September 11, 2003                          IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSHE                                       Sector: Pre-primary education (40%); Health (30%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)         Other social services (30%)
Status: Lending                                            Theme: Other human development (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Municipality of Rio de Janeiro created the Rio Early Childhood project -- Rio ECD, (Programa Rio
Criança Maravilhosa ­ RIO CRIANÇA) with the objective to expand and improve the quality of
integrated services provided to young children (ages 0 to 5 years 11 months) from low income families,
including children with disabilities and other special needs. These services comprise education, health,
social assistance and income generation provided by a network of governmental and nongovernmental
institutions. The project was originally prepared and appraised by the Bank in 1998 but, due to fiscal and
political difficulties, it was set aside until last year. The project has been revived by the present
Municipal Administration with basically the same objectives.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project consists of three components:

1. Expansion of Services and Quality Improvements
2. Development of Human Resources
3. Project Management

The following paragraphs describe the activities planned for each component and subcomponent.

Component 1. Expansion of Services and Quality Improvements (US$ 79.72 million or 80 percent of
total project cost). This component finances the expansion and quality improvement of education, health,
social assistance, and income generation services to young children and their (low-income) families. The
specific project activities were designed based on successful experiences of the participating Municipal
Secretariats, complemented by innovative activities that respond to specific needs of the target
population not previously addressed. This will be achieved through two subcomponents that complement
one another, and aim at providing complete and integrated care for young children and their families.
These subcomponents are:

1.1 Competitive Fund Subcomponent (US$ 27.97 million). Recognizing the importance of the shared
responsibilities of the family, the government, and society at large in early childhood development, this
subcomponent promotes the participation of civil society organizations in the development of young
children and their families. The project will finance subprojects presented by Civil Society Organizations
(Organizações da Sociedade Civil ­ OSC) through a competitive fund, thereby ensuring a broad-based

                                                      2
                                                                                                          ISDS


social commitment to the goals and activities of the project.        The proposed subprojects will follow
general guidelines and meet the specific project objectives in priority services and locations, using HDI
ratings to target interventions. The specific objectives of the subprojects are to:

·   Expand the services offered to children between the ages of 0 to 5 years 11 months;
·   Expand early detection/intervention, rehabilitation and education (pre-school/day care) services to
    children with mental, motor, or sensorial disabilities;
·   Carry out social-cultural and athletic activities with young children and their families;
·   Expand services to children and families at risk;
·   Assist in the provision of health services to children enrolled in day-care centers and preschools,
    through mobile health units;
·   Provide job-skills training to beneficiary family members;
·   Provide micro-credits for members of beneficiary families; and,
·   Organize popular cooperatives to expand income generating activities among beneficiary families.

Most of the resources of this subcomponent are directed to pre-defined education, health and social
assistance activities determined by the respective Municipal Secretariats. By carrying out these activities,
OSCs contribute to expand and enrich municipal services. A smaller share of resources will be devoted
to activities proposed by the OSCs themselves, as an incentive to their creativity and initiative. All
subprojects proposals will be selected according to procedures set forth in the project's Operations
Manual.

1.2 Governmental Fund Subcomponent (US$51.75 million). This subcomponent aims to expand and
improve the provision of early childhood municipal services by financing activities by the participating
Secretariats targeted to young children and their families. The subcomponent will be executed by the
SME, SMS, SMDS, SMTb and related project executing agencies. The resources allocated to this
subcomponent are consistent with the institutional capacity of these Secretariats, which ensures the
effectiveness and sustainability of project interventions.

Specific activities aimed at expanding coverage and improving service quality include: (a) the
construction of new facilities, (b) expansion and/or rehabilitation of existing facilities, (c) reallocation of
some services; (d) provision of vehicles, equipment and materials required by each service; and (e)
subprojects under the Decentralized Program for Resources in the Units (Programa Descentralizado de
Recursos nas Unidades ­ PDRU). The PDRU is a mechanism designed to decentralize financing and
foster improved service delivery.      The procedures for allocating and disbursing PDRU funds are
described in the project's Operations Manual.

In addition to the activities planned under the Government Fund, the participating Secretariats will be
responsible for delivering services in activities not provided by the OSCs through the Competitive Fund.
Resources allocated to the Competitive Fund that fail to attract OSCs proposals will be reallocated to the
Governmental Fund to permit the implementation of the planned activities by the appropriate Municipal
agency, according to procedures defined in the project's Operations Manual.

Component 2. Development of Human Resources (US$ 10.16 million or 10 percent of total project
cost).   To achieve the project objectives of expanding coverage and improving the quality and
effectiveness of early childhood development services for young children from low-income families,
including children with disabilities and other special needs, this component aims to train Municipal
personnel involved in the project, in both managerial and operational areas, and to train participating
OSCs staff. This will be achieved through the following subcomponents:

                                                      3
                                                                                                          ISDS




2.1 Management Training Subcomponent (US$ 1.48 million).                  Training courses, seminars and
workshops will carried out to provide: (a) continued training to supervisors of the participant Secretariats
to enhance their capacity to monitor, evaluate and improve service delivery practices in the various
service facilities; (b) training to project managers on advanced management techniques that will enhance
their service performance; and (c) training for Municipal staff, as well as for staff from OSCs.

2.2 Operational Training Subcomponent (US$ 8.68 million). Training courses, seminars, workshops
and participation in national and international congresses are planned to: (a) training day-care center
educators, giving them hands-on experience and systematic professional skills, thus progressively raising
the level of schooling of day-care center employees; (b) continued training for professionals directly
working with children and their families, to improve the quality of the services delivered and promote
effective integration of services (c) professional post-graduate training of staff to foster better integration
between theory and practice, in search of excellence in the provision of services to young children and
their families; (d) training of community health out-reach volunteers including youth health agents and
matrons; and, (e) production of multimedia materials to promote the exchange of information amongst all
actors involved in the project.

Taking into account the fact that several phases of project implementation require prior staff training,
resources for this component will be disbursed in a phased manner throughout the life of the project,
matching the pace of project execution. The implementation of this component will count on the
partnership with OSCs and on the effective participation of universities for the delivery of training
services.

Component 3. Project Management (US$7.4 million or 7 percent of total project cost). The success of
the project, given its integrated social development approach, requires methodologies that ensure the
monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the use of this information to enhance and guide
integrated policy planning and programming. The project management model is designed to foster
functional integration and operational decentralization of project activities. This will be achieved through
the following subcomponents:

3.1 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Disclosure of Information Subcomponent (US$2.91 million). The
activities financed by this subcomponent include survey studies; evaluation research; a Management
Information System (MIS) designed to track the physical and financial development of the project; and
means to disclosure and disseminate relevant project information. The planned studies and surveys aim
to evaluate project activities and provide information regarding the sustainability of project benefits.
Information disclosure seeks to make project activities and procedures known to the communities directly
benefiting from the project and to the general public. Special attention will be given to disseminating
information regarding children with disabilities and other special needs through radio and television
campaigns coinciding with the beginning of each school-term, so as to transmit messages concerning the
importance of health and educational of these children. A global information dissemination plan will be
developed in collaboration with the communication offices of the participating Secretariats, and this plan
will be carried out throughout project implementation, under the coordination of Municipal Secretariat
for Special Projects (Secretaria Municipal de Projetos Especiais ­ SMPE).

A computerized MIS will record the physical and financial progress of project activities and will be used
as a management tool to help streamline project implementation. The information captured by this
system will cover all project activities described in Annex 2 by component and subcomponent, as well as
the selected input and outcome indicators presented in Annex 1. The MIS will permit the verification, on

                                                        4
                                                                                                        ISDS



a continuous basis, of the achievements of project objectives and of specific project targets reached. In
conjunction with the results obtained from evaluations and surveys, the MIS will permit, inter alia, the
evaluation of the impacts of the project on the: (i) development of young children, (ii) consolidation of
the integrated service delivery model, and (iii) quality of the services delivered by Municipal and
nongovernmental agencies to young children and their families.

3.2 Project Implementation Subcomponent (US$4.49 million). This subcomponent finances the
operation of a central Coordinating Unit and 10 Regional Integration Units. The SME will act as the
general project coordinator, and will carry out this function in conjunction with the Municipal Finance
Secretariat (Secretaria Municipal de Fazenda -- SMF), which will be responsible for the financial
coordination of the project.       Funds will be allocated for refurbishing and equipping the General
Coordination office and the offices of the Regional Integration Units. Financing will also be provided for
technical assistance and training in the management, supervision, and monitoring of project activities.
Project management staff will participate in courses, seminars, workshops, internships, technical visits to
relevant programs and initiatives in other states and countries. Training will be provided through
contracts with consulting firms and/or universities.

Project management will be strengthened through the contracting of external auditing firms, independent
from public administration, to perform financial and procurement audits of the project, throughout its
implementation. These audits shall abide by auditing rules and procedures satisfactory to the Bank.

Components:



1. Extension of Services and Quality Improvement
1.1 Competitive Fund
1.2 Governmental Fund
2. Development of Human Resources
2.1 Management Training
2.2 Operational Training
3. Project Management
3.1 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Disclosure of Information
3.2 Project Implementation
Contingencies

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will construct and rehabilitate schools, daycare centers, and health centers in the urban
municipality of Rio de Janeiro.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes   No

                                                        5
                                                                                                        ISDS



    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes    No

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes    No

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes    No

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes    No

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes    No

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes    No

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes    No

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes    No

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes    No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The construction of new schools, creches, or health posts could have typical negative environmental impacts
   associated with small-scale construction, including higher noise levels, dust, and public safety dangers
   caused by movement of heavy equipment, among others. None of these potential impacts are considered
   to be large-scale or significant.

While impacts won't be involved in the design phase of new buildings, this is a stage where the municipality
   can improve the quality of schools, daycares, and health posts by focusing on natural lighting and
   ventilation, adequate sanitation and sewerage system hook-ups, and access by disabled students, among
   other issues.

Finally, site selection will be critical to ensure to minimize possible negative environmental impacts.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are foreseen due to application of more than one safeguard policy. Cumulative
   impacts caused by construction of more than one new building are not foreseen either, as long as the
   guidelines for site selection, design and construction articulated in the Environmental Assessment are
   followed.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None envisioned.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The municipality has prepared an environmental assessment for the project, as well as a construction
manual, environmental management plan (EMP), and construction supervision plan for construction of
new schools, daycares, and health posts. The EMP and Construction Supervision Plan address potential
negative impacts on the environment and their mitigation at the site selection, design, and construction

                                                      6
                                                                                                        ISDS



phases. Highlights of these two documents include:

Site Selection:

    No sites that would require resettlement will be selected.

    No sites involving steep slopes or flood areas will be chosen; soil studies will be carried out.

    Consideration of future expansion possibilities will be given when choosing a site.

Design:

    New buildings will ensure access by the disabled.

    New buildings will maximize natural ventilation and lighting.

Construction:

    Contractors will sign contracts with "environmental" clauses, requiring them to follow guidelines on
    mitigating negative environmental impacts during the construction phase. These requirements
    include daily clean up of the site, appropriate disposal of construction waste, provision of temporary
    latrines for workers, etc.

    Preservation of vegetation.

    Appropriate safety measures will be taken to ensure public safety around the construction area.

    Project officials will periodically supervise construction to ensure compliance with environmental
    requirements.



The EMP also includes a division of responsibilities and the identification of resources to cover the costs
of environmental supervision.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the citizens of Rio de Janeiro. Disclosure will occur via the Government web site.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                5/19/2003

                                                   7
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                         7/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         7/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ricardo Rocha Silveira                             07/08/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                       07/08/03
Sector Director                      Ana-Maria Arriagada                                07/08/03

