23281
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/02/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Countrv: BULGARIA                            Project ID: P069532
Project: Social Investment and Employment Promotion  Task Team Leader: Peter Pojarski
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 7, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m): 50.00
Bank Approval: November 26, 2002             IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD                         Sector: Central government administration (60%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Sub-national government administration (40%)
Status: Lending                              Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
development (P); Civic engagement; participation
and community driven development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall objective of the project is to improve the standard of living of people who are
locked in persisting "pockets" of poverty in Bulgaria, concentrated regionally, among the
long-term unemployed, and among specific ethnic minorities (Roma, Turkish). Because these
targeted vulnerable groups suffer from multiple disadvantages (e.g., exclusion, weak social
capital, poor access to markets and basic services, low employment), the project will achieve its
objective through complementing the existing, relatively good social protection system by
offering a range of instruments, all focused on building the assets, individual and communal, of
poor and vulnerable people living in these pockets.
The Community Infrastructure for Development Initiativ CIDI) component will address
issues related to empowerment and integration of targeted communities and of inadequate
access to basic infrastructure and services, by allowing communities to identify and to
manage, themselves, development investments of greatest local priority. Hopefully the
investments will also lay the groundwork for improved market access and human capital
development-preconditions to enhancing employment opportunities and reducing poverty.
The Bulgarian Active Labor Market Initia%l LMI) component will identify
medium-term economic and labor trends information and provide active labor services to
assist economically disadvantaged individuals in poor communities to extend and use their
human capital productively, particularly in the context of changing economic and labor



2
ISDS
market conditions.
These mutually reinforcing targeted interventions are designed to secure and deliver additional
help to vulnerable communities to leverage their own efforts to escape poverty. The actual
combination of these interventions will be determined by the participating communities and
other users during project implementation making the project flexible and demand driven. By
achieving these objectives, the project will also provide support and financial resources to the
ongoing decentralization process and help empower democratically elected local governments.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The SIF project will have three components and will be supported by policy and regulatory
developments, covered by other programs as well. Proposed SIF components include: (i)
Community Infrastructure for Development Initiative (CIDI); (ii) the Bulgarian Active Labor
Market Initiative (BALMI); and (iii) project management, including operating costs, training,
technical assistance, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of SIF activities.
The two substantive components (the Initiatives) will be linked in SIF's governance structure
to maximize social policy coordination. The two initiatives will be implemented by SIF's
Management Unit that will provide contracting, financial management and logistical services
for their regular operations. However, the two initiatives will be managed separately by each
having its own Management Board, or through other specific arrangement. This will ensure
effective and efficient operation. The management structures will be created to maximize
operational effectiveness and adequate social policy coordination. The supervisory functions
will be performed by the tripartite SIF Steering Committee, as defined in the Law for the
Social Investment Fund.
Components:
1. Community Infrastructure for Development Initiative
2. Bulgarian Active Labor Market Initiative
3.Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Country wide. Project is demand driven and location of investments will depend on demand. Mosi
demand is expected from rural areas as they are hardest hit by depression and economic hardship.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments. The project is of the Social Fund type, falling into Category F from the Environmental
Classification.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                             Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                * Yes C No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                   C Yes *No      TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                           OYes *No       TBD



3
ISDS
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                C Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  C0 Yes 0 No   ' TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               C, Yes * No      TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 1 Yes * No   i TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           S Yes 0 No   C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No   ' TBD
*By supporting the pr oposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Kev Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
It is expected that the execution of micro-projects would not cause any substantial environmental
impact.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impact expected.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long-term negative impact expected. Possible positive environmental impacts include
erosion control, linking sewage to waste water treatment facilities, improved waste recycling, etc.
Possible positive social impacts include availability of water in rural communities and Roma
quarters , improved access of poor people to administrative, health, and social services, improved
social cohesion because of joint community based investment, improved employment
opportunities for long-term unemployed and unemployed from remote and depressed areas.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/a.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project Operational Manual will provide guidelines for environmental assessment of the
indiviclual micro-projects. The micro-projects are not expected to pose significant environmental
risks. The Environmental Assessment indicates that local environmental requirements are adequate,
and that where required by local legislation, environmental assessments of micro-projects will be
carried out by local experts licensed by the Ministry of Environment and reviewed by the Supreme
Expert Environmental Council.
In addition the project intends to:
(i) develop, under the project, a manual for the environmental review of the micro-project
that will            guide the communities and experts in the review;
(ii) analyze the aggregate investments on a regular base to identify, and mitigate if
necessary, any             cumulative effect of similar investment on the environment.



4
ISDS
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders in the project are the central and local governments, the social partners
(unions and employers organizations), local communities and NGOs. Consultations and
seminars with central government, local governments and social partners were held as a part of
the project preparation. During project implementation, wide participation and consultation
with stakeholders at the central level is ensured through the Steering Committee of the SIF, that
includes representation of Government, employers, workers organizations, and donors.
In addition, a participatory procedure for local-level project identification will be implemented.
This procedure looks for community consensus on local priorities, and involves local
goveniments, social partners, NGO's and community groups, etc.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
( ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



5
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date oi' receipt by the Bank                                              9/4/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           9/4/2002
Date of'submission to InfoShop                                            9/10/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date o' receipt by the Bank
Date of'"in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of' receipt by the Bank
Date of'"in-country" disclosure
Date of' submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of"'in-country" disclosure
Date of'submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date oi' receipt by the Bank
Date ofi"in-country" disclosure
Date of'submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Peter Pojarski
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                             09/13/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Annette Dixon                               09/13/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
1IARCN         FEEDBACK      SriE MAP       SHOWCASE      F



