ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                A Wo rld i rct otI frt P
InfoShop
Report No: AC84
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/22/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BULGARIA                               Project ID: P008314
Project: DISTRICT HEATING PROJECT               Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 3, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 34.20
Bank Approval: June 17, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSIE                            Sector: District heating and energy efficiency
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  services (100%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Other urban development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objectives are to assist the district heating companies (DHCs) of Sofia and
Pernik (Toplofikacias) to: (i) improve their quality of services; (ii) improve their financial viability; and
(iii) increase environmentally friendly operations through energy conservation and pollution reduction
measures.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Overall Investment Program
The overall investment program for the Sofia and Pernik DHCs totals US$132.7 million equivalent. The
overall financing plan is described below:
* Sofia DHC: The cost of the investment program is US$ 117.5 million equivalent with the
following financing: IBRD - US$ 27.2 million equivalent; EBRD - US$ 31.4 million equivalent;
EU Kozloduy International Decommissioning Support Fund (KIDS) - US$ 31.4 million
equivalent, managed by EBRD; and Sofia DHC - US$ 27.5 million equivalent.
* Pernik DHC: The cost of the investment program is US$ 13.6 million with the following
financing: IBRD - US$ 7 million equivalent; Pernik DHC - US$ 6.6 million equivalent.
* Project Implementation: Project implementation consulting costs for both the Sofia and Pernik
DHCs will be financed through an EU Phare grant of US$ 1.6 million equivalent.
Other grant resources, not reflected in the overall costs of the project, are: a) USAID financing for
consultants to assist in selecting the private operator for Sofia DHC; and b) proposed funds from



2
ISDS
Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) for the purchase of emission reductions (ER) of greenhouse gases due to
the project in Sofia and Pernik DHCs. The amounts to be purchased by PCF will be determined after a
study is completed to estimate the ER.
Bank Supported Investments
Bank financing will be targeted at the following interventions that form a subset of the overall investment
program.



3
ISDS
Component I - Sofia DHC
A. Network Rehabilitation - Replacement and/ or installation of transmission pipelines. Replacement of
thermal insulation on over ground pipelines. Replacement of valves and compensators in the
transmission and distribution network. Installation of variable speed pumping system at the main
heat sources.
B. Sub-station Rehabilitation - Replacement of sub-stations in the system.
C. Technical Assistance - (a) Provision of technical assistance for the purposes of management and
implementation of the project, including audit services and a public awareness campaign to promote
energy conservation; (b) Provision of technical assistance to introduce the private sector for
production and distribution of heat.
Component 2 - Pernik DHC
A. Substation Rehabilitation - Replacement of sub-stations in the district heating system.
B. Network Rehabilitation - Replacement of transmission pipelines. Replacement of valves and
compensators in the transmission and distribution network and the network monitoring system.
Installation of a variable speed pumping system at the main heat source.
C. Generation Plant Rehabilitation - Replacement of the outdated electrostatic precipitator for a boiler
in the lignite fired combined heat and power plant. Rehabilitation of the chemical water treatment
plant. Rehabilitation of automation and control equipment for the coal conveyor system.
D. Technical Assistance - Provision of technical assistance for the purposes of management and
implementation of the project, including audit services and a public awareness campaign to promote
energy conservation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The sites of the project are Sofia and Pernik. There are no environmental or socially sensitive areas. The
project will support the rehabilitation of the district heating networks in both cities, and will provide
Technical Assistance to the district heating companies.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
The project is classified as Category B, per the Bank's Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01), indicating that impacts are site specific and do not affect the environment in a significant
manner. Environmental issues relate to construction activities and include dust, noise, minor traffic
disruptions, and handling of hazardous waste.



4
ISDS
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts under the proposed project.
During project preparation, a review was carried out to clearly identify environmental issues. Appropriate
remedial measures to address the environmental concerns were also discussed and have been incorporated
in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMPs were discussed in public meetings (Sofia:
April 2, 2003; Pernik: March 28, 2003) and no significant concerns on the environment were raised.
Satisfactory implementation of the EMP will be condition of the loans to Sofia and Pernik district heating
companies.
The project also helps reduce the particulate emissions in Pernik through the installation of the electrostatic
precipitator.  Currently, the Pernik district heating company does not meet the air quality emission
standards. In 2000, the annual average particulate emission from the company was around 200 mg/m3
which is above the Bulgarian standard of 100 mg/m3. The use of the electrostatic precipitator is expected
to reduce the emissions to about 100 mg/m3.
Other environmental benefits of the project include savings in fuel due to efficiency gains in the network.
Further, water consumption in the district heating system is also expected to decline due to the
rehabilitation which will reduce the leakages.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



5
ISDS
Not applicable.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) adequately addresses the environmental concerns raised in the
project. The EMP requires contractors responsible for works to undertake environmental remedial measures
as part of their contract with the DHCs. Specifically contractors will: sprinkle water to reduce dust; conform
with noise ordinances; seek permission for movements and routes from traffic authorities to prevent
disruption of traffic; use specialized contractors for handling hazardous waste (mainly asbestos) if it is
encountered during construction; and dispose of construction wastes in designated areas. The DHCs will
supervise the work of contractors as per the EMP.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Rehabilitation of the district heating network has been discussed with the stakeholders in Sofia and
Pernik in 1999.  Further during the development of the Sofia City Development Strategy more
consultations were carried out between May 2001 and January 2002, with users and city officials.
Further, as part of the project, consumer surveys will be carried out by the Sofia and Pernik DHCs to
determine the level of satisfaction among consumers, including the poor. Two surveys are expected to be
carried out - at the beginning and towards the end of the project - which would involve consultation with
civil society.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 1/15/2002     1/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/20/2002     2/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              1/22/2002     1/22/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Sudipto Sarkar                              January 10, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Stratos Tavoulareas                    January 10, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                             January 16, 2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Henk Busz                                   January 16, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDBACK      SITE MM        SHOWCASE



