THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/25/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BULGARIA                               Project ID: P073427
Project: Revenue Administration Reform Project  Task Team Leader: Carlos D. C. Ferreira
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 7, 2002   IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: May 29, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPE                            Sector: Central government administration (85%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance
Status: Lending                                 (10%); Sub-national government administration (5%)
Theme: Tax policy and administration (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective aims to assist the Government in implementing a sustainable revenue
collection system for Bulgaria through the establishment of an economically efficient public revenue
collection system that facilitates private sector development and complies with requirements for EU
accession. A complementary objective is the separation of federal and municipal revenue collection
functions as an integral part of the tax administration institutional rationalization and modernization
process. The project would achieve its developmental objective through a comprehensive program of
reforms focused on maximizing community voluntary compliance, increasing effectiveness and
efficiency, establishing a professional workforce, which will help reduce the opportunity and motivation
for corruption, and improving equity and fairness in the administration of the tax and social collection
system, while reducing the taxpayer/contributor compliance burden. The project is intricately connected
with the National Revenue Agency (NRA), which was legally enacted by Parliament in November 2002,
and will execute the project. Under the project, the NRA would become the foundation of the new
revenue and social collection system in Bulgaria.
The project would seek to maximize thie level of taxpayer voluntary compliance by: (a) further
developing the current system of self assessment and introducing risk management based on: (b)
simplifying the law and procedures; (c) establishing a comprehensive program of taxpayer/contributor
education and services; (d) reengineering, integrating and automating business processes; (e) instituting a
comprehensive compliance strategy and selective audits and investigations; (f) enhancing collection
activities; and (g) transforming the thinking and behavior of NRA officials and taxpayers to one of
mutual trust and cooperation in the administration of, and participation in, the tax and social benefit
systems.
The project would seek to promote effectiveness and efficiency by: (a) adopting a model for strategic



2
ISDS
management as the basis to develop the role and capacity of NRA headquarters; (b) creating a vision,
values, and plans for reform and ongoing revenue administration improvements; (c) establishing
processes and structures for planning, accountability, and corporate governance; (d) providing
mechanisms for external transparency and accountability, and for input from extemal stakeholders; (e)
redeveloping functional organizational arrangements, and restructuring and consolidating the national
revenue organization; (f) providing modern accommodations and environment for staff and taxpayers; (g)
perpetuating and continuing to sharpen the special focus on large taxpayers and contributors; (h)
separating and enabling a future transfer of responsibility for the administration of local taxes and
charges to local governments; (i) reengineering business processes to increase efficiency, transparency,
and accountability while reducing opportunities for rent-seeking behavior; (j) introducing modern,
integrated, information technology business support; and (k) adopting the Bulstat (nationally assigned
number) as the common taxpayer identifier and introducing electronic interfaces with other government
agencies (e.g., Customs).
The project would seek to establish a professional workforce and approach by: (a) establishing a
comprehensive human resource management function and strategy; (b) establishing a modern and
relevant code of conduct and ethics; (c) increasing the professional capacity of the executive, middle
managers and key operational staff; (d) establishing a comprehensive learning, development, and training
capacity; and (e) developing the internal control system to monitor integrity and organizational outcomes.
The project would help reduce the potentialfor corruption by: (a) increasing the separation between
taxpayers and tax inspectors; (b) reengineering work procedures to reduce discretion and opportunities
for rent-seeking behavior; (c) simplifying and increasing taxpayer understanding of tax laws and
procedures; (d) carefully directing audit activities to firms and individuals whose tax returns are
questionable; (e) increasing community participation through taxpayer associations, and (e) developing
an internal control system to monitor integrity and enforce the code of ethics.
The project would seek to improve equity andfairness in the administration of the tax and social
contribution system by: (a) creating a modern Charter of Taxpayer and Contributor Rights; (b) promoting
community understanding of the system, laws, administrative procedures, and rights and obligations; (c)
promoting the development of private taxpayer advisory services; (d) adopting uniform approaches and
interpretations throughout the country; (e) creating an ombudsman's office to address complaints; and (f)
ensuring that dispute resolution mechanisms are expedient and impartial.
The project would seek to redluce thse taxpayer compliance burdlen by: (a) harmonizing and simplifying
tax and social legislation and their respective codes; (b) developing, simplifying, and integrating to the
extent possible, tax and social contributor processes and services; and (c) maximizing electronic
interchange with taxpayers and contributors.
The project would indirectly seek to foster economic growtht by: (a) enabling a reduction of tax rates
through broadening the tax and social contribution base; (b) enabling a fairer private sector environment
by increasing the overall level of compliance, and providing a more uniform and equitable tax and social
contribution system; (c) reducing compliance costs through easier and more efficient declaration and
payment of liabilities; and (d) reducing taxpayer exposure to corruption and administrative abuse.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The current project design assumes that the Government would successfully complete the project
preparation steps agreed with the Bank and IMF. Preliminary actions that are required to create an
enabling environment for project implementation include: (a) first, creating an adequate legislative basis



3
ISDS
that would ensure transfer of responsibilities to the NRA for tax and social contribution collections from
GTD and NSSI (based on the Tax Code and Social Insurance Code); (b) review, revise, and support the
work program of the NRA project team; (c) manage and successfully conclude the PHRD-financed
studies on information technology, human resources, compliance and project management; (d) ensure the
development of a strategic vision and plan for reform; (e) establish external oversight panels and fora for
consultation; (f) strengthen and develop the leadership and management style of the executives currently
involved in collection activities to encompass a focus on strategic management, participation and change
alignments; and (g) ensure the implementation of a suitably staffed, skilled, and appropriately
independent NRA headquarters to drive and manage the change.
The project consists of six components:
Component 1 - Policy Support: This component aims at ensuring that the NRA fully complies with the
tax policy framework developed by the Ministry of Finance and provides useful feedback on the
administrative arrangements and requirements to implement the Tax Code. The component would
finance activities to: (a) build in-house capacity for conducting policy reviews, and compliance and
revenue estimation studies; (b) review and analyze policies and laws to provide an efficient and legally
effective operating environment for the NRA, and, in particular, ensure the legal alignment necessary for
EU accession exists, and propose improvements to NRA's legal framework and joint taxation/social
contribution code; and (c) support NRA's strategic and operational planning, with special focus on the
integration of GTD and NSSI collections. Moreover, this component would (d) improve NRA's
interaction with the court system to efficiently manage revenue collection cases, and specifically (e)
facilitate judicial understanding and interpretation of salient elements required to adjudicate these cases
properly. It also would (f) help develop fair and impartial administrative procedures for handling appeals,
including the possibility of community participation.
Component 2 - Organization and Management Development: This component aims at developing the
capacity of NRA in two major areas: Organizational Development and Human Resources and Training.
Organizational Development targets (a) providing an organizational structure for the NRA, and (b) a
management system that includes modules governing accountability, internal control, and integrity of
managerial processes. It would be implemented through a management information system deployed
throughout the NRA. The project will provide management and technical training to staff to raise the
level of agency professionalism and integrity. The investment in human resources management will
establish a modern HRM function in the NRA. This will include modernizing recruitment, selection, and
hiring procedures, compensation policies and practices, performance incentive systems, workforce
planning and career development, as well as management development. It also will establish a training
center to meet short- and long-term training requirements of the NRA. Curricula will be developed and
suitable training infrastructure established. NRA HRM policies and procedural manuals will be
developed and standardized, and a Code of Ethics and Conduct prepared and disseminated to all NRA
staff.
Component 3 - Increasing Operational Efficiency: This component would support activities required to
implement the core business processes of the NRA by: (a) establishing an Information and
Communications Technology Department; (b) strengthening basic areas of revenue administration, such
as audit, enforcement, appeals, and internal audit; (c) implementing an Integrated Revenue and
Registration Management System, with access to third-party information, to increase efficiency and
compliance; (d) implementing a Human Resource, Financial Management, and Management Information
System, respectively, providing for sharing information through a Data Warehouse. It would be vital that
experienced revenue administration staff within GTD and NSSI be assigned to assist in the execution of
this component to ensure alignment between revenue administration requirements and new technical



4
ISDS
specifications.
Component 4 - Outreach and Participation: This component would finance activities aimed at
promoting a Taxpayer, Insurer, and Contributor Charter of Rights; assuring citizen voice and
participation in shaping the NRA, creating mechanisms for transparency and accountability, such as
oversight panels, community surveys; participation in improving the appeals procedures to ensure fair
community input; creation of a "call center" to provide information and services to taxpayers and
contributors; and external and internal communications plans aimed at the community and NRA staff.
Component 5 - Office Upgrading: This component would finance civil works to establish an adequate
working environment for the NRA--staff, taxpayers, and contributors. This will be achieved by the
rehabilitation of buildings currently owned by GTD or newly acquired buildings, where necessary.
Appropriate workspaces would be established at HQ and the Regional Offices, including power, network,
physical, telecommunications security, appropriate functional/spatial separation, and other necessary
features often adopted by modern tax offices. Modernization of offices would take into account best
practices in EU countries. Priority will be assigned to those Territorial Directorates that account for the
highest share of revenue collected. These are the Directorates of Sofia, Plovdiv, Varena, Burgas, Veliko,
Turnovo, and the Large Taxpayer Directorate. Together they constitute 85 percent of budget revenues. (A
pilot project aimed at centralizing state taxes at the Territorial Directorate level and separating the
administration of local taxes and fees in the Territorial Subdivisions has been launched in Plovdiv as
well. Plovdiv is also the site of the new Tax Training Institute.) The above mentioned Directorates, and at
a minimum the Large Taxpayer Directorate, and Directorates in Sofia, Plovdiv, and Varna, would be
modernized to reflect EU standards so as to promote the development of domestic and international
investment in the country through better interaction with potential investors. Ideally, a building to
accommodate NRA HQ functions, to create a level playing field for GTD and the NSSI social collections
function that will be merged to form the NRA, which is expected to be operational in January 2004.
Component 6 -Project Management: This component would finance a structure for implementing the
project, including: a Project Coordination and Administration Unit (PCU); and a Change Management
Unit, which would provide direction and lead the integration of the Social Security collection area of the
NSSI and GTD into the NRA, as well as take responsibly for managing the incremental changes
necessary to effect the implementation of each component and related activities of the RARP. The PCU
would ensure that the financial management and procurement capacity meets World Bank Guidelines for
accountability and transparency. The Change Management subcomponent ensures that all changes
promoted by the NRA are based on well-established change management principles that seek to build
commitment of all staff in the change process to facilitate integration and overall development of the
NRA.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Project implementation would take place in the country's main cities where the current tax administration
and social security offices are located. It is not anticipated that the changes promoted by the project
would affect, either positively or negatively, protected areas, sites, or natural habitats, or any other
culturally or socially sensitive areas.
B. Chleck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments.



5
ISDS
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes   No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            C Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes* No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 C Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
None.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders in the reform project are the Bulgarian taxpayers and those who make social
contributions. Their interest in achieving agreed project outcomes and transforming the behaviors of
agency officials and the community would be represented by an extemal oversight panel. The panel
would comprise independent and prominent local and international citizens who would meet, perhaps
quarterly, to hold the UAR Commission, the GTD and NSSI accountable for project performance and
outcomes, in particular, that progress is being made in the transformation of the behaviors of tax officials
and the community, and the protection of taxpayers/contributors rights. Periodic surveys would also be
conducted by the URA Commission to ensure that all segments of the taxpaying public are receiving the
required level of service as the new agency is developed. This would be especially so during the
institutional transition period, given the scale of the transition, and the need for adroit change



6
ISDS
management and leadership.
External stakeholders, such as other agencies, professional bodies, and community groups, would
participate in the reform process and have input through formal external consultation forums to be
created by the leaders of the GTD and NSSI.
Staff would also be able to participate in the project through the internal communication and consultative
mechanisms to be established.
The project would also promote the development of private tax advisory services to assist the private
sector and enterprises in fulfilling their tax and social contribution obligations. In introducing this
development, key segments of the business, general community and professional population would be
consulted.
E. Safeguards Classiflication. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



