1~~~31
ISDS
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 1/06/2001
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: BURKINA FASO                           Project ID: P000309
Project: Basic Education Sector                 Task Team Leader: Maklia Ndao
Appraisal Date: November 5, 2001                IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: December 20, 2001                   IDA Amount ($m): 35.00
Managing Unit: AFTH3                            Sector: EE - Education Adjustment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The proposed project will provide support for the Government's Basic Education
Ten-Year Program which is designed to be implemented in three phases the first of which covers
the period 2001-2005. The main development objective of Phase I of the Ten Year Program is to
lay the foundation for accelerating the development of basic education, while ensuring adequate
quality and financial sustainability. Further, to prepare for a shift from project to programmatic
support, the Bank's assistance will also aim to build the capacity of the Milnistry of Basic
Education (MEBA) with particular attention to the areas of financial management, budgeting,
procurement, monitoring, evaluation and donor coordination.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project will help the Govermment implement activities to expand basic education
and promote greater participation by girls and women. It will experiment with integrated
approaches (including early childhood education and non-formal education) in the 20 poorest
provinces. Various measures and reforms to improve the quality and efficiency of education and
enhance the institutional capacity of MEBA will also be implemented. The Governmnent has
already begun implementation with other donors. The costing of the components of the project,
with the various amounts funded by the Government and other donors will be finalized during
appraisal. The Canadian Intemational Development Agency and the Netherlands Minister for
Development Cooperation are supporting the Burkina Program in coordination with IDA.
Agreements for implementation arrangements will be finalized during project appraisal.
Improving access to basic education .
Construction/rehabilitationi of primary schools
Girl's education.
Adult literacy programs.
Special needs education
Improving quality and efficiency of basic education:
Curriculum reform
Pre and in-service training
Pedagogical materials
Nutrition, health, and HIV



2
ISDS
School-based quality projects
Evaluation of learinig outcomes
Early childhood development
Improving management and building capacity particularly on financial management and
procurement
Studies on organization and methods
Systems development
Training
Material resources upgrading
Unit-based capacity-building operations
Components:
1. Improving access to basic education
B. Improving quality and efficiency of basic education
C. Improving management and building capacity
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project, will cover the entire country with particular attention given to rural and to the
poorest areas of the country, such as the Centre-Nord, Centre-Est, Hauts-Bassins and the Sahel
where the shortage of teachers is particularly pronounced. Schools in the Sud-Oust and Centre
are significantly better off.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: This project is being processed without a separate EA. The project has been classified as a B
because experience in the Africa Region has shown that the environmental and social impacts of suclh
operations are not severe, but, nevertheless they require environmental guidelines to ensure that potential
impacts due to construction and rehabilitation activities are addressed. Construction and rehabilitation
activities include (i) 3,180 new classrooms (25% of which will serve to complete existing schools); (ii) 350
classrooms to be rebuilt; (iii) 200 additional classrooms at existing private schools under a matching
sclheme; and (iv) provision of water and sanitation. Environmental guidelines pertaining to construction
activities, water points, latrines, and hygiene education will be included in the Project Implementatioln
Manual. Additional environmental work will be conducted during project implementation to ensure that any
potential issues are appropriately addressed and monitored after construction. Therefore, no separate
environmental analysis was prepared.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               0 Yes * No    0) TBD



3
ISDS
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    0 TB3D
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O. Yes * N_o _   TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             .      Yes * No  ( TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                          0 Yes * No    C) TBD
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes * No  0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fUll in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Potential safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project will be
managed through the use of environmental guidelines and additional environmental work.
I1.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
TBD
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of this project has involved stakeholders and beneficiaries through
beneficiary assessments; workshops with parents, teachers and donors; and communication
strategies. The stakeliolders and beneficiaries will continue to participate during project
implementation.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address



4
ISDS
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Reqairements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:.                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoSlhop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                        Date H ,     01
Task Team Leader:            Makha Ndao        -
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:                              -/
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye
Comments
Sector Manager/Director       R.BelleW//<
Comments                      R



