                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC300
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/09/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BURUNDI                                             Project ID: P064876
Project: BURUNDI-ROAD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT                     Task Team Leader: Kingson Khan Apara
PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 25, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 16, 2004                             IDA Amount ($m): 40.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR                                         Sector: Roads and highways (80%); General water,
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance          sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
Loan (SIM)                                                   Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                              development (P); Rural services and infrastructure
                                                             (P); Trade facilitation and market access (S); Rural
                                                             non-farm income generation (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the project is to contribute to Burundi's post-war revival by restoring part of the priority
road network, generating employment for the rural and urban poor, and improving institutional capacity in
the transport sector.

In order to achieve this objective, the RSDP will be implemented in the context of the Bank's
Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) for Burundi, and will seek to accomplish the following
specific outcomes: (i) help restore part of the existing primary, secondary and communal road
network either destroyed by the war or deteriorated from years of no maintenance; (ii) support
greater involvement of SMEs in road works and promote the employment of urban and rural
unskilled labor on a scale sufficient to inject liquidity into the national economy; (iii) safeguard
road investments and related works by delegating road management and security responsibilities
to road-side communities; (iv) establish a system to support sustainable road maintenance,
including the consolidation of a second generation road fund and the establishment of functional
programming and budgeting practices within the National Road Agency (OdR) and the National
Road Fund (FRN); (v) improve road sector planning and management so as to reduce the sector's
dependence on the national budget and to increase its contribution to long term growth and
poverty reduction; (vi) prepare a national Transport Development Master Plan (TDMP) as the
basis for a comprehensive strategic framework for the transport sector; and (vii) provide
supplemental assistance to project management.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The precarious situation of Burundi, as described in the Bank's Transitional Support Strategy
(TSS), makes it difficult for the Government to contribute to the direct costs associated with this
project. Given this incapacity of the Government, the design and implementation of road works
under the project will seek to limit, to the extent possible, any implications for resettlement or
compensation. This consideration is reflected in the component description below. Also, it is
requested that, exceptionally, the Bank should finance 100 percent of the non tax cost of the

                                                  2
                                                                                                 ISDS


project.
Component 1: Paved Road Rehabilitation
This component will help restore part of the existing primary road network either destroyed by
the war or deteriorated from years of no maintenance. It will rehabilitate (i) 68.7 km (7%) of the
1,000 km of the paved primary road network, linking major cities, production areas and
neighboring countries. The roads to be rehabilitated are National Roads Nos. 3, 4, and 10. These
roads have been appraised, and their EAs and bidding documents prepared; (ii) spot rehabilitation
on national roads Nos. 1, 5, and 7, linking the city of Bujumbura with the rest of the country, and
protection works on the River Rusizi embankments. Technical studies for this second set of roads
were carried out in 1999 under the previous Bank-financed project, and will be updated in the first
year of the project, including the preparation of their EAs, economic studies and bidding
documents. Works on this second set of roads will start from the second year of the project. A
map of the roads will be attached to the PAD. All works under the component will be limited to
pavement repair and repaving. Special efforts will be made to limit works to the paved area and
shoulders of the roads, with no incursions into the wider right of way, no realignment or remaking
of slopes. In the overall project there are a few specific points where drainage may have to be
redone, but these are limited. In view of the fact that there will be no planned entry into abutting
land, and that any damages to such land will be carefully compensated on the spot, the Transport
team has agreed with ASPEN that the potential spot compensation to be paid (not just to titled
holders but to any holders of such land) does not invoke the Bank's policy of Involuntary
Resettlement. The Government has agreed to these measures, and will further be requested to
confirm its agreement during negotiations.
Component 2: Rehabilitation of existing unpaved secondary and communal roads
This component will help rehabilitate some 350 km (9%) of the 4,000 km of the unpaved
classified network (of which 3,000 km are secondary and communal roads). The roads in this
component were chosen on the basis of socioeconomic criteria including, access to agricultural
production points and social services such as schools and health centers, and connection of
production centers to the primary road network and to market centers. These roads are in the
Northern, Western and Central-Southern parts of the country, and are contiguous to the primary
network. A map indicating their locations is being developed and will be attached to the PAD.
The works on these roads will be mainly periodic maintenance without any alterations to the
existing geometry, and will not involve heavy machinery. As with the paved primary roads, no
re-alignment is anticipated, and special efforts will be made to ensure that there will be no
damage outside the existing road to adjacent property. Economic, technical and environmental
studies relating to these roads will be conducted during the first year of the project by independent
consultants. It has been agreed with ASPEN that recommendations of studies and any ensuing
mitigation measures will be costed, reflected in the bidding documents, and executed as an
integral part of the civil works. The Government has agreed to these measures, and will be
required to confirm its agreement during negotiations.
Component 3: Community-Driven Participatory Road Management (CDPRM)
Under this component, the project will finance the routine maintenance on some 550 km of
identified primary, secondary (provincial) and communal roads, in the Northern, Southern and
Central regions of the country, and in Bujumbura. Maintenance works will be labor-intensive and
will be conducted by road-side Associations of Community Development (ACDs), and SMEs as
follows:

                                                  3
                                                                                                ISDS


l Spot repairs on 150 km of the paved (primary) network by SMEs, and road-side clearing on
    the same roads by ACDs
l Routine maintenance on 200 km of unpaved secondary roads by ACDs
l Routine maintenance on 200 km of unpaved communal roads by ACDs
Basic maintenance tools needed for this component will include about 550 road maintenance kits
for some 55 ACDs. Although no major environmental impact is expected from this routine
labor-intensive activity, a road maintenance guide to be prepared before the commencement of the
scheme, will include guidelines on how to implement environmental management as an integral
part of road management activities. The guide will be cleared with ASPEN. Road maintenance is
expected to start in the second year following the establishment and training of the ACDs in the
first year, and after a multi-year maintenance program has been prepared.
Component 4: Sector Management and Institutional Strengthening
This component will include:
(a) Support to sector management: The project will finance technical assistance by national and
international consultants to (i) enhance the analytical, planning and management capacity of the
two key road sector institutions, namely the Ministry of Public Works and Equipment (MINTPE)
and the National Road Agency (OdR). Specifically, this component will help establish and
maintain within MINTPE and OdR a Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation (LME) capability to
support and oversee policy implementation and private sector-led road works; (ii) carry out a
corporate study of and provide ancillary support to the National Public Works Laboratory
(LNBTP), the National Road Agency (OdR), and the Road Equipment Leasing Agency (ALM).
The study will provide data to be used in establishing management contracts for ALM and
LNBTP, as part of the GOB's resolve to improve governance in the sector; (iii) prepare a national
Transport Development Master Plan (TDMP) which would constitute a comprehensive
framework for the long term development of the sector. The TDMP would cover, inter alia, road
network inventory and related studies, road safety, regional transport facilitation and
development, the restructuring of sector institutions, the promotion of national public and private
sector capacity in the transport sector, and a transport sector Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP).
(b) Support to sector dialogue: The project will finance consultations, travel, workshops and
seminars leading to the preparation and adoption of the national Transport Development Master
Plan (TDMP), and other costs associated with (i) national transport policy development and
regional transport dialog;
(c) Support to road maintenance: This sub-component will finance critical equipment and spare
parts to the ALM and LNBTP to support private sector-led activities of road maintenance and
geo-technical studies, including the refurbishing of ALM's workshop. An inventory of the road
equipment inherited by ALM shows that a good part of it is still in fairly good condition but lacks
spare parts. This equipment cannot be transferred to the private sector under the current
circumstances of Burundi, hence the decision to have it managed autonomously by ALM. This
sub-component will also include vehicles and IT equipment to enhance the capability of sector
agencies in the management, monitoring and evaluation of road operations;
(d) Training: The project will support the implementation of a training program for staff of road
sector institutions, SMEs and ACDs.
Component 5: Project Preparation and Implementation Support
This component will include:(i) project preparatory activities financed by the PPF No. BI-202-Q;

                                                         4
                                                                                                          ISDS


(ii) the management of resources allocated to the CDPRM component; (iii) technical assistance to
support project financial and procurement management; (iii) Operational and technical audits of
works under components 1, 2, and and (iv) operational costs, staff salaries, travel related to
project implementation, establishment of the project financial and procurement management
systems, and project financial audits.

Components:


1.Paved Road Rehabilitation
2. Earth Road Rehabilitation
3. Community-Driven Participatory Road management
4. Sector Management and Institutional Strengthening
5. Project Preparation and Implementation Support




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
EAs for RN 3, RN 4, and RN 10 were prepared in 2001.Their main findings are summarized as follows:

National Road No. 3 (RN3): This is a 29.3 km paved road originating from Bujumbura city. 4.7 km of the
road originate from Bujumbura city while the remaining 24.6 km go through rural terrain toward the South
of Burundi. The road is 6 meters wide. The small urban section is characterized by commercial activity in
the form of street hawkers who sell from vehicle to vehicle as they pass on the right of way. There are lines
of natural and planted trees at some points of this section. Erosion on embankments is visible throughout
the section, while power poles are frequent along the road side. The second section of the road, from PK
6+400 to PK 20+000, crosses a plain where natural vegetation is rare, with a few trees seen here and there.
The last section goes through hilly terrain with the road embedded on both sides. Erosion takes place on
almost the entire road but is quite severe on the last portion. Waters from uphill drain through culverts
along the road into nearby rivers or into Lake Tanganyika which runs parallel to the road. Apart from the
urban section, trees are rare on the rest of the road, along which human settlements are sparse, despite an
intense agricultural activity. Housing is generally enclosed. The road side population is estimated at
23,500. The EA for this road did not reveal within its proximity any protected areas, critical natural
habitats, or sensitive areas.

National Road No. 4. (RN 4): This is a transnational paved route linking Bujumbura to the DRC border.
The section to be rehabilitated is 10.4 km and runs from the outskirts of the city, from PK 5 +000 to PK

                                                        5
                                                                                                         ISDS


15+475, parallel to and away from Lake Tangayika and the Rusizi National Park. The park is laden with a
number of animal species and has a reach ecosystem. The 3.8 km urban section of the road, between PK
8+400 and PK 12+200, has the same characteristics as the urban section described for RN 3 above, with
an average road-side population density of 106 inhabitants per square kilometre. It passes through the
heavily populated Gatumba hill which has a population of about 6,000. Settlement at this point is quite
close to the road which is 5.2 km wide on average. The second section of 2.7 km goes through a plane and
crosses the Rusizi river, on the Concorde bridge, a key tributory of Lake Tangayika. It is lined by by some
planted trees. The last portion of the road is on swampy land and crosses the dead arm of the Rusizi river
called "la Petite Rusizi". Erosion on the entire road is minimal because of the limited slopes.

National Road No. 10 (RN 10): The 122 km road runs eastward from the North-West of Burundi, through
hills and valleys, from Rugombo to Kayanza. Works on the road will be mainly spot rehabilitations
covering only 29 km (25%) of the road length. There are few trees along the road, except on the last 20 km
between Rwegura and Kayanza, but these are essentially planted eucalyptus, situated some 4 metres from
the road side on average. Natural vegetation has been severely affected by an intensive agricultural activity
carried out by a local population with a dense population. The road traverses few villages; and housing is
reasonably distant from the road side. There is little or no interferance with human activity except in small
townships like Rugombo, Mugina, Mabayi, Rwegura and Kayanza. Given the hilly nature of the terrain
crossed by the road, erosion is severe at certain points.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
    A key issue highlighted in the EAs is the fact that works on RN 4 could likely generate the
    displacement of a few people in the Gatumba village, if implemented as in the original design.

                                                       6
                                                                                                            ISDS


    in order to avoid this occurrence, the original design will be modified by limiting the road
    width at Gatumba to 6 meters. This solution which is feasible given the low volume of traffic
    in the next several years on this 10 km road, will be supported by the special dispositions
    prescribed in the EA (Executive Summary, p 12) to minimize possible accidents. These
    dispositions which would include speed breaks on the road and special road signs, will be
    highlighted in the bidding documents.

    A second issue was the drainage solution initially proposed at PK 29+100 (RN 3), which
    would have caused damage to houses down slope. The EA has prescribed an alternative
    solution (Executive Summary P.10), which includes construction of a small retaining wall,
    excavation of longitudinal ditch, planting of grass on slope, and protecting the watersheds of
    Mwambuko and Gatororongo.

   A third issue associated with the project is that works under components 1(ii) and 2, have not been the
   subject of EAs. Given that these works will not commence until the second year, their EAs will be
   prepared together with their technical and economic studies. Any measures arising from the
   EAs will be costed and implemented as an integral part of the works. The works will be
   supervised by consulting firms hired through competitive processes. The team of each
   supervising firm will include environmentalists. Also, the Bank's initial supervision missions will
   include environmental and social safeguard specialist, to ensure that appropriate dispositions are taken
   from the onset. In addition, the National Road Agency has an environmental unit which is expected to
   oversee the proper implementation of environmental actions relating to road programs (See EA P.36)
   .This unit will be strengthened early in the project to render it fully functional. New legislation recently
   enacted by the Government defines compensation rates and other dispositions relating to expropriations
   and compensations. This instrument is attached to the EAs (page 40) and will form the basis of the
   costing for trees and other property, if any, affected by the works.

   Environmental impacts (see EA Summary, p. 8-12) include: possible destruction of vegetation
   (grass, trees); soil destruction (loss of arable lands, erosion, pollution by hydrocarbons,
   lubricants, organic wastes and other cut wastes); on water (increase in water sediments due to
   water perturbation in the Kanyosha and Mugere rivers and their direct conduct in the Lake;
   pollution with the cleaning of machineries in water points and erosion of wastes at cut areas);
   construction milieu ( sound, dust, perturbation of traffic, uncontrolled wasting ); health (risks
   for accidents, cloud of dust)
The EA states that "all mitigation measures proposed, whether general or specific, will permit to
   minimize the project negative incidences
on the milieu and permit its environmental integration". It also points to the "positive impacts"of
   the project and concludes that " the project
is environmentally viable, socially acceptable and economically sustainable" (Executive Summary,
   page 20).

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None. EAs concluded that there would be no major impact associated with the appraised national
roads Nos 3, 4 and 10. This is valid for the national roads 1, 5, and , and the earth roads, as the
envisioned works will not require alterations to the road geometry, nor any economic

                                                       7
                                                                                                          ISDS


displacement of persons or property. No negative impacts are expected on any abutting users or
land holders. In light of the close limitation of the project to within-road repairs, it has been
concluded in discussions with ASPEN that the Resettlement Policy is not triggered , and that no
Resettlement Action Plan or Resettlement Policy Framework is needed. It has also been agreed
with ASPEN that (i) recommendations of studies and any ensuing mitigation measures will be
costed, reflected in the bidding documents, and executed as an integral part of the civil works.
The Government has agreed to these measures, and will be required to confirm its agreement
during negotiations.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental mitigation measures for works starting in the first year have been quantified and
will be included in the bidding documents and contracts of the works.

For the works under components 1 (ii) and 2, expected to start from Year 2, their EAs will be
prepared in the first year together with their technical and economic studies. Any measures arising
from the EAs will be quantified and implemented as an integral part of the works.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Local populations have proven to be a serious threat to road works and assets, either through
guerrilla hit-and-run acts of sabotage or by farming into the right-of-way. Discussions held with
community leaders, government officials and members of the civil society, during project
preparation, led to the conclusion that these threats could be substantially reduced if local
communities were empowered and motivated to assume full responsibility in the oversight of road
preservation and security, especially in the hinterlands.

This component will develop and promote a new scheme of Community-Driven Participatory
Road Management (CDPRM) under which the Government would delegate to road-side
community associations the full management and preservation of the road network, including
routine maintenance and the protection of road works and assets. See Annex --- for a detailed
description of this component. Community associations selected for this purpose would conclude
remunerative "fees for service" contracts with the National Road Agency (OdR). Works under
the scheme will be based on a new type of Community-Driven Labor-Intensive (CDLI) approach,
involving some 70 Associations of Community Development (ACDs) to be selected from rural
and urban road-side communities in the three regions of the Northern, Center and South parts of
the country.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

                                                      8
                                                                                                           ISDS


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/1/2001          7/25/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Available     8/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Available
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. The safeguard
policies are not triggered (see Section C above).

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Kingson Khan Apara                                    09/24/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Yvette Laure Djachechi
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Amadou Konare
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Dan Aronson

Approved by:                          Name                                                  Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                                           09/24/2003
Sector Manager/Director               Alain L. Labeau                                       09/24/2003

