ISDS
THEWORLD BANK GROUP                                         AWorld Frac of Poverty
-lfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/28/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: BURUNDI                              Project ID: P081511
Project: Supplement to the Second Social Action Project Task Team Leader: Menahem M. Prywes
(BURSAP II)
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 13, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 10, 2003                IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: AFTH3                          Sector: Other social services (80%); Pre-primary
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  education (20%)
Status: The proposed supplement would be an IDA  Theme: Other social protection and risk management
Grant of US$ 10 2 million equivalent (SDR 7.7 million)  (P)
I.A 2. Project Objectives:
Project background. The Project was one of the first donor investments to support recovery of
Burundi following the lifting of the embargo in 1999. Under the Burundi Interim Strategy
1999-2001 (July 30, 1999, report no. 19592-Bu), the Project was one of several activities aimed
at "promoting governance and 'ownership' through participation in rehabilitation and
reconciliation".
The Project was approved on August 5, 1999 and became effective on December 23, 1999 for the
amount of SDR 9 million, or USD 12 million equivalent. On November 6, 2001, Belgium made
a grant of Euro 1 million for parallel financing of the early child development component of the
Project. As of September 30, 2002 about 60% of credit funds had been disbursed. A total of
about 92% of credit funds have been disbursed or committed -a large number of sub-projects are
under execution. The current closing date is December 31, 2003. The Project is executed by a
non-profit institution known as Twitezimbere ("self help" in Kirundi).
Supplement development objectives. The objectives of the Project and the Supplement are that:
1. Diverse community groups work together to select, partly finance, monitor and evaluate, use
and maintain their priority community investments; and that
2. The poorest and most vulnerable groups benefit from improved social and economic services
and improved social protection -through transitory wages and social services that limit risks
of poverty.



2
ISDS
The Project  and the proposed Supplement seeks to meet these objectives through the
participatory process and through investments that benefit the poor rural population.
Participation. To engage the population, Twitezimbere organizes public meetings to inform the
population about the Project and to seek their views on development of their commune. On the
basis of these consultations, the population elects a community development committee, an
achievement since Burundi does not have elections or local government but rather a highly
centralized administration. Twitezimbere then works with the committee to produce a
community development plan that lists their highest priority investments. The plan is then
validated through a public meeting. The committee mobilizes the population's contribution in
labor and materials, monitors construction, and maintains their investments. In this way, the
participatory process brings the major ethnic groups together to work on investments that are in
their common interest and in this way supports national reconciliation.
Investments. Once the community development plan is ready, Twitezimbere finances the priority
investments that appear in the plan up to a maximum cost of US$75,000. (The investments in
each commune are referred to as a single sub-project). The largest investment is in sub-projects
to rehabilitate small-scale community infrastructure, such as schools, health centers, and potable
water supply. The Project also invests in early childhood development by supporting services to
pre-school children in the areas of nutrition, prevention of infectious diseases such as malaria,
and informal pre-school education. Finally the Project supports poverty monitoring, through
statistics collection and training of national statisticians.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Government requested a $10.2 million supplement. Its highest priority use of these funds is
to rehabilitate war-damaged areas and ease the reintegration of returning refugees and displaced
persons. The uses of the supplement that have been agreed with the Government during the
mid-term review appear below:
Community mobilization ($US 0.85 million). The supplement will support community
mobilizations and the production of new or updated community development plans in 55
communes.
Infrastructure sub-projects ($US 6.35 million). The majority of the supplement will support
delivery of small-scale community infrastructure sub-projects to 55 communes, with priority
targeting of the provinces of Ruyigi and Makamba. The sub-project financing limit for each
commune will increase from $US75,000 to $US 100,000 so that communities can decide to build
short-rural access roads and other economic infrastructure.
Early child development ($US 2 million). The supplement will allow the project to continue to
support delivery of social services to pre-school children in 34 communes. Moreover, it will
support construction of 115 shelters for informal pre-school circles. Finally the supplement will
support training to prepare for the integration of policy-making and monitoring aspects of the
component into the Ministry of Education.



3
ISDS
Poverty monitoring ($US 0.75 million). The supplement will support a rapid statistical survey of
social and economic conditions (a QWIC survey) for use in monitoring Burundi's progress in
recovering from severe poverty. Moreover, the component will support training of candidates for
the entry exams for the African statistical institutes.
Administration. ($US 0.75 million including audits and special studies).
Components:
Community mobilization
Infrastructure sub-projects
Early child development
Poverty monitoring
Administration
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The proposed Supplement will benefit poor Burundians who live in rural areas or in small and medium
towns, which excludes only residents of the capital, Bujumbura. Because of the way the Project will
select communes, the beneficiaries will include a high proportion of returning refugees and
displaced persons.
No Project activities are planned in or near any protected areas or sites or critical natural habitats, or
other culturally or socially sensivitve areas.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments An Environmental Analysis for the original project was received on April 15, 1999. Since then,
the Project has not confronted significant environmental issues.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes C No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4 09)                                    C; Yes* No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0l Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        * Yes C' No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          C Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  C' Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas



4
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environment. The overall environmental impact of the project is positive because it supports rehabilitation
of rural springs and provision of potable water. Moreover the project is encouraging the use of the 'cold
process' technology for production of bricks in order to conserve wood.
Resettlement. The project has not displaced or resettled any one. That is because the community selects
sub-projects through public meetings and therefore avoids any intervention which would harm a
community member. Furthermore, the project does not displace anyone from homes because most sub
projects consist of rehabilitation of existing community infrastructure such as schools, health centers,
water supply and market places.
Land contributions. Moreover, the project does not and will not expropriate any private land. Almost all
project activities take place on public land, since they usually involve rehabilitation of public
infrastructure. The project does support the construction of small sheds for sprouting seedlings and for
growing mushrooms. These sheds usually measure about 4 to 5 square meters and are on land voluntarily
contributed by private farmers.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area
None
II.D.2 In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environment. The project manual of procedures describes how the execution agency, Twitezimbere, uses an
environmental check list to identify sub-projects that could have a negative impact on the environment.
Applications for such sub-projects are usually rejected. If such an application is accepted, the manual of
procedures sets measures that are applied to avoid or mitigate any negative effects on the environment
To avoid any negative impact in the future, the Government will prepare an environmental management
framework.
Resettlement. In order to be prepared for any possible displacement, for instance of squatters on public
land, the project team is helping the Government prepare a resettlement policy framework that will avoid
involuntary resettlement and will compensate project-affected people.
Land contributions. In addition, the Resettlement Policy Framework will also describe ways in which these
tiny plots are contributed for community use and will establish measures to protect landowners.



5
ISDS
1I D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the population of rural areas, represented by the community development
committees, retuming refugees and displaced persons, and the Government of Burundi, represented
through the Ministry of Planning.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[  SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3 - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             4/15/1999
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Available  1/3/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            4/19/1999     5/25/1999
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               12/31/2002     12/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/24/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/24/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework-             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by      Name                                       Date



6
ISDS
Task Team Leader:             Menahem M. Prywes                            01/23/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank      01/27/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Maria Mims/Person/World Bank            01/27/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                      01/27/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Laura Frigenti                               01/23/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
__________  r FEEOSAK    ,      A?  .      5H0 gCASEi



