ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWor1d1Frcoto PoYtr4y 
InfoShop
Report No AC17
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated 04/04/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country CAMBODIA                                  Project ID P071146
Project: RURAL INVESTMENT AND LOCAL              Task Team Leader Louise F. Scura
GOVERNANCE PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 10, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m)-
Bank Approval. April 22, 2003                    IDA Amounlt ($mi). 22.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                             Sector Sub-nationial government administration
Lending Instrumenit Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  (30%), General agriculture, fishinig and forestry
Status. Lending                                  sector (20%); Central government administration
(20%); General water; sanitation and flood
protection sector (1 5%); Roads and highways (1 5%)
Themile: Other public sector governance (P); Other
rural development (P); Gender (S); Other
environim11enit and natural resources management (S)
I.A 2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the proposed Rural Investimietit and Local Governance Project is to
contribute to rural development and poverty reduction throughl support to provision of priority public
goods and services at the provincial and commune levels, as well as promote good local governance
through support of decentralized and deconcentrated participatory local governanice systems at the
communie and provincial and district levels.
I.A 3. Project Description
The proposed Project will support, throughl Phase 11 of the National Seila Program, the newly
decentralized planinilg process at the commiiunie level, and a pilot of a deconcentrated planninilg process at
the provincial level, as well as the provision of grants for priority rural infrastructure and services
identified throughl such planniniig processes. More specifically, the proposed Project will support: (i)
integration of the National Seila Program into the new local government institutional structures and
development planning, budgetling and implementation processes at the commune level established as part
of the recent decentralization reformis; and (ii) techinical assistance for strategic studies to inform the
ongoinig dialogue on deconcentration reforms, as well as to review and strengthen the regulatory
framework for decentralization



2
ISDS
The proposed Project will provide support, over a foulr-year period (2003-2006), to the following two
componenits,
Component I - Local Planning and Investment; and
*      Component 2 - Policy Support and Project Managemenit
The proposed IDA Credit, totaling US$ 22 millioni, will finance principally sub-project investments at the
commune and province level, as well as some strategic studies and program support costs. The
associated planning activities, technical assistance and capacity building at the national, provincial and
commune levels will be co-financed in parallel by the Partnership for Local Governance (PLG), a
multi-donor trust fund administered by UNDP, as well as by Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC)
domestic resources The IDA Credit would cover techniical assistance, capacity buildinig and incremental
operating costs in the final year of implementation.
A.     Local Planning and Investment Compontent will support, through the Comm1une/Sangkat Fund
(C/SF) (i) the newly established decentralized planling process at the commune level, including
developmenit of five-year Commune Development Plans (CDP), three-year rolling communle investmenit
programs (CIP) and annual commune budgets; and (ii) grants for commune-level investments in public
goods and services identified and prioritized through the participatory local planninig process
B.     Policy Support and Project Management Conmponent will support the capacity buildiig,
technical assistance, bulidings and equipment, and incremenital operating costs at national, provincial and
commune levels of implementing Components I More specifically, the component will finance the
provision to national and provincial institutiolIs the works, goods (SUclh as vehicles, and office,
communications and other equipment) and consulting services necessary to implement their respective
project responsibilities At the provincial level, the IDA Credit will be utilized primarily to procure goods
and works for PRDC ExCom units and Provincial Treasury to strengthien their capacity to support C/SC
development planining and implementation of sub-projects. At the nationial level, the IDA Credit will
finance office equipment and vehicles, as well as fund workshops focused on reviews of the Seila
systems and proposed updates In addition, conisultinig services will be finanlced for the purposes of
conducting strategic studies related to decentalization and deconcentration reforms, socio-economic
follow-up studies, mid-term and final project evaluations, monitorinig quality of procuremenit support by
TSS to C/SC, and an annual indepenidenit audit of project accounts
l.A.4. Project Location. (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas )
The Seila Program includes a total of 17 provinces The RILGP would support Seila Program activities in
15 provinces covering a range of agro-ecosystems and social contexts throughout the country Componenit I
IDA-funded activities in the 15 provinces would be phased-inl over the first 3 years of implementation,
starting with up to 698 communes in 7 province in year I (Banteay Meanchey, Battambaiig, Kampong
Cham, Prey Veng, PLirsat, Siem Reap, Takeo), expanding to up to 980 communes in 11 provinces in year 2
(additionally Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Speu, Kratie, Svay Rieng) and up to 1 1 10 communies in 15
provinces in years 3 and 4 (additionally Otdar Meanchiey, Pailin, Preah Vihear, Ratanakiri).
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Colin men5s The RILGP is rated as a category B project. The rating is based on the small scale of project
interventiois. The potential adverse impacts of these sub-projects are limited in geographical scope and



3
ISDS
impacts will be limited prinarily to the construction period. Impacts will be manageable through good site
selection criteria and simple construction managemenit techniques.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                      * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                              C Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         C Yes * No
Pest Managemiient (OP 4 09)                                   C Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  * Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlemenit (OP/BP 4.12)                        * Yes C No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   C Yes* No
Projects in Internationial Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          U Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7 60)*                   0 Yes * No
*By szpporting ihe proposedpproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summnary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions If information is 77ot available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
IL.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
Potential environmental issues associated with the vast majority of sub-project investmenits are not
expected to be significant. Most investments are likely to involve rehabilitation of existing infrastructure
which is in a dilapidated state or construction of new facilities whichi are very small in scope. To the
extent that there would be any adverse effects, they will primarily be related to construction phase
activities. The potential for adverse impacts from any sub-project investmenlt will ultimately depend on
the magnitude of the specific investmenit type, the characteristics of the specific location, and in some
cases the long term operations of the sub-project. Anticipated effects include dust and noise generated
during construction, modifications to local drainage patterns, small-scale habitat loss from vegetation
clearing or drainage of wetland areas, erosion and increased sedimentation resulting in reduced water
quality; and pollution resulting from inappropriate disposal of construction waste materials. Most
adverse impacts will be highly localized (i.e., effects rarely more than 10-20 m. from the construction
works); temporary in nature (i.e., experienced durinig construction phase only) and easily mitigated
through the application of sensible site selection criteria, good construction practices and dligenit
managemenit practices in the operational phase.
Based on Bank field evaluation of Seila Program sites and discussions with Seila Program Advisory staff,
similar sub-projects financed Llider the Seila Program in the past seem to have experienced few
environimental problems. Still, some adverse impacts fi-om small-scale infrastructire sub-projects have
been described depending on the specifics oF each site. While most activities will have limited effects,
those that involve new physical works or changes in the sites of existing infrastructure could have some
adverse environmental implications. Notable examples are new road construction and the construction of
new irrigation facilities. In these cases, local problems have been identified with respect to poor site
selection decisions resulting in drainage problems, restricted flows In natural water course, conversioll of
local habitat, and erosion problems during the operational phase following road construction.



4
ISDS
Based on the small-scale nature of the sub-projects and the ullllikely prospects of cumulative effects of
these small investments, thie project has been rated as a B category environmenital risk according to
World Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmenital Assessment
11 D lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of mnore than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componenit.
There is little possibility of cumulative effects from the sub-projects supported under the project
Sub-projects are not physically related and will be in different sites.
ll.D.lc Describe any potential long tern impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area
There are no long term impacts anticipated due to the very small scale nature of planned activities.
11 D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternlatives (if required)
Alternative sub-projects will be considered during the commune planlling process. Communities will
identify environmental resources of value during initial scopeing and will evaluate potential impacts as
possible sub-projects are identified.
ll.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats and Cultural Property. The project's approach to
environmental review will be to fully integrate consideration of adverse impacts into the
Commune/Sangkat development planning planning, design, construction procurement and
operations. Based on a review of the proposed nationally approved commune planning
guidelines, several key points in the overall decision process lend themselves to including
environmental review. Guidelines for Environmental Assessment, including screening for natural
habitats and cultural property issues, of proposed investment activities managed by the commune
and by the province has been developed and incorporated as part of the Seila programming,
appraisal and contracting systems. A full description of the procedures to be followed under the
project is provided in Annex 13 of the PAD.
Indigenous Peoples. OD 4.20 has been determined to apply in some of the participating
provinces. However, due to the unknown nature and site of possible sub-projects it is not
possible to pre-determine whether or not IP will be affected by specific investments. Indigenous
Peoples concerns will be addressed through a Highland Peoples Development Plan which is fully
described in Annex 14 of the PAD.
Involuntary Resettlement. The development of small-scale infrastructure (e.g., village roads,
bridges, culvers) under the project will likely not require taking of land or assets. However, the
possibility of land acquisition cannot be ruled out because the specific investment choices and
settings will be unknown until implementation, due to the participatory nature of the project.
Therefore, for Component 1, a Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures for
Commune Sub-Projects has been prepared in compliance with OD 4.30. This framework is fully
described in Annex 15 of the PAD. A separate draft resettlement policy framework has been
prepared for Component 2 and is described in Annex 16 of the PAD. As this component is a pilot



5
ISDS
to be developed during implementation, important design features for this component remain
under consideration, and the framework cannot be finalized prior to appraisal. Final approval of
the framework by the Bank will be a condition of disbursement for Component 2.
II D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultationi and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people
Key stakeholders in the project will be the residents of villages and communes who will benefit
from the provision of commune level investment funds. Community consultation is an integral
component of the commune planning process promoted under the Seila program. Project
beneficiaries will participate through representation on village and commune committees, public
discussion of local development priorities and through the approval of the commune
development plans. District and Provincial Facilitation Teams are required to undertake
community based needs assessments and to share information at all stages of the planning
process. No sub-project will be selected that does not flow from the Commune/Sangkat
development planning process. Since environmental and social criteria will be fully integrated
into the planning process, stakeholder participation and information disclosure will be assured
throughout. District and Provincial Facilitation teams will be given training in community
consultation techniques including environment and social safeguard issues.
For projects requiring a stand alone EA, the report itself will be posted in a public place within
the commune and the commune councils will be responsible for ensuring that the EA reports are
on the formal agenda for all final decision meetings on sub-project selection. Prior to project
implementation all safeguard procedures to be followed under the project will be made available
to concerned stakeholders through the Provincial Rural Development Committee (PRDC) offices
in each province, through the Seila Task Force offices in Phnom Penh and through the
Information centers of the World Bank.
Under the terms of the Highland People Development Plan procedures are put in place to ensure
that project affected minority groups are given meaningful opportunities to participate in
planning decisions. This will help to ensure that they are provided culturally appropriate benefits
and to ensure that adverse impacts are avoided or minimized.
E. Safeguards Cllassification. Category is determinied by the highest impact in any policy. Or oni basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards Wheniever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts, or significanit technical and institLtional risks
in maniagement of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects whlich require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
En vironinental Assess,nen7t/Analysjis/Managemen7t Plan     Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by thie Bank                                12/16/2002    12/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002    1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/17/2002    1/9/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlemnent Action Plan/Framnework                        Expected       Actuial
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/16/2002    12/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002    1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2002    1/9/2003
Indigenous Peoples Developnment Plan/Framnework             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/16/2002    12/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002    1/13/2003
Date of submission to lnfoShop                              12/16/2002    1/9/2003
Pest Management Plan                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bankl                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submissionl to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain wily.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader.             Louise F. Scura                             December 11, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1  Glenn S. Morgan/Personi/World Bank      December 11, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Daniel R. Gibson/Personi/World Bank    December 11, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Cyprian F Fisiy                          January 9, 2003
Sector Manager/Director.      Mark D. Wilson                              January 10, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SE SARC H                    'rFfEDoACK  , E IT  -AAP



