ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorid Free, oi Pivtrty c
4=
InrfoShop
Report No AC23
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated 04/09/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country' CAMBODIA                                 Project ID' P071207
Project: Provincial and Rural Infrastructure Project  Task Team Leader. Sally L. Burningham
(PRI P)
Authorized to Appraise Date April 3, 2003         IBRD Amounlt ($mi)
Bank Approval. September 16, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m). 20.00
Managing Unit EASTR                               Sector' Roads and highways (50%); Central
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (25%), Sub-national
Status' Lending                                   government administration (25%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
reconstruction (P); Rural services and infrastructure
(P); Other public sector governance (S)
I A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the Provincial and Rural Infrastructure Project is to provide sustainable,
year-round, and safe improvements in rui'al accessibility to markets and essential services in the four
provinces of Kamponig Thom, Otdar Mean Chey, Preah Vihear and Siem Reap
I.A.3. Project Description:
In order to attain its development objective, the following will be implemented under the Provincial and
Rural Infrastructure Project (PRIP) in the four northwest provinces of Kampong Thom, Otdar Mean
Chey, Preah Vihear and Siem Reap provilces by the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT)
and the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) The PRIP will draw on, and scale up, the successfuil
experience of earlier similar projects such as the MRD-implemented Rural Infr-astructure Improvement
Project (RIIP) and ILO-assisted Upstream Project, and complemiient various Asian Development Bank
(ADB) supported projects. Sustainiable maintenance of the secondary, provincial and tertiary roads
presents significant challenges that the proposed project intends to take on.
Component 1. Maintenance management (US$ 2.0 million) The project will support the installation
and operation of road mainitenianice management systems at the national level in MPWT and MRD and in
the respective provincial departments of Kampong Thom, Otdar Mean Chey, Preah Vihear and Siem
Reap. The project will also support the annual execution of routine mainitenance works on all roads in
good and fair condition in the provinces of Kampong Thomii, Otdar Mean Chey, Preah Vihear and Siem
Reap. The funds for routine maintenance are included in the cost of the project to be funded from



2
ISDS
Government annual budget funds.
Component 2. Rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of secondary-national, provincial and
tertiary roads (US$ 18.0 million). The project will support rehabilitation and periodic maintenlanice of
approximately 300 km of strategic secondary-national and provincial roads under the MPWT; and
rehabilitation and periodic mailitenian1ce of approximately 100 km of tertiary roads under MRD in the
provinces of Kampong Thom, Otdar Mean Chey, Preah Vihear and Stem Reap The works will be
contracted out and a program to develop qualified private contractors would be run concurrently,
increasing private sector involvemenit in the road sector Works will be carried out using labor based
assisted technology to maximize local employment.
Component 3. Capacity building program (US$ 1.75 million) is aimed at strengthellilng of
institutional capacity at the national and provincial levels and providing support to strengthen the
on-going deconcenitrationi efforts in MRD, and seek to replicate these efforts in MPWT, where
applicable.
Component 4. Improved policies and strategies (US$ 0.75 million). The project will support on-going
policy development in the transport sector, supporting the existing trends rather thani pursuLilg new
initiatives. Areas of possible support include:
a) development of transparenit planniniig, budgeting and contractinig for roads;
b) adoption of life-cycle standards and costing for planninig, designing and managing roads,
c) adoption of labor-based appropriate technology throughout MPWT and MRD,
d) provision of sustainied funding for road maintenance includinig both periodic and routilne
maintenanice; and
e) Institutionial reform to provide capacity for contractinig out of maintenanice, and
commercialization of force account ulnits.
Component 5. Community awareness programs (US$ 0.5 million). The project will implement
community awareness programs aimed at increased awareness by transport agencies and residents of
related risks in the following areas
a) People's participation in planning, specifically road planning and road maintenianice, and
access to public information
b) Road Safety
c) HIV/AIDS
d) Mine/Uinexploded Ordinance risks and clearance programs.
Componienits.
1. Maintenanice management
Routine maintenianice on secondary; provincial roads
Routine maintenance on tertiary roads
2. Rehabilitationi and periodic maintenlanice
MPWT-Secondary and provincial roads
MRD-Tertiary roads
3. Capacity building program
4. Improved policies and strategies
5. Communiity awareniess programs
Refundinig of Project Preparation Facilities



3
ISDS
I A 4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in the four northwest provinces of Kampong Thorn, Otdar Mean Chey, Preah
Vihear and Siem Reap. Only the first year rehabilitationi program is knowin prior to appraisal. The roads
to be implemented in the first year work program have been defined during a consultative process
complemiienited by multi criteria (economic, technical, environmenit, social, beneficiary consultationi, etc.)
analysis and represent about US$ 10 million of the total US$ 23 million project The first year roads have
all had an Environmental Assessment and a SocialAsses.sment done and have been determined to have no
land acquisition or resettlemeit. One road does affect a community of Indigenous Peoples and an
Indigenous Peoples Developmenit Plan will be agreed prior to appraisal.
Some of the roads proposed for reliabilitation may pass througil or adjoin protected landscapes, nationial
parks, or wildlife sanctuaries and are therefore subject to OP 4.04 oni Natural Habitats. NR 66, the
east-west highiway adjoining the Beng Per Wildlife Sanctuary, will be rehabilitated under the project and
crosses at least three Angkor bridges wvhicih would require preservation or even restoration This was the
case for the Angkor era Kampong Kdai bridge on the NR6 being reliabilitated under a World Bank
supported project Given the potential for cultiral relics in the area, OP 4 11 on Cultural Property is
applicable. The project will use mechaniical or manual work for clearing areas for road rehabilitatiol. No
pesticides will be used OP 4.09 on Pest Management is therefore not applicable. There might be an
impact due to induced development generated by migration and settlemenit of people in the project area
The extent of this impact and how it is mitigated is covered in the Environmenital Assessment On the
positive side, the project will achieve important environmenltal benefits througIl improved access and
mobility for the motorized and noni-motorized traffic, reduced erosion and floodilg, tree plantinig to
reduce erosion and improve esthetics, improved access to the communities and improved drainage along
the existing road alignimlents. The Environmental Assessment (EA) for thle project hias been carried out by
an indepenldenit consultant to identify potential project roads withi significant impacts requiring a specific
EA
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Conmments As a precautioni, an envirolimenital assessment has been carried out for the project and for the
first year roads even though most of the anticipated roads to be rehabilitated and maintailned would be
classified as environment category "B".
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessmenlt (OP/BP/GP 4 01)                    * Yes IC No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                              * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        C Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
CulAItUral Property (OPN 11 .03)                             * Yes 0} No
Indigenious Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes C^ No
Involunitary Resettlemenit (OP/BP 4 12)          *              Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4 37)                                  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Interinationial Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        D Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                     Yes * No



4
ISDS
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejtudice thefinal determination of the parties'claimns
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sumntary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all r elevant questionis If ilnforilation Is n70t available,
describe steps to be taken? to obtain necessary clata
lI.D. la Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The environmental imlpact of the project is expected to be limited to the constructioni effects associated
with these rehabilitation and maintenance wvorks. Thle impacts may result from dust and noise, use of
bitumen on sections selected for surface treatment, disposal of solid wastes, erosion control, siting and
operation of borrow areas and quarries, labor camp managemenlt, etc These impacts are common in road
works and can be mitigated with proven management techniques. The project does not involve
realignment of existing roads and therefore any land conversion for construction purposes would be
marginal. Thus any land acquisitioll would be marginial. The project may affect some indigenous
communities living in the vicinity of the roads to be rehabilitated.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more thani one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None anticipated.
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Positive impact is expected.
II.D 2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The following safeguard policies apply to the project. a) Environimiiental Assessment, b) Natural Habitats;
c) Cultural property; d) indigenous people, e) Involulitary resettlement Implementation of
environnmental assessment will ensured throughl inclusion of EMP activities discussion at the pre-bid
meetings, requirement in the constructioni contracts, and environment and social impact mitigation
management training for both constructioni contractors and MPWT/MRD supervisors and project
personnel. Conditionis in Constructioll Contracts will require contractors to meet performance standards
All contracts will containi clauses that define the environmental requirements to be met durinig road
constructioni Natural habitats will be protected thioLgh selection criteria and design Roads selected for
the first year do not cross any known heritage sites, the EMP includes procedures to be followed to
protect known or chanice find of cultural property. Indigenous peoples development framework has been
prepared for the project. For the first year roads, one IPDP requirement has been identified and prepared.
No land acquisition is anticipated but a resettlement policy framework has been prepared and agreed to
with the Government in case people are found to be negatively affected. No adverse impact have been
identified for the first year roads All safeguard policies complianlce will be closely monitored during
supervision and mid-term evaluationi.
Il.D 4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisiims for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



5
ISDS
Participation of and consultation with the beneficiaries groups has been and would be contillued
throughlout the project preparation and implementationi. The indepenident consultant for environmental
impact assessmenit in collaboration with social consultanit would prepare a Public Participation
Framework that would provide mechanism for public participation and consultation durinig the planiniig,
design and implementationi of the project. Key stakeholders would be consLilted formally throughi
PRDCs and inforimially through focus group discussions il identification of their needs and priorities as
part of both the IRAP process and the social assessment. Feedback from the key stakeholders would be
used for screening of the project and decidilg the priorities
E. Safeguardls Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards Wheniever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1.- Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects whicih require a safeguard frameework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Anialysis/Managemoent Plan-        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/30/2003     3/26/2003
Date of "in-couLitry" disclosure                           3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShlop                            3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Date of distributilng the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  3/30/2003   4/2/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framnework-                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/30/2003     3/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoSlhop                            3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framewvork              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/30/2003     3/26/2003
Date of "in-counltry" disclosure                           3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/30/2003     3/31/2003
Pest Management Plan                                        Expected      Actial
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan                                 Expected       Actucal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable



6
ISDS
If in-couLitry disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain whiy
Signed andl submitted by      Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader              Sally L Burinigham                           3/24/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Jitendra J. Shah/Person/World Banik     3/24/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Lars C Lund/Person/World Bank           3/24/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved bv:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Maria Teresa Serra                         03/24/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Jitendra N. Bajpai                           03/24/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCHN  _    , F_EE8ACK     r S-T M        SHO wcAsE    2 :



