ISDS
THE WVORLD BANK GROUP                                             A World Free of Poverty
InfoShop
Ih 1,1w >1.,m K,
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/07/2002                                 24964
Section I - Basic Information                                     October 7, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CAMBODIA                                  Project ID: P070542
Project: Health Sector Support Project             Task Team Leader: Vincent Turbat
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 2, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 19, 2002                   IDA Amount ($m): 17.20
Managing Unit: EASHD                               Sector: Health (75%); Sub-national government
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance  administration (13%); Central government
Loan (SIM)                         administration (12%)
Status: Lending                                    Theme: Fighting communicable diseases (P); Health
system performance (P); Administrative and civil
service reform (P)
I.A.2. IProject Objectives:
The objective of this project is to contribute to the improvement of the health status of the
population by: (a)increasing the accessibility and the quality of health services; and (b) supporting the
GOKC's health sector reform process and strengthening the sector's capacity to manage resources
efficiently.
The project's specific objectives are to:
(i)    develop affordable quality health services with emphasis on primary health care and first
referral services in rural areas;
(ii)   increase the utilization of health services by the poor;
(iii)  mitigate the effects of infectious disease epidemics and of malnutrition; and
(iv)   improve the health sector's capacity and performance.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed WB-HSSP design responds to: (a) Borrower's explicit demand to use the IDA
credit to launch and implement the Health Sector Strategic Plan for 2003-2007 using a sector-wide
management approach (SWIM) and (b) Bank's and other donors' concern with the complexity of such an
approach for which the sector does not posses the entire required capacity. Consequently the WB-HSSP
includes: (i) the commitment to strengthening sector capacity (to which ADB and DFID but also WHO,



2
ISDS
GTZ and all other partners will also contribute through their financing and programs); and (ii) the
agreement that while activities have been identified and costed for the entire duration of the project,
starting with the third year of the HSSP (and using the Annual Review and Operational Planning process
adopted by the Borrower to operationalize the Health Sector Strategic Plan), adjustments or new
allocations will be made depending upon the needs of the sector and the level of available funding in
each respective year. Further, both to examine progress in the achievement of development objectives
and to help HSSP adapt, in management terms, to an annual review and planning process, the HSSP
mid-term review is scheduled to take place at the end of the second HSSP year of implementation.
The project aims at improving the health status of the population by providing support for: (a)
reforming Cambodia's health sector; (b) strengthening the sector's capacity to manage resources
efficiently; and (c) improving the performance and the quality of health services. In particular, the
project will focus on equity in the utilization of health services by the poor, by improving the
accessibility and affordability of health services and by increasing the demand for such services amongst
underserved groups. Utilization rates of various income groups will be monitored during project
implementation and changes in health outcomes evaluated. While supporting the sector-wide feature of
the GOKC program for the health sector, the WB-HSSP will also focus on specific priority areas,
including:
(a)    Longer term activities requiring a sustained, coordinated approach, e.g., infrastructure
development, equipment and maintenance, pharmaceuticals (essential drugs) and human
resource development;
(b)    Proven cost-effective interventions, relevant to the situation in Cambodia and to which
the Bank and its partners are committed, specifically:  (i) poverty alleviation
(development of quality affordable services for the poor and of different arrangements to
protect the use of services by the poor, women and children); and (ii) reduction of major
public health problems (such as: infectious diseases in general, and TB, malaria, dengue,
and HIV/AIDS in particular, and malnutrition); and
(c)    Capacity building and health sector reform, especially by addressing issues in areas such
as health financing, planning and financial  management, and by supporting other
activities conducive to allocative efficiency and other efficiency gains, including the
decentralization process, generalization of Health Management Agreements (HMAs) to
ensure accountability of health providers, donor coordination, and the strengthening of
provincial and Operational Districts' (OD) health administrations.
Components:
(1)    Improved Delivery of Health Services (for the benefit of the poor and rural populatiori. Under
this component the project will provide support to increase:
(1.1) Accessibility and quality of health services The first objective of this sub-component is the
continued development of primary health care facilities and first referral and provincial hospitals, by
financing civil works (rehabilitation and new constructions), equipment, and maintenance. A health
infrastructure development plan will be developed with HSSP financial support and Bank assistance
will focus on rural and remote provinces. This plan will ensure that: (i) investments in infrastructure
take into account Cambodia's potential to cope with the recurrent expenditures entailed by such
investments; and (ii) the siting of health facilities to be constructed or rehabilitated under HSSP is



3
ISDS
decided on sound criteria (such as accessibility, utilization rates, health needs, and proximity to
private facilities). Other issues such as equipment needs and maintenance services will also be
supported, inter alic4, by establishing maintenance workshops in districts, and by providing training
and technical assistance. The project will also help reduce, through this and other components, some
of the current problems with the availability of health providers (very important in rural areas and
remote provinces), skill and motivation.
The project will support activities to improve the quality of services by providing financial resources
to carry out the training of the minimum and complementary packages of activities (MPA and CPA)
and particularly, in collaboration with WHO, of the MPA Module 3 (Child Health/IMCI). Other
project components will also support MPA/CPA training e.g., Nutrition, Infectious disease control.
The project will also help the MOH to establish a Quality Improvement/Quality Standards unit and to
finance the activities of this unit after its inception. In collaboration with GTZ, the project will
support QA activities in the three districts of the Kampong Thum province. This will include
training, supervision, development of quality indicators and of materials to support the health
providers in the delivery of curative and preventive care. HSSP will also provide program support
for the establishment of (i)  performance-based reward systems and of contracts with health
providers, (ii) arrangements to increase user participation in decision making and to assess user
satisfaction, and (iii) equity funds to pay for the services delivered to the poor population (the equity
funds will be based on the same model as the one adopted in the Sub-component 1.2 and supported
financially from it).
Lastly, funding will be provided to help solve current problems with drug quality, utilization and
availability throughout the health services. Project supported activities related to drugs will ensure
that the goal of providing affordable and good quality drugs to the entire population, and of
preserving or enhancing the affordability of drugs for the poor, will be reached. These activities will
include (i) upgrading the National Drug Quality control laboratory to meet international standards,
(ii) carrying out of a feasibility study on cost recovery of drugs and drug revolving funds (DRF), (iii)
supplying drug kits to health centers, and first & secondary referral hospitals to meet the needs of the
Minimum Package (MPA) and the Complementary Package of Activities (CPA), (iv) strengthening
of the capacity of the Food and Drug Department, and (v) carrying out a feasibility study on the
establishment of a central drug procurement unit. Other HSSP supported activities (e.g., the
expansion of health facilities, the improvement in sector financing and efficiency, the strengthening
of MOH capacity and the support to programs addressing main public health problems) will also
contribute to the improvement of the drug situation.
(1.2) Affordability of health care servicesUnder this sub-component, the credit will finance
alternative means to increase the accessibility and improve the affordability of health services for the
poor and underserved populations.  These include modifications of the recent, innovative
donor-supported pilot programs which have been able to mitigate existing deficiencies in
management capacity and funding by strengthening local management capacity and increasing
sustainable local funding.
In addition to activities specifically focused on helping poor individuals and households to afford
health services, it should also be noted that the project will also benefit the poor through: (i)
development of primary health care (preventive and curative) services; (ii) financing of health
facilities in the rural areas of the country; (iii) strengthening of infectious diseases control programs;
(iv) development of nutrition activities; and (v) improvement of procurement and distribution of
essential drugs. Such strategies are particularly beneficial to the poor who are frequently living in



4
ISDS
the remote areas of the country and more often affected by infectious diseases and malnutrition, and
who cannot afford to purchase drugs from private pharmacies.
Given the credit's emphasis on poor and underserved groups, it will be crucial to monitor access to
and affordability of health services for these groups over the life of the project. The project design
uses the information provided by initial beneficiary assessment to target the under-served population
groups, while the final project evaluation will include a similar assessment as well as the data of two
DHS (see also Section A.2).
(2)    Improved Programs Addressing Public Health Priorities.
(2.1) Infectious diseases control programs.The TB, Malaria, Dengue and STI/HIV/AIDS
programs will receive support from the project.  These interventions are important from an
epidemiological standpoint in Cambodia and are consistent with the World Bank Strategy for Health,
Nutrition and Population in the East Asia and Pacific Region due to their high cost effectiveness
ratios and contribution to equity. Because of their importance on the one hand and their potential to
raise grants on the other hand, an agreement was reached to: (i) set aside from the IDA credit US$
2.2 million for Malaria and US$ 2.7 million for TB, and to make yearly allocations from these
amounts depending upon the respective programs' needs and financial gaps (and, if grant financing
becomes sufficient, to transfer the unused part of the IDA allocation for Malaria and TB to the
Component 1.1); (ii) provide US$ 0.9 million from the IDA credit to finance Dengue control
activities and to entrust the execution of the respective set of activities to WHO; and (iii) provide an
IDA grant of US$ 2 million to support the activities of the STI/HlIV/AIDS program.
Malaria: The project will support the further development of: (a) impregnated bed-nets and
hammock-nets program; (b) activities to cope with the emerging problem of parasite drug
resistance; (c) case detection (laboratory equipment and training); (d) case management (with
emphasis on early treatment of complicated malaria cases, malaria in children and in pregnant
women); (e) supervision and improved surveillance; and (f) IEC activities with focus on minority
groups and other underserved populations to increase their demand for services. The project will
also support the procurement of environmentally safe insecticides to be used for the impregnated
bed-nets and hammock-nets program and for indoor spraying (reducing mosquito transmission
and containing malaria and dengue epidemics).
Dengue: In collaboration with the National Dengue Program and WHO, the project will
contribute to this program that aims at strengthening: (i) early diagnosis and appropriate clinical
management; and (ii) vector control, in synergy with the malaria program where appropriate.
Dengue control activities financed from HSSP will be executed by WHO. The activities that will
be financed from the credit will focus on the provision of logistic support for larvicide
distribution and training, and the phasing in of more sustainable control strategies (such as
impregnated jar lids).
Tuberculosis: The project will support the implementation of the TB program's Strategic Plan il
its entirety and will focus on: (i) integrating TB activities at health center and district hospital
level including the implementation of the Directly Observed Treatment (DOTS) and its further
devolution to communities; (ii) increasing the TB case detection rate and reducing the defaulting
rate; (iii) improving the laboratory capacity and strengthening supervision and management
activities at district and province level and (iv) developing IEC and other activities promoting
behavioral change to increase the detection rate and, in particular, the use of services by



5
ISDS
underserved populations such as minority groups and the poor in general. HSSP will finance
supervision, training, technical assistance, minor civil works, laboratory equipment.
Additionally, the HSSP will finance activities in collaboration with the HIV/AIDS program
aiming at controlling the spread of TB in AIDS patients and providing better care to the TB/HIV
positive patients.
STls/HIV/AIDS: The project will support the procurement of STI drugs and the implementation
in the field of the "100% condom use" strategy that targets specifically sex workers and other
high risk groups and effectively decreases STIs and HIV transmission.
(2.2) Nutrition activitiesBecause of the alarmingly high rates of both undernutrition and
micronutrient malnutrition in Cambodia and the consequent effect that malnutrition has on morbidity,
mortality, educability and productivity, the HSS project will finance an essential package of
preventive and curative nutrition activities inducive of behavior changes. The nutrition activities
selected to receive financial support from the HSSP have been shown to be the most cost-effective in
reducing the developmental and productive problems associated with malnutrition. This essential
package includes the following: 1) exclusive breast-feeding for infants 0-6 months; 2) timely and
adequate complementary foods for children from 6 months to 2 years of age with contilued
breast-feeding until 2 years of age and promotion of an adequate diet for women of reproductive age,
particularly pregnant women; 3) appropriate care of sick and malnourished children; 4) provision of
iron-folate supplements for women and children; 5) provision of vitamin A for women and children;
and 6) availability of iodized salt for all members of the household.
(3)    Strengthened Institutional CapacityUnder this component, the project will provide
appropriate support to ongoing efforts at central, provincial, and district levels to strengthen key health
sector functions, including: (a) oversight of the policy, legislative and regulatory framework for health
service administration; (b) sector planning and program coordination of health care delivery; and (c)
management of sector resources (human, financial, and material including infrastructure, drugs, etc.). An
additional function, monitoring and evaluation of sector performance and health status, will be financed
jointly by ADB and DFID.
(a) Oversight of the policy. legislative and regulatorv framework The project will support: (i)
local legal consulting services to help the ministry formulate a legislative program and to draft
appropriate legislation; and (ii) translation services and dissemination of information through the
production of materials and the organization of workshops for health personnel, local authorities,
and public opinion leaders.
(b) Sector planning and program coordination. In addition to sector reforms, the Project will: (i)
strengthen MOH's capacity for analyzing health sector financing; (ii) develop the planning roles
and capabilities at central and decentralized levels; and (iii) reinforce the coordination and
monitoring of plan implementation. Specifically, the Project will use the proposed medium-term
expenditure framework (MTEF) exercise as the basis for improving health sector financial
analysis, introducing a medium-terpianning process, and strengthening annual planning
guidelines and procedures. The Project will also support the progressive decentralization of the
planning process and the integration of planning and budgeting activities.
The project will contribute to the organization of annual sector reviews, which will be carried out
by an independent organization, with oversight from a suitable institution within MOH (e.g.,
NIPH, CoCom, Directorate General for Inspection, etc.) responsible for contracting and



6
ISDS
managing the reviews, disseminating the findings, and incorporating them  into MOH
policy-making and planning processes.
(c) Management of sector resources. The Project will assist MOH to solve the present problems
with human resources in regard to: (i) manpower planning and management, and (ii)
improvement of skills and performance. Based on the Health Workforce Development Plan
(1996-2005), the recommendations of the biennial workforce development plan reviews (of 1999
and 2001), the National Policies and Strategies for Human Resources for Health (1999-2003),
and the proposed reforms of the National Program of Administrative Reform (NPAR), the
Project will support measures to: (a) strengthen manpower planning and personnel management
at all levels; and (b) improve the knowledge and skills of health service providers and
administrators.
In addition to strengthening human resource development, the project would also focus on
strengthening financial resource management and procurement capabilities. With respect to
financial management, the project will finance: (i) the recruitment and training of financial
management staff at central, provincial, and district levels; (ii) the development and
implementation of systems acceptable to both the Government and IDA along with a policy and
procedures manual; and (iii) the creation of a strong internal audit function within MOH. With
respect to procurement, the project will finance: (a) additional staff and training on Bank
procurement policy and procedures; and (b) the recruitment of an international procurement
advisor and four national procurement consultants to supplement MOH capacity. Additional
training for provincial health departments will also be provided if they are to be given
responsibility for procuring small contracts for civil works, drugs, other goods and services.
(d) Monitoring and evaluation The project (through ADB and DFID financing) would support
efforts to improve M&E analytical capabilities and expand its investigative range to include: (i)
systematic comparison of the outcomes of the various on-going pilots and experiments (HMAs,
contracting in and out, boosting, etc.); (ii) surveillance of health service delivery outside the
public sector to provide a comprehensive view of sector-wide change; and (iii) use of the
information to improve health sector governance, in particular at the local level (by increasing
information to health center management committees, feedback committees, and NGOs.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project provinces are: Krong Pailin, Krong Kaeb, Kampot, Banteay Mean Chey, Stueng
Traeng, Preah Vihear, Bat Dambang, Otdar Mean Chey, Kampong Spueu, Pousat, Kampong Thum and
Kracheh.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         *           Yes S No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              .Yes * No      . TBD



7
ISDS
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                * Yes _ No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes * No     . TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      * Yes    No    . TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes    No     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            Yes 0 No      TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          Yes 0 No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties 'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If infornmation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment and Pest Management
The environmental impact potentials of the project are limited in scopc and, to the extent that
environmental mitigation measures are required, they are relatively simple and well known. An
Environmental Review (ER) was carried out to assess the particular environmental and human health
impacts with the main focus being on: construction and rehabilitation of health care facilities (HCF)
focusing on civil works and drinking water supply; health care waste management (HCWM) practices;
and pesticide use in malaria and dengue vector control programs. The ER complied with the provisions
of OP/BP/GP 4.01 concerning Environmental Assessment, and reviewed and complied with Cambodia's
environmental laws, regulations, policies, and other relevant legislation to ensure that applicable
assessment requirements were fully addressed in project implementation. Extensive consultation was
sought with MoH, Ministry of Environment, provincial health authorities, and national and international
organizations involved in the provision of health care in Cambodia in completing the ER to ensure that
potential project impacts were fully understood and appropriate conclusions and recommendations were
reached. Particular attention was given to obtaining inputs from targeted provinces and technical
programs expected to be involved in HSSP delivery.  The recommendations of the ER will be
incorporated into the proposed project, including the Project Implementation Plan, Operational Manual,
Annual Operational Plans, and Health Infrastructure Development Plan. The Environmental Review
Report was publicly disclosed in Phnom Penh, Cambodia on September 20, 2002. The findings
summarized by activity are as follows.
(a)    HCF Construction and Rehabilitation - Review of this activity confirmed that it does not pose
any serious environmental concerns and as such will not trigger an assessment under Cambodia's
environmental impact assessment (EIA) guidelines.
(b)    Construction of a new National Laboratory for Drug Quality Control - This activity is expected
to trigger additional assessment under Cambodian EIA requirements. Anticipated construction-related
environmental impacts are expected to be minimal as the site selected is situated in an existing built
urban area of Phnom Penh. No environmentally sensitive areas were identified during a site visit.
Potential environmental and human health concerns that were identified relating to laboratory operations
include: air emissions containing harmful pollutants; laboratory wastewater disposal; and disposal of
hazardous solid laboratory wastes. These aspects of laboratory operations are well understood and
readily addressed throughi adoption of industry best environmental management practices.



8
ISDS
(c)    Drinking Water Quality - Review of the safety of drinking water sources available to HCF
identified potential risks associated with microbial water quality and naturally occurring arsenic in
groundwater. Microbial water quality represents the most serious human health threat countrywide in
Cambodia with infectious diseases and parasites being the most common and widespread health risk
associated with drinking water. Available data indicate that overall chemical water quality in Cambodia
is generally very high but that elevated arsenic levels are prevalent in some provinces targeted by the
WB-HSSP. An additional study of water sources typically used by HCF in WB-HSSP provinces will be
conducted prior to commencement of health infrastructure development in the respective province, to
ensure that World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for drinking water are consistently met.
(d)    Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) - Potential environmental and occupation risks
associated with wastes generated by HCF, particularly hazardous chemical and infectious wastes, were
reviewed in detail in completing the ER. It was determined that risks are well defined and are readily
addressed through adoption of best HCWM management practices encompassing: waste minimization,
recycling, and reuse; proper handling, storage and transportation; and treatment of waste by safe and
environmentally sound methods. The need to address wastewater, a sub-category of health care waste
(HCW), in construction and rehabilitation of HCF was also examined and recommendations made to
provide appropriate treatment to avoid human risks associated with discharge of untreated or
inadequately treated sewage to the natural environment.
(e)    Pesticide Use in Vector Control - Review of planned malaria and dengue vector control activities
confirmed that insecticide/larvicide to be used in the WB-HSSP have successfully passed WHO's
Pesticide Evaluation Scheme (WHOPES). Chemicals currently recommended by WHO pose very low
risks to humans if used correctly. Of these Deltamethrine, used in insecticide treated nets (ITN), is
considered the least toxic and highly unlikely to cause adverse effects in normal usage. Temperos, used
in larviciding of drinking water containers, has a very low toxicity to humans. Although both chemicals
are known to be highly toxic to non-target species such as aquatic organisms, environmental risks are
limited under normal circumstances where only negligible quantities of these chemicals are likely to be
released to the natural environment.  Review of existing occupational health and environmental
safeguards in place for vector control programs in Cambodia confirmed that there exists a low potential
for unintentional release of these chemicals through improper handling or disposal.
Indigenous Peoples -- Social Assessment
The project aims at improving health outcomes with emphasis on the underserved groups
including the rural and urban poor and women. The project will improve accessibility to health services
for the lowest income groups by: (a) development of primary health care (i.e., preventive and curative
PHC services); (b) financing, with priority, of health facilities in the rural areas of the country; (c)
strengthening of infectious diseases control programs; (d) development of nutrition activities; and (e)
improvement of procurement and distribution of essential drugs (such strategies offer more benefits to
the low-income groups which are frequently living in the remote areas of the country, are more often
affected by infectious diseases and malnutrition, and cannot afford to purchase drugs from private
pharmacies). Moreover the project will: promote and assess cost recovery for services and drugs but also
exemptions and equity funds for the poor; and review and finance, if warranted, the establishment of risk
sharing schemes protecting the poor.
Increased utilization of health services by the poor and women is one of the project's specific
objectives and it will be measured by three performance indicators dealing with the utilization of
outpatient services, utilization of hospital services and patient satisfaction. The access to and the



9
ISDS
affordability of health services for the low-income groups will be monitored during the life of the project.
The project design will use the information provided by an initial beneficiary assessment targeting the
under-served population groups, while the project final evaluation will include a similar assessment as
well as the data of two DHS.
Preparation of the project includes a Social Assessment (SA). The specific objectives are to: (a)
assist in project formulation by considering potential impact of proposed activities, how to improve the
design of specific interventions and activities, and whether there are activities which should not be
included because they are unlikely to work or would have undesirable social impacts; (b) ensure there is
an appropriate system for monitoring the impact of the project and mechanisms for the collection of
baseline data if recommended; (c) advise on the consultation and participation process required as the
programme is developed and implemented, to ensure views of relevant stakeholders (including poor
groups) are taken into account and proposals are agreed; and (d) review relevant parts of project
documentation to ensure they are appropriate and reflect the findings from social development inputs and
stakeholder consultation.
SA activities involve six key stages: (a) initial assessment of gaps and planning; (b) study on
access to services for ethnic minorities and for other key disadvantaged groups to identify barriers to
improving their health and how to address these; (c) stakeholder analysis, to identify their interests,
concerns and how they could be affected by proposed programme activities; (d) analysis to assess how
well suited key institutions are to their expected roles, and how to strengthen their performance; (e)
review of proposed activities and interventions and of baseline data requirements and preparation of a
report providing a SA of the project proposals and recommendations for change in the project as a result;
and (f) review and strengthening of project documentation required. An initial SA was carried out in
November 2001, with a follow-up mission in May 2002. The appraisal mission will include a Social
Development Specialist to continue SA activities.
Involuntary Resettlement
The WB-HSSP includes the continued development of primary health care facilities and first
referral and provincial hospitals, by financing rehabilitation and new  construction.  A  health
infrastructure development plan will be developed with HSSP financial support, and Bank assistance will
focus on rural and remote provinces. This plan will ensure that the siting of health facilities to be
constructed or rehabilitated under WB-HSSP is decided on sound criteria (such as accessibility,
utilization rates, health needs, and proximity to private facilities). Supported infrastructure projects are
small in scale and are expected to cause little or no significant adverse impacts. Nonetheless, since all
sites have not been identified, experience shows that such activities sometimes do cause loss of land or
loss of access to other resources. Therefore, any land acquisition associated with civil works will be
undertaken in accordance with an agreed Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures. The
Framework defines terms and provides guidance for involuntary acquisition of land or other assets
(including restrictions on asset use), and establishes principles and procedures to be followed to ensure
equitable treatment for, and rehabilitation of, any persons adversely affected.
Il.D. l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A



10
ISDS
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment and Pest Management
Minor environmental concerns that were identified for the WB-HSSP will be fully mitigated in
project planning and implementation. The ER prepared for the project describes existing environmental
regulations and guidelines relevant to individual FISSP activities to be undertaken and details
corresponding environmental screening, appraisal and monitoring requirements. Each WB-HSSP activity
has been examined separately for any negative impacts and recommendations made to address all
potential human health and environmental concerns. The EMP and PMMP included in the ER detail
appropriate safeguards in accordance with the Bank environmental assessment guidelines. Additional
technical assistance and capacity building will be provided to the Borrower to complete additional
assessment tasks and to ensure proper evaluation and monitoring of WB-HSSP activities to agreed
environmental standards on an ongoing basis.
Indigenous Peoples -- Social Assessment
The Ministry of Health has developed a health development plan to safeguard the health rights of
ethnic minorities. The health development plan draws upon the findings of a participatory poverty
assessment of indigenous peoples (2001) and complementary project financed research to study the
health seeking behaviors and constraints to accessing health services of ethnic minorities. The plan aims
to increase the health status of vulnerable ethnic peoples by increasing access to appropriate, quality
health services, increasing health knowledge to promote health, and ensuring the participation of ethnic
groups in the planning and monitoring of service delivery. The plan rests on a two-pronged strategy.
(a)    Targeting health development activities at the four northeastern provinces that have large
concentrations of ethnic minority peoples, as recommended by the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Ethnic
Minority Development; and
(b)    Mainstreaming attention and responsiveness to the needs and constraints of ethnic minorities
through institutional development and capacity building across the public health service.
Project preparation also includes an examination of health needs, health seeking behaviors, and
constraints to health access faced by different ethnic minority groups in the WB-HSSP provinces of
Kracheh and Stueng Traeng. The study includes two stages. Stage 1, which has been conducted,
included the collation of existing background information on the main health problems experienced by
ethnic minority groups in Kracheh, and the availability of public health services. It also included the
collection of health seeking behavior information from a small number of communities specifically
looking at where people prefer to go for treatment, and why, and the perceptions people have of public
health services and barriers to access they confront. Stage 1 will also contribute to the design of
methodologies for the main part of the study to be implemented in Stage 2. Stage 2 will cover the further
design of methodologies, implementation, analysis, and initial dissemination of results. This stage of the
research project will be completed before project effectiveness. Overall, the study will provide critical
information on which to plan health services and demand side interventions to increase access to, and use
of health services by these vulnerable groups.
Involuntary Resettlement



11
ISDS
The WB-HSSP includes the continued development of primary health care facilities and first
referral and provincial hospitals, by financing rehabilitation and new construction.  A  health
infrastructure development plan will be developed with WB-HSSP financial support, and Bank assistance
will focus on rural and remote provinces. This plan will ensure that the siting of health facilities to be
constructed or rehabilitated under WB-HSSP is decided on sound criteria (such as accessibility,
utilization rates, health needs, and proximity to private facilities). Supported infrastructure projects are
small in scale and are expected to cause little or no significant adverse impacts. Nonetheless, since all
sites have not been identified, experience shows that such activities sometimes do cause loss of land or
loss of access to other resources. Therefore, any land acquisition associated with civil works will be
undertaken in accordance with an agreed Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures. The
Framework defines terms and provides guidance for involuntary acquisition of land or other assets
(including restrictions on asset use), and establishes principles and procedures to be followed to ensure
equitable treatment for, and rehabilitation of, any persons adversely affected.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental Assessment and Pest Management
Extensive consultation has been undertaken in identifying project-related environmental
concerns and in reaching consensus on appropriate mitigation and remediation measures to ensure that all
human health and environmental issues are fully addressed. Additional consultation is planned with key
stakeholders during project planning and implementation. Stakeholders include: local communities;
provincial and operational district government health officials; Ministry of Environment officials at the
national and provincial levels; and laboratory and HCF professional staff and administrators.
Stakeholder inputs gathered during follow up on-site visits will guide completion of any additional
assessment requirements, and refinement of recommended mitigation and remediation measures
contained in the EMP and PMMP. Particular emphasis will be given to ensuring that recommendations
are practical and sustainable.  The Environmental Review  Report, including the Environmental
Management Plan and Pesticide Management and Monitoring Plan, was publicly disclosed in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia on September 20, 2002.
Indigenous Peoples -- Social Assessment
Social assessment of the health needs, health seeking behavior, health beliefs, and constraints to
accessing health services of ethnic minorities was initiated during WB-HSSP preparation and will
continue into implementation. This includes participatory research to inform the development of local
health plans and community participation in the planning and monitoring process. Stakeholders include
the various vulnerable ethnic minorities targeted by the project, representatives of ethnic communities,
NGOs, civil society organizations advocating for ethnic peoples, health workers and local health
managers, Provincial Health Departments, MOH, and development partners. Stakeholders have and will
continue to be consulted and involved in ongoing design and implementation processes.
The project's support to the four northeastern provinces addresses the health problems identified
in the recent participatory poverty assessment and supports measures for improving health identified
through the consultation exercise:  key issues are physical access, costs, local ethnic minority
participation in health development, absence of health workers at facilities, and lack of health workers
from local ethnic communities. Targeted, participatory local health development planning will be
undertaken during implementation.
The mainstreaming of safeguardicross the sector is necessary to support the targeted



12
ISDS
interventions in the four northeastern provinces, but also to capture and respond to the interests of
vulnerable ethnic minorities living in other parts of the country. Pathways for mainstreaming are:
*      Strengthening the social assessment capacity of the MOH.
*      Improving delivery of appropriate targeted information and behavior change
communication.
*      Local ethnic minority participation in designing and monitoring health development
plans.
*      Monitoring, evaluation and the annual sector review process.
*      Human resource development.
Social assessment capacity This will include capacity building in social analytical skills at
various levels of the health system, and the introduction of safeguard checks in key sector management
processes such as planning, the allocation of resources, monitoring and evaluation, to direct attentioni to
the inclusion of ethnic minorities.
Access to appropriate health informationLanguage is a barrier that excludes ethnic
minorities from participating in development processes. Lack of information and educational materials
in the languages of ethnic minorities is a major constraint to health promotion. The WB-HSSP will,
through its support for key national programs, ensure that behavior change communication strategies and
materials take into account the specific needs of ethnic minorities and communication approaches and
materials are developed that are appropriate for the needs of target minority groups. This will require
increased understanding of the health beliefs that influence ethnic minorities in order to design
appropriate materials. Where appropriate consideration will need to be given by MOH and Provincial
Health Departments to sanctioning the use of local translators in health facilities and during outreach
activities.
Local participationof ethnic peoples will be encouraged through the development of more
participatory planning and monitoring processes at local, district, provincial and the national level. To
raise the profile of ethnic minorities in planning and monitoring processes throughout the country, the
planning and monitoring frameworks will include specific questions on ethnic minorities, training to
implement the revised methods will include attention to the health of ethnic groups and methods to
promote their inclusion, and guidelines for establishing consumer participation will include
representatives of ethnic minorities where they are present in the local population.
Sector monitoring and evaluation The project will assist the MOH reform of sector wide
monitoring and evaluation to include civil society participation in the process, and to introduce social
variables such as ethnicity. Annual reviews of sector performance will disaggregate achievements in
accessibility, public and client satisfaction, and health utilization by ethnicity: this will significantly
increase knowledge on the health and access to health care of ethnic minorities. The participation of
civil society in annual sector reviews will also allow ethnic minority interests to be heard at the national
level.
Human resource development Lack of trained health workers from the ethnic minority
population is a major constraint to offering responsive services to ethnic groups. The MOH with support
from the WB-HSSP has agreed to develop a primary nurse training course tailored to the needs of hill
tribes' peoples and targeting students from the four northeastem provinces. Entry requirements will be
reduced to increase access and students from the northeast offered stipends, women will be given
priority. In addition, the project will support a review of human resource policy and within this,



13
ISDS
consideration given to how human resource development needs to adapt to embrace the needs of ethnic
minorities.
The Social Assessment, including the Ethnic Minorities Development Strategy, was publicly
disclosed in Phnom Penh, Cambodia on September 20, 2002.
Involuntary Resettlement
Consultation has been undertaken in identifying project-related involuntary resettlement
concerns and in reaching consensus on appropriate mitigation and remediation measures to ensure that all
issues related toinvoluntary acquisition of land or other assets (including restrictions on asset use) are
fully addressed.  During implementation, potentially adversely affected persons will be provided
information relating to impacts and entitlements, will be consulted as to their preferences regarding
implementation arrangements, and will be informed regarding methods and procedures for pursuing
grievances. Stakeholders include: local communities, including Feedback Committees and Commune
Councils; provincial and operational district government health officials; and government officials at the
national and provincial levels for the Ministries of Economy and Finance, Health, Public Works, and
Environment. The government has prepared a Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures.
The Framework was publicly disclosed in Phnom Penh, Cambodia on September 30, 2002.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
1S. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



14
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actial
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 9/19/2002     9/19/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             9/20/2002     9/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/1/2002     10/1/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 9/26/2002     9/26/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             9/27/2002     10/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/1/2002     10/1/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 9/19/2002     9/19/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             9/20/2002     9/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/1/2002     10/1/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Vincent Turbat                              09/26/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Robert D. Crooks/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          10/02/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Emmanuel Y. Jimenez                         10/01/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDBACK      SrrE MAP       SHOWCASE



