ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                        AWorld Fre of Porty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/28/2002                            23857
Section I - Basic Information                                   May 28, 2002
A. Basic Pro ect Data
Country: CHAD                                 Project ID: P000527
Project: EDUCATION SECTOR REFORM PROJECT      Task Team Leader: Mourad Ezzine
Authorized to Appraise Date: Mlay 29, 2002   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 19, 2002             IDA Amount ($m): 31.00
Managing-Unit: AFTH2                          Sector: EE - Education Adjustment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: EDUCATION
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the project is to ensure that the framework for quality universal primary
education is in place and ready for implementation. The project places an emphasis on
developing an effective: partnership between the state and the communities, creating a
technical capacity for curricula and textbook development, and improving primary education
quality and efficiency The project will also develop and expand innovative approaches to
literacy training for out-of-school and unschooled youth and adults. At the end of the project
these objectives will translate into increased enrollment rates, more equitable access, better
education quality and efficiency, stronger managerial capacity and ability to expand the
reform process to post-primary education. In addition, new programs aimed at expanding
access and improving quality will be piloted and tested in literacy, Early Childhood
Development (ECD), School Health and Interactive Radio Instruction (IRI).  These
programs will be evaluated for large scale implementation at the end of the project.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The components of the project, funded by the government and donors, are described below.
1 - Access and equity
This component seeks to improve the national coverage of primary schooling through (i)
special targeting of disadvantaged  regions to ensure  better access to resources and
schooling services, (ii) efforts to stimulate demand where there is resistance to schooling,



2
ISDS
especially for girls ; (iii) increased survival rates for children in the school system; and (iv)
support to community schools and delegation of school management to communities;
Insofar as school infrastructure is concerned the component will (i) replace temporary,
precarious classroom structures with permanent classrooms; (ii) rehabilitate and retrofit
older schools with latrines; and (iii) furnish a greater number of classrooms to ensure
equitable access for all C'hadian children to a quality learning environment.
2 - Quality improvement
The quality component will provide better quality education to Chadian children by: (i)
creating technical capacity for curricula development and assessment and launching a
comprehensive renovation of the primary curriculum (ii) improving stucdent learning by
developing and implementing a context-relevant, integrated, bilingual curricula for grades I
to 2; (iii) improving the quality of teacher training and supervision with a special emphasis
on the training and certilication of 4,000 community teachers; and (iv) developing a national
capacity to ensure sustainable availability of quality teaching materials in Chadian schools.
Four quality-enhancing initiatives will be included as pilots the project: (i) Functional
literacy and non-formal education programs for adults, unschooled and out-of-school youth,
implemented by outsourcing of program development and delivery to community-based
private organizations ar,d NGOs; (ii) School health initiatives focusing on school health
policies, water and sanitation in school, health education focusing on HIV/AIDS prevention
through life-skills, and health services delivered in schools (micro-nutrients supplements and
de-worming) to ensure better health for more effective learning; (iii) Early Child
Development programs to help families better prepare their children for formal schooling
with a focus on teaching parents at the community level ways of developing their children's
skills in the early preschool years; and (iv) an Interactive Radio Instruction initiative which
will further enhance efforts to achieve a larger access to quality primary education by
improving teaching practices and stimulate enthusiasm for learning, especially in remote
areas.
3 - Literacy
This component includes implementation of literacy and practical skills training to out of
school youth and adults in a broad sampling of rural communities, using a cost-effective,
equity-enhancing model for delivering such training through private literacy providers.
These activities, which will reduce gender and geographic inequities in access to basic
education will be developed in response to local demand. By the end of the project, the new
approaches  will be recognized by decision-makers as appropriate for nationwide
application.
4 - Management and policy analysis
Technical assistance, infrastructure and logistical support, and consensus-building activities
will be aimed at: (i) providing Chad with an institutional framework capable of supporting a



3
ISDS
wide array of pedagogical improvements including curriculum renovation; (ii)improving the
managerial capacity of the MEN for program implementation by financing an in-depth
assessment of the responsibilities and the capacities of both the central and provincial
administrations as well as the linkages between them, development of a new organizational
chart of the MEN reflecting proposed reforms and partnership agreements with the
communities, and preparation of an action plan aimed at reinforcing the MEN capacity to
manage the reformed educational system; (iii) supporting consultation activities with
stakeholders and providing TA to develop consensus around access and financing issues in
secondary and higher education, and improving their quality and relevance; and (iv) assisting
the MEN improve its planning and monitoring capacity by focusing on information system
improvement and management, cost-effectiveness analysis and prioritizing of strategies for
meeting needs of disadv,mtaged communities.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or aiiy other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover the entire country.
B. Chleck Environmental Class ification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The project has a B classification due to the potential environmental and social impacts
of classroom rehabilitation, the provision of water supply and sanitation facilities in schools, and
construction of the new National Curriculum Center in N'Djamena.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
F'olicy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   0 Yes    No   _ TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        Yes *No     .TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                Yes * No      TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes * No     TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes *No       TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/eP 4.12)                        Yes *No     .TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 Yes *No       TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 Yes *No     . TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          C Yes 0 No    P'TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        C Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' clains
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to ob tain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Rehabilitation of classrooms as well as the provision of water supplies and sanitation



4
ISDS
facilities at schools can have negative environmental and health impacts if these activities
are not handled properly. Rehabilitation of classrooms will take place on existing sites,
replacing temporary classrooms with permanent structures. Hence, there will be no land
acquisition, loss of agricultural land, other assets and/or incomes.
Potential environmental impacts due to the construction of the NCC will relate to the
management of borrow pits and the provision of construction materials. The future site of
the NCC is presently covered with plastic bags and lacks a drainage system, flora, fauna, and
forest cover; hence, there will be no negative environmental impacts in this regard. There
will also be no negative social impacts as the site is flooded for two months of the year, and
thus not suitable for settlement. Positive social impacts will relate to the provision of a
drainage system and employment opportunities.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Groundwater and soil pollution as well as soil erosion and loss of fauna and flora have been
identified as potential environmental impacts. For example, water pollution could result
from the washing of extracted construction materials, improper waste disposal at school
rehabilitation sites, and lack of school sanitation facilities. Soil erosion and loss of flora and
fauna could result from i.he extraction of construction materials at the borrow pits as well as
school rehabilitation.
II.D.lc Describe any potential lDng term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Borrower has:   (i) conducted an Environmental Analysis (EA) of the potential
environmental and social impacts due to the construction of the NCC in D'Njemena; (ii)
prepared Environmental Guidelines to guide the parents associations who will be responsible
for the rehabilitation of existing class rooms and the construction of latrines; and (iii)
prepared an Environmental Mitigation Plan (EMP) as well as an Environmental Monitoring
Plan to ensure effective environmental management during project implementation. The
EMP focuses on the implementation and monitoring of appropriate environmental mitigation
measures for classroom rehabilitation, construction of the NCC, the use of construction
materials, the provision of water points and latrines, water quality testing, and training.
The EA and the EMP have been cleared by ASPEN and will be disclosed on May 28, 2002,
in the Bank's Infoshop and in-country at the Direction des Projects Education (Salle de
reunion), Institut Superieur des Sciences de l'Education (Bibliotheque), Direction
Departementale de l'Education, and the World Bank's Country Office.



5
ISDS
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include parents associations; schools, and relevant ministries. Members of
the national federation of parents associations participated in the preparation of the project,
thereby representing the interests of the local parents associations. Consultations also took
place with representatives of the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Environment and Water,
Ministry of Public Works and Transport, and schools in Bongor and N'Djamena.
As the project will not support the rehabilitation of classrooms if land acquisition or loss of
income were to occur, there will not emerge social safeguard issues. Should new school
construction become necessary during project implementation, a separate environmental
analysis will be prepared for such activities. In light of the current status of the future site of
the NCC, social safeguard issues will not emerge.
E. Safeguards Classification. (Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Ancalysis/Management Plan.         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 3/20/2002     4/29/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/22/2002     5/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/22/2002     5/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShopF
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Mourad Ezzine                               05/24/02
Project Safeguards Specialists il:  Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt/Person/World Bank  05/24/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                         05/24/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Arvil Van Adams                             05/24/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH  _     j FEE--EiBA-CK  5E MAP       'SHOWCASE



