1                           25000
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
_____ -= ZIIIZr.T?2.
-InfoShop
'f1%. Wfr,J 1WA,
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/15/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA                                   Project ID: P040599
Project: Second Tianjin Urban Development and     Task Team Leader: Songsu Choi
Environment Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 29, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 150.00
Bank Approval: February 25, 2003                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR                              Sector: District heating and energy efficiency
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  services (25%); Roads & highways (25%); Sanitation
Status: Lending                                  (25%); Sewerage (25%)
Theme: Legal services (S); Other human
development (S); Access to urban services for the
poor (P); Municipal finance (S); Pollution
management and environmental health (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's objective is to enhance the efficiency and equity of wastewater management and
transportation systems in Tianjin, and thereby facilitate the sustainable development of Tianjin
Municipality, and establish a model for other Chinese cities.
For wastewater management, the project will support measures to increase the utilization of
wastewater treatment facilities; reuse of wastewater; increase sewerage services in underserved areas
including the fast-growing suburban areas; and to improve wastewater management institutions and
finances. For improved transportation, the project will support modifications and better management of
selected sections of existing roads, focusing on facilitating public transportation. These programs
include significant innovations -- the suburban wastewater management, water reuse, and bus priority
measures -- that will serve as important experiments and demonstration for advances in urban
management in China.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project consists of the following of wastewater, transportation, and institutional development
components:
Wastewater Components:
(a) City Drainage and Sewerage: Construction of storm water drains and sanitary sewers in Nanbeicang



2
ISDS
and Fukangnanlu areas, complementing the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) being financed by JBIC
and ADB; drains and sewers, and the Shuanglin WWTP (200,000 m3/day), in the south suburb district of
Tianjin. These facilities will complete the drainage system envisioned by Tianjin drainage master plan.
The Nanbeicang and south suburb district are recently annexed areas with many small industries and
lower-income residents.
(b) Urban Wastewater Reuse: Construction of water reclamation (tertiary treatment) plants for
approximately 20% of the treated effluent from the Dongjiao, Nanbeicang, and Shuanglin WWTPs; and
reclaimed water distribution systems mainly for industrial cooling and landscape irrigation.
(c) Rehabilitation of Dagu Canal: Dredging of sediments and rehabilitation of cross-sections, bridges
and culverts, and three pump stations of Dagu Canal (70 km) and its associated tributary canal Xinfeng
(20 km). These are main wastewater canals for the southern part of Tianjin City draining directly into
the Bohai Sea since 1960. The project will remove, treat, and dispose of about 2 million cubic meters of
sediment, about half of which is estimated to be contaminated with heavy metals, in an environmentally
sound manner. This will prevent recontamination of treated wastewater (three of the new Tianjin
wastewater treatment plants will discharge into Dagu canal), and also restore its flood water conveyance
capacity.
(d) Suburban Sewerage: Creation of municipal wastewater collection and treatment systems in two or
three small towns of Tianjin municipality on a programmatic basis. Water pollution from the Tianjin
suburbs as a whole is already greater than from the city itself, yet there are no wastewater treatment
systems serving these small cities. The project will initiate and set models for the wastewater
management in these areas. A proposed GEF-financed project for an improvement of Bohai water
quality will include a direct support for this and the Dagu rehabilitation as well as complementary
measures of groundwater management and water conservation.
Transportation Components:
(e) Urban Roads. Construction of interchanges at two major intersections of the Middle Ring Road
(MRR), and low cost traffic engineering improvements on selected locations along the Inner Ring Road
(IRR) and the Eastern and Southwestern parts of the MRR.
(f) Traffic Management: Extension of the existing Area Traffic Control System to 300 new intersections
-- 89 on or within IRR and the rest within the MRR, with channelization and often in connection with bus
priority measures.
(g) Public Transportation: Preparation and implementation of bus priority measures on selected
corridors, including bus ways and traffic engineering measures, to increase the efficiency of bus
operations and to contribute to increasing the modal share of the bus system.
Technical Assistance:
(h) Technical Assistance and Training for:
(1) Development of infrastructure information systems;
(2) Reform of sewerage institutions and finance;
(3) Establishment of comprehensive urban transport planning and management institution;
(4) Improvement in the traffic forecast model;
(5) Bus routes restructuring.



3
ISDS
Components:
(a) City Drainage and Sewerage
(b) Urban Wastewater Reuse
(c) Dagu Canal Rehabilitation
(d) Suburban Sewerage
(e) Urban Roads
(f) Traffic Management
(g) Public Transportation
(h) Technical Assistance
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Tianjin Municipality, located between Beijing to the west and the Bohai Bay to the east. Most of the project
is in the central city of Tianjin, on the banks of the Hai River. Sewerage facilities will be located in a few
selected towns in the suburbs. There are no known protected sites or natural habitats in the project area.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes ID No   C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes 0 No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               C Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    G TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes CO No   QTBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 0 Yes C No    C0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           C Yes C} No   0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes C No    C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
About 80% of the project investment is directed to improving and protecting water quality in Tianjin
municipality and the Bohai Bay. The intended benefits, beneficiaries and responsible institutions are
identified and discussed in Chapter C of PCD. The transportation components are also likely to have positive
environmental impacts as they are designed to reduce idling times and overall traffic demand. However, they
may also increase air pollution in some localized areas. These effects are being analyzed with the use of an



4
ISDS
airshed model. Construction noise and dust would be another, temporary environmental impacts that would
be studied similarly and mitigation designed.
Rehabilitation of Dagu Canal would present a unique opportunity to pilot proper mitigation of
accumulated polluted sediment, a serious problem that need to be addressed as the next generation
environmental action in most industrial areas of China. It poses significant environmental challenges in
the characterization, removal, treatment, and disposal of the contaminated sediment. Substantial physical,
chemical, and toxicological sampling and analysis of the sediment have been completed with the help of
a top intemational limnologist. The analysis shows that about half of the sediment contains need to be
treated and disposed of in a secure landfill. Sites for the landfills have been identified, and they have
sufficient space to dispose of the sediments in the event other disposal options are not appropriate or
feasible. But the analysis done so far remains at a feasibility level, but the heterogeneous nature of the
sediment leaves considerable uncertainty which needs to be resolved by further characterization and
analysis.
By appraisal, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be established and agreed upon
that specifies actions to be followed before dredging starts (expected in about two years after the project
start). One part of the EMP will specify actions to prevent inflow of further contaminants after the Canal
Rehabilitation. This will involve actions to control discharges from industries and to collect and treat the
wastewater from the catchment areas. The other part of the EMP will consist of protocols for sequencing
the dredging by section, more detailed analysis of sediment by section, and choice and design of
dredging, treatment, and disposal methods. The preliminary protocol includes closing off canal sections
during dredging, rerouting the flow around the section. This will ensure that toxic compounds released
from the sediment during dredging will not escape into the downstream environment. Water caps will
also be used during dredging, as required, to reduce odor. The sediment will be dewatered, and the
effluent will be treated to remove hazardous compounds with special treatment units. Various methods
will be adopted for final sediment disposal depending on the degree of contamination including: disposal
in two hazardous waste landfills, use as earth construction material, and disposal on agricultural land. As
mentioned earlier, currently identified landfills have enough space to dispose of all the sediment if
necessary. Final design and contracts for all Canal Rehabilitation works would be subject to prior review
by the Environmental Protection Bureau and the Bank.
The second most important safeguard issue is resettlement. The project design has been adjusted
to minimize resettlement, and the components in the city is currently estimated to require resettlement of
35 households, 107 shops and 20 offices, and temporary use of about 30 ha of land. A survey was
conducted covering these as well as others that would have been resettled under earlier design. A
resettlement action plan is being drafted. Land and resettlement requirements for components outside the
city -- suburban sewerage, Dagu canal rehabilitation, and landfills for the Dagu sediment -- are not yet
identified, but there is expected to be no resettlement but approximately 40 ha of permanent land
acquisition and some temporary use of land. The landfill sites will be firmly chosen before appraisal,
and will be included in the final RAP. Others that will be identified and prepared during the project
implementation will require individual RAP at the time of component preparation, under the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) agreed upon by the time of appraisal.
Key stakeholders for Dagu rehabilitation are people living along the canal, whose number is
small because it runs through mainly rural areas; people living near the proposed landfill sites; and
farmers who may choose to apply the non-contaminated, nutrient rich, sediment on their fields. The
public consultation on EA will involve these people. Coordination of Dagu Canal work is being done by
a Steering Committee consisting of representatives from TMG, MEB, EPB, WRB, and the three districts
crossed by the Canal.



5
ISDS
Another environmental issue concerns the use of reclaimed wastewater for municipal, industrial,
and irrigation purposes. Most of the untreated effluent is now used for irrigation during certain seasons
and thus treatment of the wastewater will have an obvious beneficial use, especially as it is conveyed
through the rehabilitated Dagu canal. This put into question the high levels of nitlogen and phosphorus
removal by WWTP, designed to conform national mandates intended to protect the Bohai sea water
quality. But the ecology of red tides are complex and not fully understood, although excessive nutrient
loadings, especially nitrogen, are considered the primary culprit. Since Tianjin sewage constitutes only a
small percentage of the total pollutant and nutrient flows into the Bohai Sea, and most of the treated
wastewater will go towards irrigation during certain periods, the decision to invest in nutrient removal
facilities at the WWTP has not yet been finalized.
Use of reclaimed water for municipal and industrial use is a new activity and precautions will
need to be observed to ensure that there are minimal public health risks. Tertiary treatment of the
effluent, filtration perhaps with a multi-media carbon substance, and disinfection, will used at all the
water reclamation plants. Reclaimed water distribution systems will also be marked different colors to
avoid accidental cross-contamination, and water quality monitoring will be more intensive for reclaimed
water than for the normal water supply system.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Compliance with Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Programs, Resettlement
Action Plan, and Resettlement Policy Framework will be required.
Some of the subcomponents for suburban wastewater management and for road modifications and bus
ways are to be identified and prepared during the project under a programmatic approach. EA and RAP
for them would be required as part of their preparation.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
See II.D. I
E. Safeguards Classiftcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues



6
ISDS
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               5/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         3/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            8/20/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  8/20/2002
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               5/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          3/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            8/20/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Songsu Choi                                October 10, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Bekir A. Onursal/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Youlan Zou/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                        October 15, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:     Keshav Varma                               October 15, 2002



-_3SV-3VOHS'; Q.-          dVL3 LIS-  V .                      au HSA
aja4 'P!p s'podaj pue soafroid uo seseelai sMau Nueg PloM Ao is!l e joj
L



