Report No. 23174
Report No: I071094 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/19/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA Project ID: P071094
Project: POOR RURAL COMMUNITIES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT       Task Team Leader: Alan
L. Piazza
Appraisal Date: December 20, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m): 150.00
Board Date: July 8, 2003         IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASRD     Sector: AY - Other Agriculture
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the project is to improve livelihoods
security and achieve sustained participation of the poorest rural people
in selected counties of the four target provinces.
I.A.3. Project Description:
A. Participatory Approach
It has been agreed that participation will be a key feature of project
design, implementation, monitoring and impact assessment. It is noted
that, in current poor rural China, a top-down poverty alleviation strategy
is widely adopted, and neither government officials nor poor people
themselves have much experience of participatory approaches. This is most
clearly seen in the current practice of producing Village Development
Plans (VDP) which reflect decisions made in higher levels of a
hierarchical government structure. At present, VDPs are not adequately
flexible, do not necessarily reflect the needs of primary stakeholders,
and lack local ownership. To ensure that the proposed project will
fulfill the principles of being flexible, responsive and innovative, it is
imperative to introduce participatory approaches to local authorities.
The objectives of introducing the participatory approach are that the poor
should not only be able to influence the design and implementation of the
project but, by the end of the project, should also be able to exert
influence over local decision-making.
Introducing a participatory approach would include the following
activities:
providing training to project staff and local officials, including village
leaders, about participatory approaches;
identifying the participatory techniques most appropriate for the various
stages of the project cycle and for different stakeholders; and to develop
and test a training system in participatory techniques that could be
adopted by the project;
implementing various participatory monitoring and evaluation tools,
assessing their effectiveness in ensuring the participation of the most
disadvantaged population within the communities and developing guidelines
in the application of such tools; and
assisting the poor communities in completing village development plans and



in reviewing and adjusting such plans through a participatory approach.
B. Project Components:
Component I: Sustainable Mountain Agriculture Development. The component
will support agricultural development for communities living in remote
mountainous environments. The implementation of the component will stick
to two principles: targeting and reaching all households and environmental
protection.
Sustainable mountain agriculture will include the following activities:
improving village land use through (i) intensification of use on
households' more fertile plots while protecting or rehabilitating tree and
grass cover, and (ii) ensuring full participation of village communities
in decision-making and identifying appropriate technology;
providing assistance and training to households to develop
farmer-to-farmer services. Opportunities identified in ethnic minority
areas relate to the activities such as tree nursery growers, pig breeders,
village blacksmiths, grain millers, tea drying facilities, and masonry;
extension of applied research and technical assistance; and
improving food security for the poorest villages and households. This
activity will require more than basic farmland construction.
Component II: Basic Rural Infrastructure Construction. The continuing
lack of basic rural infrastructure and environmental degradation in the
proposed project area make living conditions harsh and arduous.
Sub-projects of this component include roads, paths, electrification, soil
conservation, small-scale water resource system (for both drinking and
irrigation purposes) and other infrastructure. Adequate community
participation is imperative in the process of sub-project selection,
construction, and maintenance to ensure the sub-projects reflect the need
and priority of local residents. For example, given that a substantial
proportion of project villages would be located in karst environments and
other areas vulnerable to water shortages, small-scale water resource
system would be a key element of village infrastructure construction,
which would include activities such as clearly identifying community
needs, customs and habits, particularly those of ethnic minorities;
reviewing and refining proposed designs to ensure technical quality and
responsiveness to conditions in the villages; constructing the system; and
providing training in the management and maintenance.
Component III: Basic Education. Despite notable achievements at the
national level, primary schooling and vocational education in the proposed
project areas are still marked by poor attendance and very low on-time
graduation rate. There is a clear strong demand for basic education
services. The component would address the challenges of: a) high levels
of adult illiteracy; b) low access to primary education by poorer and more
vulnerable children, particularly girls and disabled children; c)
inadequate skills and capabilities of many teachers; d) the low
educational attainment of many children of minority groups due to their
inability to understand the language of instruction; and e) poor
infrastructure, much of which is in need of repair.
The basic education component will include the following activities:
providing training for primary school teacher;
focusing on vocational education for both school pupils and adults;
innovative methods to reduce the costs of education for poor and
vulnerable children should be developed, such as the use of revolving book
funds;
developing bilingual education system in both major minority languages and
Chinese; and
-2-



promoting the integration of disabled children into the education system.
Component IV: Basic Health. One of the greatest challenges to be faced
by the proposed project will be to improve the health status of the target
population. In proposed project area, there is excessive morbidity and
mortality in many communities. For instance, in some communities infant
mortality is particularly high while, in others, malaria is a significant
problem. Health services in the administrative villages are of low
standard (and nonexistent in most natural villages). Although there is
usually a health post in the administrative villages, most have virtually
no equipment or medicines, and the wages of village medical workers are
very low. The cost of health care and transport difficulties also mean
that poor ill people are often unable to access the higher levels of the
health service (e.g., township and above).
The basic health component will develop a strategy focusing on impacting
on health outcomes. This would mean that health work would not just be
concerned with the provision of health services but would take a more
integrated approach to health improvement. As priorities, the component
will consider focusing on impacting on infant mortality, maternal
mortality and prominent diseases - such as malaria - in specific counties
and regions.
Component V: Local Capacity Building Program with A Focus on Village
Leader Training. Village leaders are one part of the group of key figures
in the China's current rural governance system. They are responsible for
many policies and activities including running the local tax system,
resolving disputes, launching entrepreneurial duties, ensuring fulfillment
of the state grain procurement quota, determining land reallocation,
allocating and monitoring poverty reduction funds, and designing village
development plans. The proposed project, as a grass roots and
multisectoral poverty reduction project, will certainly interface with
village leaders, and there is no doubt that village leaders can play a key
role in changing the way polices and project activities are implemented.
However, it is widely observed that village leaders lack the skills
necessary for them to play a more effective role in village development.
A preliminary plan of the local capacity building component is to train
village leaders in the skills that they need for their everyday duties and
to teach them the skills that will become more useful in the governance
system that can be expected to develop as China modernizes. Some of the
possible areas of training include public management, participatory
methods, accounting, project management, dispute resolution,
infrastructure construction skills (such as basic knowledge of road
construction and terracing), and courses teaching the content and nature
of China's rural policies.
Component VI: Rural Enterprise Development Initiative. The experience of
other World Bank supported poverty reduction projects show that there are
two major factors which resulted in an unsatisfactory performance of the
rural enterprise development component, these are (a) a serious lack of
marketing information, human capital and management skills, and a weak
transportation condition in most poor areas, and (b) flaws in the
procedure of enterprise selection (that is, the county level project
management office played the key role in selecting enterprises, and this
often resulted in the selection of nonviable enterprises). Therefore, the
proposed rural enterprise development component would explore a new
strategy that shifts the focus from selecting and setting up new
enterprises through direct project investments to providing more services
and other assistance in order to foster a better development environment
- 3 -



for enterprises.
If agreement can be achieved, the rural enterprise development component
would include the following three activities:
establishing an intermediary organization (such as an NGOs or some type of
company) which supplies basic services to both collective and private
enterprises in the project area. The services supplied by the
intermediary organization could include, but not be limited to, credit
guarantees, consulting services for technical upgrading, management
improvement, marketing, ownership transformation, and other capacity
building activities. The list of the possible services could be developed
on the basis of an assessment of enterprises' needs.
avoiding direct support for enterprises through project investments. In
the case that directly supporting enterprises development is required, the
number of enterprises must be strictly limited and the central PMO and
provincial PMOs must have the power to select enterprises. The component
will identify and establish an appropriate procedure for the central and
provincial PMOs to select enterprise; finally,
supporting private microenterprise development and experiment with
microleasing, particularly in remote ethnic minority areas where rural
industry is currently very limited or does not exist.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
About 28 counties and 2.5 million poor people in Yunnan, Sichuan, Guizhou,
and Guangxi provinces.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The safeguards team endorsed the proposed "B" environmental
category. During discussion with the TTL, it was determined that the
scale of local investments would be small, environmental impacts of these
activities are well understood, there are well-developed mitigation
measures, and China has a good track record in previous projects of this
type. Thus the "B" categorization is justified. The project will include
a substantial amount of civil works and construction under Components 2
and 4, however, there will be no new roads built in the area, only repair
and upgrading of existing roads and paths.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
- 4 -



D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
OP 4.01 -- Environmental Assessment
The overall objective and tentative design of the proposed project suggest
that the net environmental impact of the project will be positive and that
negative environmental effects will not be irreversible or long-term. The
proposed project would bring environmental benefits, through a more
efficient use of natural resources, such as land, water, and forest.
Other positive impacts are expected through the farm production
improvement and marketing component, which would address issues like soil
erosion, soil mining, nutrient leaching, and promote environmentally
sustainable agricultural production and marketing practices.
The most substantial negative environmental effects of the proposed
project can be expected from a more intensive agriculture production which
might involve higher use of inputs like fertilizer etc.. The proposed
project will put strong emphasis on mitigating these effects by
introducing more efficient application techniques to farmers. There is
some risk that road upgarding or repair in remote areas could improve
access to forest resources and increase deforestation. However, this
possible impact should be largely offset by other infrastructure
improvements which should make rural settlements more attractive,
contribute to improved livelihoods, and reduce overall pressure on forests
by shifting cultivators.
Activity under project preparation will include a detailed environmental
annex to the PAD and the formulation of a comprehensive screening
mechanism. EASES has examples of environmental screening guidelines and
will provide them to the project team to use as models. It was noted that
local capacity in the project affected areas would have to be increased
before the screening mechanism could be properly implemented, and the TTL
stated that one of the other donors in the project, the UK's Department
for International Development (DFID), was concentrating on that process
already.
OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10) -- Indigenous Peoples
It is expected more than half of the project beneficiaries will be
extremely disadvantaged ethnic minority people, so an Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan is not required. However a social assessment will be
conducted to confirm that the majority of beneficiaries will indeed be
ethnic minorities. Even if the majority of beneficiaries will not be
ethnic minorities, the meeting agreed that they would be assisted by the
project, and a framework would be developed to guide the project.
OD 4.30 (being converted to OP 4.12) -- Involuntary Resettlement
There will be no construction or land acquisition is planned in this
project; however, a resettlement framework adapted from the one used in
the Vietnam Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction project will be developed
for this project. The meeting agreed that no Resettlement Action Plan is
needed.
OP 4.04 -- Natural Habitats
-5-



The project team was prevented from visiting an area of Ximeng County that
was inhabited by wild elephants. The TTL had determined that the project
will probably avoid the area if the government of China's proposal to
remove the elephants is enacted, rather than the project's plan to work
with the communities with the elephants in situ. The need for activity
under this policy is still To Be Determined.
OPN 11.03 (being converted to OP 4.11) -- Cultural Property
The project could impact cultural sites of significance such as spirit
forests or sacred landscapes. The community-driven development agenda of
the project, the screening mechanism described above, and Chinese national
law, will include provisions to address Cultural Property. The need for
activity under this policy is still To Be Determined.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
TBD.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
TBD.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not required.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
TBD
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The participatory approach is discussed in Section I A.3 ("Participatory
Approach") above. The Chinese Government has stressed the need for making
its poverty reduction program more community-driven and participatory, and
considers PRCDP to be a key first step and mechanism in achieving this
important goal. Initial project preparation work has given an unusually
heavy emphasis on participatory design and analysis. As part of this
process, the DFID China Desk has already funded a participatory poverty
assessment (PPA) in the proposed project area, and the PPA team's report
"Listening to the Voices of the Poor: Lessons and Recommendations from the
PPA Study in Nanhua County, Yunnan" is available upon request.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
- 6 -



community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      8/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 8/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   8/1/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      8/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 8/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   8/1/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Alan L. Piazza  10/16/01
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Chaohua Zhang
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Glenn Morgan
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Mary P. Judd
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn Morgan     10/18/01
Sector Manager/Director:         Mark D. Wilson   10/16/01
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



