Report No. 23497
Report No: I070191 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA Project ID: P070191
Project: Shanghai Urban Environment Project      Task Team Leader: Geoffrey Read
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 11, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 150.00
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR     Sector: US - Urban Environment
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)          Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance the
economic, financial, trade and manufacturing stature of Shanghai,
assisting it in becoming a sustainable global competitive city-region and
an international economic, trade and shipping center at the heart of the
important Yangtze Delta Economic Region. In this context, the Shanghai
Municipal Government (SMG) would expect to redefine its role from that of
a direct service provider towards that of a regulator and facilitator.
The objectives would be pursued through improving Shanghai's environmental
conditions to enhance the quality of life of its citizens by (a) providing
facilities for the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater; (b)
providing environmentally secure solid and hazardous waste disposal
facilities; (c) supporting urban redevelopment and rehabilitation of
infrastructure in Shanghai City; (d) improving municipality-wide water
resources management; (e) strengthening of institutions with
responsibility for environmental management; and (f) implementing
sustainable financing of environmental infrastructure.
The Shanghai Municipal Government, with the support of the central
government, has proposed that the above objective be achieved through an
Adaptable Program Loan (APL) facility in at least three phases commencing
about July 2002 and ending about December 2007. The aggregate amount of
loans under the APL is expected to be about $700 million, with tranches of
$250 million, $250 million and $200 million. The first phase would
concentrate on urban and rural environment, including wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal, improvements to solid and hazardous
waste management, and information technology. The second phase would
focus on peri-urban environment improvements, especially in solid waste
management. This phase would also introduce innovative approaches to the
financing of environmental infrastructure. The third phase would address
urban redevelopment, supporting the rehabilitation of antiquated
wastewater infrastructure and redevelopment of large industrial
communities, including housing. SMG expects to formalize its Letter of
Development Program by December 2001.
Shanghai has already received support from the World Bank for (a) urban
wastewater investments (First and Second Shanghai Sewerage Projects); (b)
urban water supply and solid waste management (Shanghai Environment
Project). The success of these projects in terms of institutional,



financial and physical performance improvements forms a solid base for
Shanghai to proceed now in pursuing more innovative ways of providing
services to its citizens, and to extending such services to its less
affluent citizens living outside the city core.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The overall APL is conceived as three phases. The first Phase of the APL
would comprise three components. The first component would address the
key wastewater-related issues facing Shanghai through targeted wastewater
collection investments for three low income areas of the city together
with wastewater treatment facilities for part of the urban area wastewater
flow. In addition there would be investments in water resource protection
in the Upper Huangpu River Catchment Area to ensure sustainability of the
river as the key water supply source for Shanghai.     The second component
would address solid waste management, in particular the expansion and
upgrading of a strategic landfill, and the hygenic collection and disposal
of municipal wastes. The third component would support the expansion of
Shanghai's urban management information system, the strengthening of the
industrial pollution control system managed by the by Shangahi
Environmental Protection Bureau (SEPB) through on-the- job and management
training, and the design and implementation of an urban growth monitoring
system for suburban districts. The specific wastewater and solid waste
management sector investments and policy interventions would be supported
by technical assistance and training and by broader studies on
infrastructure financing including public-private partnership in the
provision of urban infrastructure facilities and pollution permit trading.
The second Phase of the APL would also comprise three components. The
first component would further address solid waste management issues
including separation, recycling, containerization, transport, composting
and incineration. The second component would involve the establishment of
non-state and/or public/private participation in the financing and
operation of urban services and pollution control. This could include
service contracts, the commercialization of services, e.g., water,
wastewater and solid waste management, the establishment of revolving
funds for pollution control, and pooled financing for sub-municipal
intestments in enviornmental infrastructure. The third component would
involve the possible issue of long term bonds on the domestic market for
the financing of environmental infrastructure investments. All three
components would be supported by the provision of technical assistance and
training.
The third Phase of the APL is expected to comprise three principal
components. The first component would involve the rehabilitation of
obsolete existing wastewater and related infrastructure and the possible
relocation, consolidation or closure of old wastewater treatment
facilities in the city with a view to maximizing the value of the land.
The second component would consist of sub-projects to redevelop a large
industrial community in the city, large tracts of land of
municipally-owned enterprises, and sub-standard residential areas
throughout the city. The third component would address the financing
needs of large and medium sized state-owned-enterprises for remediation of
industrial land assets. The financing needs would be met from an
industrial site redevelopment revolving fund. The phase would be
supported by technical assistance and training as needed.
- 2 -



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located within the boundaries of Shanghai Municipality.
The first phase will be focused on improvements in the main urban area of
Shanghai, where there are no relevant protected habitats or other natural
areas that would be affected. Works in urban and agricultural areas of
the Municipality will affect inhabitants temporarily or permanently and
these potential impacts will be addressed in project preparation. To
date, no culturally or socially sensitive issues have been identified in
the proposed area of the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: A full EA will be prepared, providing both a general overview of
the 3 phases of the APL, and a specific evaluation of Phase 1, in
accordance with Chinese regulations and to meet the Category A
requirements of the Bank. Extensive background information is available
from previous environmental activities in Shanghai.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The type and scale of investments that will be supported under this
project are similar to previous projects supported by the Bank. There
will be site specific impacts, which will be addressed by the EA and the
associated EMP but no major irreversible impacts are foreseen. The
principal ongoing environmental impact of the project will be the
generation of very substantial quantities of sludge at the various
wastewater treatment plants. It is unlikely that significant quantities
of sludge can be economically beneficially used in agriculture and
therefore the principal disposal route for sludge will probably be by
landfill. This would impact upon the landfill resources of Shanghai, both
-3 -



in terms of capacity and of secondary impact (landfill gas and leachate).
The implementation of an effective Catchment Management Plan for the Upper
Huangpu would reduce pollution of the Huangpu from the Shanghai
Muncipality area and contribute very substantially to safeguarding water
quality in the Huangpu and the sustainability of the Da Qiao intake as the
water supply for Shanghai.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None anticipated
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
This project is in a very dynamic urban area and would not significantly
affect the development patterns. Failure to implement an effective
Catchment Management Plan for the Upper Huangpu would result in increasing
levels of pollution which would seriously threaten the sustainability of
the Da Qiao intake from the Huangpu as the key strategic water supply
source for Shanghai. Ultimately, without the necessary controls, supply
from the Huangpu would either need to be abandoned in favor of other
costly new resources, principally the Yangtze, or would need to be
associated with more extensive, sophisticated and costly methods of water
treatment.   Failure to adopt water conservation measures would result in
progressively increasing water demands in Shanghai. The present
abstraction of water from the Upper Huangpu at Da Qiao represents the
maximum realistic level, and further demands would need to be met from the
Yangtze; investments in water conservation would enable the postponement
of the costly new investment necessary to exploit the Yangtze as a water
resource.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The works are being carried out within a strategic planning framework
prepared by Shanghai which has addressed broad alternatives.
Alternatives for individual components will be discussed in the EAs. In
particular opportunities to minimize sludge generation will be evaluated.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Full EA and RAP (where applicable) will undergo statutory review and
clearance in China and will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Consultation will continue, particularly with comunities in the areas most
directly affected by the works.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
-4-



I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   2/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        2/15/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   2/28/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. Dam safety, Pest Management, and Indigenous Peoples
Development Plans are not relevant in this instance.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Geoffrey Read   October 19, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Zhang Chaohua    October 19, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        David Hanrahan   October 19, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Sun Chongwu      January 18, 2002
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn Morgan     October 29, 2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Keshav Varma    October 19, 2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



