Report No. 23500
Report No: I074409 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA Project ID: P074409
Project: SECOND LIAO RIVER BASIN PROJECT         Task Team Leader: Geoffrey Read
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 8, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m): 145.00
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR     Sector: US - Urban Environment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the proposed Second Liao River Basin Project
(LRBPII) is to continue to support environmental recovery of the Liao
River Basin (LRB) in Liaoning Province (LP), to provide a safe
environmental setting for the sustainable long-term economic growth of
main urban areas of Liaoning, and to enhance integrated river basin water
resource management and decision making capacity. These objectives would
be pursued in the project cities through (a) provision of facilities for
collection and treatment of municipal wastewater; (b) a parallel program
of industrial wastewater treatment at source; (c) provision of facilities
for effluent reuse, aquifer rehabilitation, and the environmentally secure
disposal strategies for wastewater sludge; (d) establishment or
enhancement of municipal utilities to manage these facilities; (e)
infrastructure upgrading; and (f) technical assistance and training.
The project water quality objective for environmental recovery is to
reduce pollution loads on the LRB as part of an overall pollution control
program aiming to achieve by 2010 a minimum of Class V water quality
(under 75%ile April flow conditions) for key pollutants throughout the
basin. The project represents the second stage of LP's efforts and would
target specifically key parts of the basin and the adjacent Bohai Sea with
sensitive water uses: municipal water supply, agriculture and
aquaculture. This would be achieved by a combination of measures,
including: (a) priority wastewater collection, treatment and reuse systems
in the major cities in the basin; (b) complementary regulation and
pollution control of industrial discharges; (c) environmentally secure
disposal of sludge generated by wastewater treatment; and (d) other
initiatives to reduce per capita water demand including adoption of water
conservation measures in the domestic, industrial and agricultural
sectors, demand management through economic pricing of water and
wastewater services, restrictions on water use for certain activities, and
wastewater reuse. This proposed project would include prioritized
investments in wastewater management treatment in Shenyang (the largest
source of pollution in the Basin), in the main urban areas of the basin,
and include urban upgrading in Shenyang.
The Liao River Basin Project (LRBP), which was approved by the Board on



June 14, 2001, focused on two cities (Panjin and Yingkou) and one
paper-making company in the lower reaches of LRB, and one city (Jinzhou)
and one paper-making company in an adjacent river basin discharging into
the Bohai Sea. That project also included investments in (a) modern data
management systems, including GIS-based systems, complementing the current
European Union-EU-supported technical assistance initiative to develop a
water resources management strategy for the LRB in Liaoning Province, (b)
environmental (water and air) quality monitoring, (c) environment
sub-projects, and (d) institutional strengthening and training. The LRBP
would support prioritized and complementary environmental investments,
aimed at reducing about 30t of the pollution load in theLRB.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project investments in the proposed Second LRBP are intended to further
assist in meeting the objectives of improving water quality in the LRB to
Class V standard for key pollutants, and protecting water resources. These
objectives would be achieved through the collection and treatment of
municipal wastewater in additional cities in the LRB, and promoting the
treatment of all industrial discharges at source. The planned investments
under the proposed project would follow on from investments to be made
under LRBP and would concentrate on six localities in the LRB (Liao, Hun,
and Xi rivers), treating effluent to meet Class V surface water quality
standard for the 75 percentile of low season flows. In addition,
wastewater flows from two localities (Jinzhou and Yingkou Economic
Development Zones) would be collected and treated because of their high
pollutant loads, which have an impact on the Liao River and the Bohai sea
water quality and marine environment, due to tidal flows.
The following project components are proposed for inclusion in the
investment project for Bank financing under the Second LRBP:
n Panjin City: wastewater collection systems and a treatment plant of
100,000 tons/day, sludge disposal facilities, and a possible water
conservation and reuse component;
n Fushun City: wastewater collection systems and a treatment plant of
250,000 tons/day, sludge disposal faclities, and a possible water
conservation and reuse component;
n Shenyang City: a) wastewater investments including wastewater collection
system upgrading, a wastewater treatment plant of 400,000 tons/day, and a
possible water conservation and reuse component; and b) urban upgrading
comprising investments in public open space infrastructure and essential
fabric rehabilitation in Beiling Park, North and East Tomb areas, and the
area of the Shenyang Palace.    Restoration and conservation would be
included for selected priority items;
n Fuxin City: wastewater collection systems, including a wastewater
treatment plant of 100,000 tons/day, and a possible 60,000 tons/day water
reuse component;
n Jinzhou Economic Development Zone: wastewater investments including a
wastewater treatment plant of 20,000 tons/day;
n Yingkou Economic Development Zone: wastewater investments including a
wastewater treatment plant of 100,000 tons/day; and
n Institutional Strengthening, Training and Construction Supervision
Services: measures to strengthen provincial government and city government
agencies to improve their efficiency in service delivery, training, and
consultant services for construction supervision.
-2 -



Components:
Panjin Wastewater Interception & Treatment
Fushun Wastewater Interception & Treatment
Shenyang wastewater Interception & Treatment
Fuxin Wastewater Interception & Treatment
Jinzhou Economic Development Zone Wastewater Interception & Treatment
Yingkou Economic Development Zone Wastewater Interception & Treatment
Shenyang Urban Upgrading
Institutional Strengthening and Training
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Sector Setting
Liaoning is a coastal province in the southern part of Northeast China
and is a key link between China's Northeast economic zone and the Bohai
Sea Rim economic zone. The province overlooks the Bohai and Yellow Sea in
the south and faces the Korean Peninsula across the Yalu River to the
Southeast. Liaoning is a communication hub, connecting with the Eurasian
rail bridge into Russia and a vital link for China's Northeast region to
conduct foreign trade and international exchange. Archaeological
discoveries have shown that the province has been occupied by humans for
over 280,000 years. Stone age tools have been discovered along with a
variety of cultural relics. Liaoning was the birthplace of the last
feudal dynasty of China, the Qing Dynasty which ruled from 1644 until 1911.
Liaoning province covers a total area of 145,900 km2 and has a total
population of 41 million. The province has jurisdiction over 14 cities, 17
county level towns and 17 counties. The provincial capital is Shenyang.
The province enjoys a continental monsoon climate of the North Temperate
Zone and has four distinguishable seasons. During the winter, a
temperature range of -150 to 5o Celsius is experienced, with January being
the coldest month. During the summer temperatures rise to between 22o to
26o Celsius. Annual rainfall averages 715 mm and 70 percent of this
precipitation occurs between June and September.
Liaoning is rich in natural resources. More than 100 varieties of minerals
have been discovered and the deposits of iron, boron, magnesite, diamond,
talcum, jade and solvent-grade limestone rank among the largest in China.
The main oil pipeline from the Daqing oilfield in Heilongjiang province to
the ice-free port of Dalian in the south of Liaoning traverses the
province. More recently, the Liaohe oilfield has been exploited. This now
ranks as China's third largest oil and gas field, accounting for 15
percent of China's total oil production. The exploitation of the abundant
natural resources within Liaoning has created a major raw materials and
industrial base within China. Much of this development has taken place at
a rapid pace, with a catastrophic impact on the environment. The water
resources within the province have been both badly depleted and polluted
by the heavy industries that have been established. One of the worst
affected areas lies within the Liao River catchment. This river basin is
now recognized as one of the most environmentally degraded within China,
and the State Council has identified pollution control and other
environmental improvement measures as a key national priority.
The Liao River Basin within Liaoning, covers an area of 42,000 km2 of
- 3-



which 27,000 km2 form the Hun/Taizi/Daliao rivers catchment and the
remaining 15,000 km2 form the Liao river catchment. The three main rivers
(Liao, Hun and Taizi) flow in an approximately Northeast-Southwest
direction across the province. In 1995, the gross annual output of the
Liao River Basin totalled 305 billion RMB, representing about 60 percent
of the total provincial output. Heavy industry contributes more than half
of this. The remainder is from over 900 large and medium state enterprises
located in the basin. The output from Township and Village Industrial
Enterprises (TVIE) has increased rapidly and in 1995 contributed 28
percent of provincial output. The Liaohe Plain is very fertile and has
been a major grain producer for many years. Some 2 million hectares of
land are under cultivation within the Liao catchment representing 29
percent of the total basin area. The value of the agricultural output in
1995 was approximately 20 billion RMB.
The plain is the home of Liaoning's major cities and most of the
province's large industrial base. In total, a population of 22.8 million
people live in the Liao catchment within the province and this figure
represents about 56 percent of the total Liaoning population.
Environmental Conditions
Liao Basin Issues
The three major rivers which form the Liao He catchment within Liaoning
Province of northeast China are the Liao He, the Hun He and the Taizi He.
As a result of intense urban and industrial development over the past
fifty years the Liao river basin is recognised as one of the most
environmentally degraded regions within the whole of China.     The evidence
of extreme pollution is widespread and includes pollution of surface water
systems, groundwater aquifers and the poor air quality. This not only
affects the lives of the residents but also the provincial economy as
pollution reduces economic development. The urban population and the
industrial complexes that do not have wastewater treatment facilities are
the main sources of surface water pollution within Liaoning Province. From
a review of data obtained from the Provincial Environmental Protection
Bureau (PEPB), it is apparent that with the exception of their upper
reaches, all major rivers within the province do not comply with the
minimum permitted surface water quality of Category V classification of
GHZB 1-1999 Environmental Quality Standard for Surface Water. A brief
summary of the current situation within the major rivers of the Liao River
Basin is given below.
The West Liao is not heavily polluted as it enters the province from
Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. However, the East Liao is heavily
polluted with oils and phenols as it enters the province from Jilin
Province. The situation is worsened by the wastewater discharged by
Tieling and, further downstream, Panjin. Above Dahuofang Reservoir the
Hun River is of excellent quality. The major sources of pollution are
wastewater discharges from Fushun and Shenyang. Below Shenyang, the water
quality is poorer than Category V classification, which is the worst
category. Above Yinkou, the water quality within the Daliao River is
generally poor as a result of the upstream discharges. However, the
situation is made worse by the municipal wastewater from Yingkou and the
industrial wastewater from Yingkou Paper Factory.    The Liao River Basin
Schematic on Figure 2.1 shows the municipal wastewater discharges
exceeding 10,000 m3/d together with major industrial wastewater discharges
- 4 -



exceeding 3 tonnes of COD per day.
Pollution Loads
According to the Tenth Five Year Plan, the total organic pollution from
the basin discharge is 594,400t/y of which most comes from the industrial
cities. There are only ten urban wastewater treatment plant, which can
treat 219of the total urban discharge from 29 cities.    According to the
statistics for 8 provincial controlled cities, industry generates 42t of
the urban discharge.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The project is expected to yield significant positive
environment, social and economic benefits. It has been proposed as a
Category S2 Project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The wastewater treatment plants will substantially improve water
quality in the LRB, assisting in achieving compliance with the Class V
standards for COD under 75%ile April flow conditions. During the winter
months (when temperatures are substantially below zero throughout the day
and minimum
temperatures are frequently below -20 oC) compliance with standards may
not be achieved depending upon natural river flows, which in this period
are very low. However, there is little if any direct beneficial use of
river water during this period, and the rivers are largely covered by ice.
The water conservation and reuse components of the project will reduce
the levels of demand on the very limited and currently heavily exploited
water resources of the LRB. This will have the further benefit of
reducing wastewater flows and thereby increasing the levels of dilution
available in the basin rivers.
The wastewater treatment plants, particularly the very large plant for
the city of Shenyang, will generate substantial quantities of sludge that
- 5-



will require safe and environmentally sound disposal. The use of sludge
as a
soil conditioner in agriculture is limited by the adverse winter climate
of Liaoning, and therefore the primary sludge disposal route would be by
landfill. This will add significantly to the quantities of solid wastes
requiring landfill and therefore have significant impacts upon local
landfill resources in terms both of capacity and secondary impact
(landfill gas and leachate). Reuse of treated wastewater will reduce the
demands on the limited water resources of the LRB but poses risks in terms
of contamination and health if adequate controls are not in place. These
risks would be minimized in any proposed reuse components by additional
treatment and by restrictions on types of reuse.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None envisaged at this stage. The project would be highly beneficial, and
cause minimum disruption.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Notwithstanding the limited water resources of the LRB, and Liaoning
province overall, LP has ambitious plans for increasing both industrial
and agricultural output, to meet economic growth and poverty alleviation
goals. Without initiatives to reduce water demands per unit of output,
the level of water resource utilization will become unsustainable. Long
term benefits of the proposed investments would be distinctly positive,
underpinning economic growth, while also restoring degraded waterways,
improving water quality, enabling the water depandant fauna and flora to
regerate, and making clear progress towards providing a safe environment
for agricultural and recreational use in the Basin.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
All landfills used for the reception of sludge will need to be designed
and operated to international standards
of sanitary landfill practice. To reduce the quantities of sludge
requiring disposal, sludge treatment options
involving either sludge digestion or incineration of dewatered sludge are
being evaluated. These would be
considered in detail during the next stages of project preparation.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Full EA (and RAP, where appropriate) which will be cleared at statutory
level in China and review and cleared by the Bank. Detailed sludge
management plans will be prepared for review by the Bank and will be
required to demonstrate sustainability of disposal routes.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Consultation will continue at all levels.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
- 6 -



that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   2/15/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        2/22/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      12/31/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   2/15/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Geoffrey Read   October 18, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Chaogang Wang/Person/World Bank October 18, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Chaohua Zhang/Person/World Bank October 18, 2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Sun Chongwu      January 18, 2002
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan October 26, 2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Keshav Varma    October 18, 2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



