ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorl Free at Pnvtrty
InfoShop
Report No: AC78
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/20/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA                                   Project ID: P065035
Global Supplemental ID: P077615
Project: Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development  Task Team Leader: Sari K. Soderstrom
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 3, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m): 66.27
Bank Approval: June 19, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m):
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 10.50
Managing Unit: EASRD                             Sector: Animal production (50%); Agricultural
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  marketing and trade (25%); Agricultural extension
Status: Lending                                  and research (25%)
Theme: Land management (P); Other environment
and natural resources management (P); Rural markets
(P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Project Development Objective. The project development objective is to promote sustainable natural
resource management through establishing improved livestock production and marketing systems that
would increase the income of herders and farmers in the project areas.
The project would empower farmer and herder households in the project counties to better manage their
grassland resources and improve forage and feed production on arable lands, thereby increasing their
incomes through more efficient and quality focused livestock production, sufficient to generate
marketable surplus to improve living standards. Establishment of improved livestock marketing systems
in project counties would also increase the efficiency of the livestock production system and help raise
the living standards of farmers and herders.
Global Environmental Objective. The global environmental objective of the project is to mitigate land
degradation, conserve globally important biodiversity, and enhance carbon sequestration, through
promotion of integrated ecosystem management in the grassland, desert, and forest ecosystems of the
Qilian Shan, Tian Shan, and Altai Shan mountain ranges in Western China. The global environmental
objective would be achieved by implementing community based grassland management plans in selected
project areas with high global biodiversity values; providing incremental investments for implementing
grassland plans; and monitoring of grasslands habitats in selected pilot sites.


﻿2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has five components: (1) Grassland Management/Forage Improvement; (2) Livestock
Production Improvement; (3) Market Systems Development; (4) Applied Research, Training, Extension;
and (5) Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation. Four of the five project components have
incremental activities proposed for GEF financing that would: (a) conserve global grassland values and
native livestock agro-biodiversity; (b) support applied research, training and extension for multiplication
of indigenous grassland species for rehabilitation of degraded grasslands and the protection of native
sheep and yak; and (c) establish integrated grassland management monitoring processes at provincial,
county and townships levels.
Component 1. Grassland Management and Forage ImprovemeniThe component will finance
works, goods, TA and training for household based operations and participating breeding farms.
Activities include: (i) forage and fodder production (annual forage and fodder development, perennial
fodder development, monitoring and evaluation); and (ii) grassland management and improvement
(village based grassland management plans, pastoral risk management strategies). Activities to be carried
out under the GEF Alternative will include financing of incremental costs associated with conservation
of global grassland values, including: (a) inventory of grassland ecosystems in selected biodiversity-rich
areas, and assessment of their biodiversity and its change as a response to improved management
practices. Key activities would include grassland and biodiversity surveys; (b) preparation and
implementation of community and herders' group-based grassland resource management plans in
selected project sites, which will be designed to promote biodiversity conservation and carbon storage
(technical assistance, TA); (c) implementation and demonstration of global environment-friendly
grassland management techniques and investments which are consistent with the existing pastoral
systems (i.e. re-seeding with indigenous grass species, implementation of traditional forage production
techniques, etc.); (d) strengthening existing grassland ecological monitoring systems, including
monitoring of biodiversity values; and (e) capacity building, extension, training and TA, including the
preparation of training modules and awareness building to support the above global environment-oriented
activities.
Component 2. Livestock Production Improvement.The component will finance works, goods, TA
and training for households, participating breeding farms, artificial insemination (AI) stations and
veterinary stations. Activities include: (i) fine wool and mutton nuclear breeding stations and multiplier
stations; (ii) fine wool and mutton breeding households; (iii) fine wool and mutton fattening; (iv) beef
cattle breeding households and fattening households; and (v) household dairy production. These
activities will receive support from  breeding and veterinary services enhanced through project
investments for the establishment and renovation of a Al stations to facilitate the transfer of superior
genetic traits to household based activities and veterinary stations to deliver improved livestock health.
Applied research, training and extension support all these activities. Activities to be carried out under
the GEF Alternative include financing of incremental costs associated with conservation of native
livestock agrobiodiversity, including: (i) TA for measures to conserve globally significant native
livestock breeds; (ii) inventory and assessment of native livestock; (iii) training and institutional capacity
building and public awareness for livestock agrobiodiversity; and (iv) limited investments to select,
breed, and maintain small flocks/herds of native carpet wool sheep, mutton sheep, and yak breeds.
Component 3. Market Systems Development The component will finance works, goods, TA and
training for households, participating public breeding farms and enterprises. This includes: (i) physical
investments (new and renovated livestock markets, shearing stations and milk delivery infrastructure);
(ii) loans for rural enterprises or enterprise like activities to support project objectives; (iii) support
(promotion, TA and training) to farmers'/herders/ groups; and (iv) development and establishment of
mechanisms for public goods provision (market information systems, strategic market research, quality


﻿3
ISDS
standards' adoption and quality promotion). There is no incremental GEF funding for this component.
Component 4. Applied Research, Training and ExtensioWhe component will finance applied
research at the provincial levels (universitites and public institutes) and TA and training of trainers (in
line bureaus and extenstion stations), households, participating breeding farms, and participating
enterprises. Activities to be financed include: (a) applied research that identify, develop and adapt
relevant low-cost technologies to solve specific problems that will further facilitate implementation and
enhance accrued benefits from the project'ts grassland improvement, livestock and marketing activities.
The design of these applied research projects will incorporate project beneficiary households into
on-farm experiments to ensure that farmers' interests are the prime focus of the activity. Examples of
topics identified that warrant investigation include: Impact of greenhouse sheds on livestock (fine wool
sheep, mutton sheep and beef) production and profitability; Effect of diet formulation of feedlot beef
cattle production; Feeding management technologies of lactating dairy cows; Changing seasonal grazing
times and patterns to optimize livestock performance, improvements in grassland condition and the
conservation of biodiversity; Effect of cutting time and storage method on feed value of alfalfa, maize
and meadow hay; Feeding strategies of heifers to realize genetic potential from improved breeding
programs; Feed management for cow-calf herds especially in winter/springlabt of mechanical
shearing and wool grading on fine wool sheep profitability; Defining diversity within and
between native livestock breeds; (b) training (i.e., training of trainers, training of farmers and herders,
training of provincial, county and township project staff to ensure smooth project implementation and
project sustainability). This training would be delivered through technical assistance, individual training,
workshops, and study tours; and (c) public extension services (i.e., participatory demonstrations,
household visits, group discussions, technical training, company led training and extension). The GEF
Alternative will finance incremental costs associated with applied research and extension for
multiplication of indigenous grassland species for rehabilitation of degraded grasslands, including: (i)
applied research in grassland ecology and ecosystem management; (ii) training herders and county staff
in integrated ecosystem management; (iii) ecological surveys and environmental workshops to increase
environmental awareness; and (iv) applied research into conservation of wildlife habitat of global
significance.
Component 5. Project Management, Monitoring and EvaluatioThe component will finance
operational costs, goods, TA and training for the various levels of project management offices. Activities
to be financed include: (a) operational costs; (b) strengthening of the provincial, city, county and
township level PMOs (goods and training); (c) establishment of a monitoring and evaluation system that
includes: project progress monitoring, environmental monitoring, social monitoring, and impact
monitoring (technical assistance and training), and establishment of community advisory/participation
groups (technical assistance and training). The GEF Alternative will finance incremental costs associated
with establishment of integrated grassland management monitoring processes at provincial, county and
townships levels including: (i) development and implementation of monitoring processes for adaptive
integrated ecosystem management at provincial, county and township levels; and (ii) development and
implementation of monitoring tools to measure changed carbon sequestration and biodiversity status in
managed grasslands.
Key Features in Project Design and Implementation Approach. Achieving the multiple objectives of
the project has required a departure from a sectoral approach. For example, successfully integrated
approaches require that technological improvements of productive assets must be combined with
improved management of natural capital with simultaneous improvement of human and institutional
capital, while fully taking into account market opportunities and economic sustainability. As such, the
project takes a multidisciplinary approach, addressing issues of institutional development, natural
resources management, and access to markets, which are all expected to improve the productivity of


﻿4
ISDS
livestock development in the medium and long-run.
The project's main features include: (a) a geographic concentration of an integrated series of activities in
a county; (b) integration of grassland management, livestock improvement and marketing activities at the
farmer/herder level; (c) bi-directional coordination of livestock production activities with wool, meat and
milk markets; (d) phasing and sequencing of activities in order to ensure flexibility in detailed project
implementation in accordance with changing environmental and market conditions; and (e) active
participation of herders and farmers in the planning and implementation of activities to enhance their
capacity to better manage natural resources.
Project components are linked closely together in order to: (i) ensure optimum use of the investments in
grassland management and improvement, forage development, livestock breeding and production, and the
market systems development activities; (ii) promote participation of herders and farmers; and (iii)
address inappropriate policies towards pastoral areas and policy-induced market distortions.
It is expected that the project activities will improve productivity per animal through production
efficiencies gained by genetic improvement and adopting new husbandry practices, feeding regimes and
livestock health programs that reduce livestock mortality and grassland degradation, leading to increased
incomes for the project beneficiaries. These benefits will accrue from improvement to livestock breeding
and management, and the provision of high quality forages and improve grassland management delivered
as part of the Grassland Management and Forage Improvement Component to enable livestock to
produce to their genetic potential. Livestock activities are further supported through the Market Systems
Component that empowers household producers to utilize market information to make informed
decisions on enterprise selection and production focus.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Project Location and Target populatioie main targeted beneficiaries are located in 19
counties/cities in ten prefectures (Jingtai, Jiuquan, Zhangye, Sunan, Yongchang, Liangzhou, Jingyuan,
Huining, Lintao, Dingxi, Zhangjiaxhuan, Qingshui, Linxia, Kangle, Linxia, Lintai, Pinglian, Huating and
Ningxian), and one provincial level farm and one prefecture level farm (Huangcheng and Minshen). In
Xinjiang, project areas include 24 counties in nine prefectures (Xinyuan, Tekesi, Gongliu, Wusu,
Shawan, Yumin, Bole, Wenquan, Altai, Fuyun, Changji, Hutubi, Manasi, Fukang, Jimusaer, Qitai,
Hejing, Yanji, Bohu, Kuche, Baicheng, Wensu, Hami, and Tulufan) and 3 sheep breeding farms in
Gongnaisi, Tacheng and Bazhou.
The target population's average annual income is substantially below the country's average per capita
income (RMB 7,543 in 2001). The average (net) per capita income of rural households in Xinjiang is
RMB 1,710 per year and in Gansu RMB 1,508 (2001). This figure is well below the average national
and rural income in China (RMB 2,366). Benefits would also accrue to entrepreneurs associated with
livestock product processing industries in county, prefecture, and provincial centers (wool, mutton, beef,
dairy). A large portion of the herder and farmer households are ethnic minorities (mainly Dongxiang,
Hui, Kazakh, Mongol, Tu, Uygur, and Yugu). The number of households which will benefit from the
project are currently estimated to be about 35,000 households (140,000 people), whereof about 24,500
households in Gansu and 10,500 households in Xinjiang. The selection criteria for beneficiary
households is described in the Project Implementation Plan. Special efforts are going to be made to
include poorer households, that might not be able to afford loans, in non-lending activities (e.g. training).
In Gansu, Sunan and Huangcheng Nuclear Sheep Farm will focus on the development of fine wool sheep.
Development of mutton sheep will be the main project activity in Jingtai, Suzhou, Ganzhou, Yongchang,


﻿5
ISDS
and Huining., Beef fattening will be the principal activity in Zhangjiachuan, Qingshui, Liangzhou, Lintai,
Kongtong, Ningxian, Kangle, and Huating. Linxia County. Lintao, Linxia City, Jiuquan and Dingxi, and
Hovill Group, will feature dairy cattle. In Xinjiang, mutton sheep production is the main production
activity in Fuyun, Altai, Yumin, Hejing, Kuche Hami and Tulufan. All other counties will be producing
dual purpose sheep (fine wool and mutton).
The GEF activities will be implemented within geographically-targeted landscape units and natural
grasslands of high biodiversity value and with significant carbon sequestration potential. Phase I GEF
counties in Xinjiang are Tekesi, Fuyun, Baicheng, Bole, and Hejing. Phase II GEF counties are Altai,
Qitai, Hami, Yumin, Xinyuan. Xinjiang GEF counties are located in the eastern Tien Shan and Altai
Shan mountains eco-regions. In Gansu, Phase I GEF counties are Sunan, Subei, Jingtai, Dingxi and
Suzhou in the Qilian Shan mountains eco-region. Phase II counties are Yongchang, Ganzhou, and
Liangzhou.
Proximity to Protected Areas and/or Critical Natural HabitatsThere are 26 nature reserves in
Xinjiang. These nature reserves consist of the zones at the state priority preservation and that at the
Autonomous Region priority protection. The zones are under separate management by the forestry
system, environmental protection system and agricultural system. In total, 15 natural reserves are
established within project counties in Xinjiang and are presented in Table 1.
Thirtysix nature reserves of various significance levels have been established in Gansu province. Among
these preservation zones, five are at the national level, 27 are at provincial level, one is at district level
and three are at the county (city) level. In addition, there are 37 forest parks in Gansu province of which
six are at state level, and 31 at provincial level. Furthermore, three nature reserves for wild animal
migration and three nature reverses for wild plant migration are established respectively. Table 2
presents the characteristics of major nature reserves in the project counties in Gansu.
No project activities will take place in nature reserves or their buffer areas. In addition, the EIA has
therefore recommended that before any construction activity starts adjacent to such areas, the project
proponent should contact the respective authorities that are identified in the attached tables as the
management department (Xinjiang and Gansu province Wildlife Protection Administration Bureau of the
respective Forestry Department, Environmental Protection Buraus, Animal Husbandry Bureau, etc.).
Table I Nature Reserves in Project Counties, Xinjiang
Name of Nature Reserves - Area (hm3) - Time of Establishment - Location - Protected Animals/Plants - Management
Department - Grade
Wenquan County North Giant Salamander Nature Reserve, NR (695 hm3) in Wenquan county. Established 1997.
North Giant Salamander and its eco-system. Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB)
Tianchi NR (690 hm3) in Fuyun County. Established 1980. Forest Eco-system. Regional Forestry Department.
Mount Tormu NR (125,637 hm3) in Fuyun County. Established 1983. Forest Eco-system. Regional Forestry
Department.
Gongliu County NR (28,000 hm3) in Gongliu county. Established 1983. Forest Eco-system. Regional Forestry
Department.
Gongliu County Wild Walnut NR (180 hm3) in Gongliu county. Established 1983. Wild Walnut Trees. Regional
Forestry Department.
Lake Ganjiahu Suosuo Plants NR (54,667 hm3) in Wusu and Jinghe counties. Established 1983. Suosuo Plants.
Regional Forestry Department.
Tacheng County Wild Badan Apricot NR (1,500 mh3) in Yumin County. Established 1980. Wild Badan Apricot
Trees. Regional Forestry Department.
Kalamaili Ungulate Animals NR (1,800,000 hm3) in Fuyun County. Established 1986. Wild Donkey and other
Ungulates. Regional Forestry Department.
Baryinbrok Swan NR (100,000 hm3) in Hejing County. Established 1986. Swans and wetlands. National Forestry


﻿6
ISDS
Department.
Xinyuan County Mountain Grassland NR (65,300 hm3) in Xinyuan county. Established 1986. Mountain grassland
and its eco-systems. Regional Animal Husbandry Department. Grade B.
Qitai County Desert Grassland NR (38,600 hm3) in Qitai county. Established 1986. Desert grassland and its
eco-system. Regional Animal Husbandry Department. Grade B.
Albi Lake Wetland NR (267,085 hm3) in Bozhou county. Established 2000. Wild rare animals and plants. Regional
Forestry Department.
Xiarshili NR (22,000 hm3) in Bozhou county. Established 2000. Forest and wild animals. Regional Forestry
Department.
Xinjiang Gongliu Dragon Spruce (Picea asperata) NR (28,000 hm3) in Gongliu county. Alpine Dragon Spruce
(Picea asperata) and its habitat. Regional Forestry Department.
Two-river Source Natural Reserve in Altai, Fuyun county. River source ecosystems.
Table 2 Nature Reserves in Project Counties, Gansu
Name of Reserve    Project       Area of the     Items preserved                 Remarks
county         Nature
Reserve
Qilian Shan        Wuwei,        Area of       Gymnocar pos           1044 kinds of plants were collected from
Sub-frigid         Jiuquan,      preservation  przewalskii           the zone. Vertebrate: 229. Beasts: 47. Birds:
coniferous forest  Yongdeng,     zone (5.5292  -1st grade protection  169. Amphibian reptile: 13.
preservation zone  Zhangye,      ha) Hunting   plant in China;
(national level)   Yongchang     prohibited area:                     Not only protected the animal and plants in
87,116 Ha                           the zone, but also protected the water source
of Hexi corridor. Da Tong river and Zhuang
Lang river of Yellow river system, Shi
Yang river, Hei He river and some
anabranch of Shu Le river belonging to
inland water system, all rise from this zone.
Qing Hai Dragon    Jing Tai      10,000 ha     Spruce forest, Qing Hai  Of  certain  importance  in
Spruce (Picea                                                        protecting the forest in the arid
asperata) preservation                                                area. In the proected areas,
n Shou Lu mountain                                                  there are many    endangered
and Chang Ling                                                        plants, 14 species of endanged
mountain                                                             animals, 20 kiinds of birds, 3
repitiles. There  are  many
national 1st and 2nd protection
plants and animals.
Dong Da Shan Forest, Zhang Ye    50 km2        Plant:Qing Hai Picea   Of particular importance in
Hilly Prairie & Rare                           asperata;             study the ecosystem of desert
Animal Reserve                                                        area. In the protected areas,
Animal: Panthera uncia, there 98 plant species, 20
Pseudois nayaur.      animals, 80 species of birds.
There are many national Ist and
2nd   protection  plants  and
animals.
Guozhagou          Zhuo Ni       2500 Ha       National 2nd protection  It has important significance to
Purplecone Spruce                              plant: Purplecone Spruce the protection of endangered
(Picea purpurea)                               (Picea purpurea)       fauna and flora.
Reserve
Lianhua Mountain   Kangle,       126 km2       National 2nd protection  In the reserve, there are 75 species of
Nature Reserve     Zhouni, Lintan              plant: Purplecone Spruce plants, 60 animals, 150 birds, 10 reptile.
(Picea purpurea) and   There are many national 1st and 2nd


﻿7
]SOS
snow leopard.       protection fauna and flora. It is not only a
nature reserve, but also a famous tourist
destination.
Grassland Conditions. Except for Sunan County, the project counties in Gansu rely mainly on fodder,
forage and agricultural by-product as animal feed source. The major grassland ecological zones in Gansu
include desert, steppe, meadow, alpine and sub-alpine and marsh grasslands. Signs of grassland
degradation, are apparent in majority of grasslands within the project areas. The grassland degradation is
as low as 10 to 20% in Sunan County with an average degradation rate of 30%, of which 50 to 60% are
slightly degraded.
Due to the large size of Xinjiang (1.65 million square kilometers), a variety of different grassland types
exist in the region. Main grasslands ecological zones include temperate meadows, temperate steppes,
temperate deserts, alpine steppes, alpine deserts, low-lying meadows (wet meadows), mountain
meadows, alpine meadows and marshlands. Most natural grassland areas show signs of degradation at
different levels of severity. According to available statistics, over 80% of natural grassland in Xinjiang
show some degree of degradation, while one third are be seriously degraded. The grass yield of natural
grasslands have dropped an average of 30% to more than 50%, compared to yields in the 1960's.
Water Resources Both Gansu and Xinjiang suffer from shortage and/or poor distribution of water
resources. In Gansu, the areas to the north of an imaginary line between Liupan Mountain-Qingliang
Mountain- and Qilian Mountain suffer from shortage of water resources, while most of the areas to the
south of the line enjoy abundance of water resources. Areas to the north of the line with inadequate
water resources include eastern Gansu, the massive loess plateau and areas to the north of Lanzhou,
where annual runoff depth is only 5 to 50 mm, while the areas to the south have an annual runoff depth in
the 100 to 300 mm range that increases to as high as 600 mm in the mountainous areas. River flow
regimes have also a poor distribution, providing a small flow during spring and winter months, reaching
peak flows in fall and declining again during summer months. Water flow of inland rivers is mainly
concentrated in June to September, accounting for 70 to 75% of the annual flow.
Xinjiang also suffers from scarcity of water resources due to poor distribution of river systems. Even
though water resources are rather abundant in some areas like the hilly and mountainous alpine and
sub-alpine regions of Altai and Yili, water resources availability in dryer central and southern counties
are poor. In total, there are over 570 rivers in Xinjiang, however, most of the rivers have rather short
courses and small catchment basins, with a small water flow. The total surface water runoff in the entire
Xinjiang is 88.4 billion m3. The available groundwater resources are believed to be around 25.2 billion
m3. There are several dozens of rivers that traverse in the project areas and most of them are inland river
system. The exceptions are Eerqisi River in northern Xinjiang that flows into the Arctic Ocean via Ebi
River in Kazakhstan, and Chabuchar River in the southwest of Xinjiang that flows into the Indian Ocean
via India. Among the inland rivers, Yili River and Emin River flow into Kazakhstan. Water resources
distribution declines from northern to the southern parts, and from west to east. Northern Xinjiang
covers 27% of the region, enjoying 52% of total water resources. Generally speaking, water quality in
the project areas is good for irrigation. However, Hami and Tulufan prefectures in central Xinjiang have
a shallow and somewhat saline groundwater that in combination with high evapotranspiration rates is
causing increase in occurrences of soil salinity and potential sodicity within the areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Environmental Impact Assessment. An environmental impact assessment (EIA) of the project
has been carried out, in parallel with project preparation, by an independent institute (Chinese Research


﻿8
ISDS
Academy of Environmental Sciences, CRAES) certified to undertake environmental impact assessments
according to Chinese regulations. The EIA has: (a) screened the project to the most appropriate review and
approval option; (b) established an environmental baseline against which to measure future change; (c)
established environmental objectives, standards and performance indicators; (d) identified additional
environmental project activities; (e) identified benefits and residual impacts or risks (i.e. those that cannot be
avoided or mitigated); (f) designed an environmental monitoring and mitigation plan with a schedule and
triggers for action; and (g) provided guidance to more detailed planning and implementation.
The EIA is prepared to meet the requirements of relevant environmental protection and assessment
processes of the People's Republic of China, Gansu Province, Xinjiang Autonomous Region, and the
World Bank. The EIA report presents the results of the environmental impact assessment for the project,
based on two separate studies undertaken in Gansu and Xinjiang The studies were later combined due to
similarities of the environmental issues and the proposed mitigation measures to form one report. The
project counties were divided into different groupings based on the major prevalent livestock production
systems in each county. Within each grouping, the environmental issues were further assessed under
secondary breakdown of counties based on different ecological zones present within the project areas.
The studies concluded that the major potential environmental and social issues and required mitigation
measures are more related to different production systems than the ecological zoning, most likely since
the production systems have been adopted by the local herders/livestock farmers based on ecological
characteristics of their environment.
Activities related to the Market Systems Development Component, such as livestock and auction
markets, rural enterprises, and milk processing facilities were also reviewed, and potential environmental
impacts and respective mitigation measures were identified.
The project has been categorized as a Environmental Risk Category B and Safeguards risk category S2.
The ratings were given on the basis that the project does not involve any change in landuse and does not
involve areas designated as nature reserves. This category is consistent with guidance given in GP 4.01
Annex 1(b) and is consistent with recent practice in the East Asia Region on projects of similar scope.
Adverse impacts, if any, are expected to be localized. Environmental issues which may be encountered
under the project can be managed with known mitigation measures which are defined in the
Environmental Management Plan.
Anticipated Environmental Impacts. The major environmental issues that have been identified are the
present status of natural grasslands, adequacy of feed for livestock, and adequacy of natural resources
(water and soils) for the production of artificial pastures and improved natural grasslands to ensure an
environmentally and socially sustainable development project. During implementation and operation
phase, as long as the project enforces grassland laws and do not allow any increase in the number of
animals within natural grasslands beyond their carrying capacity, it is not likely that project
implementation will have any negative environmental impacts. The development of irrigated fodder and
forage crops (artificial pastures) under large on-going government programs is already reducing the
pressure on natural grasslands, allowing for the rehabilitation of the presently degraded and/or
overgrazed grasslands. The project will support these government efforts. For the GEF activities, use of
seeds of indigenous grass species for the improvement of natural grasslands through supplementary
sowing would provide for improvement of natural grassland ecology, thus generating positive global
environmental impacts.
Possible negative environmental impacts of the project could originate from net increase of livestock; site
specific limitations in availability of irrigation water for the development of artificial pastures; and
inadequate soil quality for development of irrigated forage/fodder crops (soil salinity, sodicity, water
holding capacity, nutrient availability, etc.) within project counties. Although the project intends to
reduce the pressure of livestock on grasslands, overstocking of animals is a risk. Livestock numbers will


﻿9
ISDS
be stricly monitored within the project. Regarding water availability, since the exact location for the
developments of artificial grassland will be determined on-goingly in accordance with the project's
phased and sequenced approach (as the beneficiaries will be selected), the location specific impacts of
those activities cannot be determined in advance. The project will, in line with the water resources
planning of the region, make sure that the available water resources are sufficient for sustainable
implementation. Water balance studies will be carried out at selected sites prior to any developments. In
addition, the project will encourage alternative, less water demanding forage crops and water saving
irrigation methods. The Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMP) includes monitoring measures for
livestock numbers, and water and soil issues. It is not anticipated that the project will lead directly or
indiredly to increased pesticide use. Nevertheless, while the project will not finance procurement of
pesticides, a training program is included to improve the knowledge base of the agricultural extension
and grassland monitoring station staffs on the basics of pest management and agrochemical use, handling
and application within project areas.
The dairy sub-component in Gansu has its own specific environmental issues and potential impacts. Two
different dairy production models are proposed: (a) small-scale household dairy farmers (1-5 heads) with
1-2 dairy cows being financed by the Bank; and (b) medium-size dairy farms with up to 100 heads
operated by Hovill Dairy Company and households in Linxia, Dingxi, Jiuquan and Lintao counties. The
small-scale household enterprises are not anticipated to cause any significant impacts. However, the
medium scale dairy farms, as well the proposed beef cattle feedletsuld have pollution impacts and
health related issues (possible coliform increase), odor, solid and liquid manure, and liquid waste from
washing of the equipments. Appropriate waste/wash water and manure treatment plans will be
incorporated in the detailed design of these activities to reduce potential negative impacts.
The potential negative environment impacts identified in the EIA during construction and
implementation phase of the project are of temporary nature and limited in magnitude. These impacts
include: impact on natural vegetation due to temporary land occupation at the construction sites,
pollution as a result of additional daily waste produced at the construction site and noise and dust of the
construction machinery.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        O Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                O Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes O No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        O Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes O No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          O Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  O Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claim.
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
ILD.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.


﻿10
ISDS
Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats: see Section 5 above. No project activities will take
place in natural reserves or within buffering zones of natural reserves.
Indigenous People. A large portion of project beneficiaries are minoriy nationalities. The social
assessment recommended to the Borrower and the Bank that a minorities-targeting development strategy
should be devised as the appropriate approach for the application of OD 4.20 to the project to ensure that
indigenous people benefit from project activities and to avoid or mitigate potentially adverse effects on
indigenous people caused by project activities. It is not anticipated that the project will have any
negative impact on minority nationalities. However, it is important to monitor that project benefits will
equally accrue to the minority nationalities. Multi-Ethnic Groups Development Strategies (MEGDS)
have been prepared for both provinces. The MEGDSs, identify and describe the minority population in
the project and specifiy the development requirements for minorities in project implementation.
Safety of Dams. It is possible that the project will utilize irrigation water from dams exceeding 15
meters in height or 10 meters in height and more than 1 million cubic meters in storage capacity, thus
being subject to safety review in accordance with procedures acceptable to the Bank and in accordance
with OP 4.37. Twentysix dams in Xinjiang and 24 dams in Gansu could potentially require safety
review. Dam Safety Review Management Plans have been prepared.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
n/a
II.D. 1 c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
n/a
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Copies (and Chinese translations) of all relevant operational policies have been provided to and
discussed with the Provincial PMOs at every mission. Borrower is well aware of the Bank's safeguard
procedures and has fully integrated them into the project design. Monitoring of safeguard issues has
been made part of the regular monitoring activities.
Environmental Assessment: see Section B above.
Natural Habitats. Final sub-project designs will be amended to prevent any impacts on natural reserves
and will be reviewed by the Bank prior to implementation. No project works will take place in natural
reserves or within buffering zones of natural reserves.The detailed designs for project activities will be
such that natural habitats will not be impacted. Procedures for environmental reviews for final plans
have been developed in the EMP.
Indigenous People. Multi-Ethnic Groups Development Strategies (MNDS) have been developed as the
appropriate approach for the application of OD 4.20 to the project to ensure that indigenous people
benefit from project activities and to avoid or mitigate potentially adverse effects on indigenous people
caused by project activities.
Safety of Dams. A Dam Safety Review Management Plan for the project has been prepared and is part
of the overall implementation plan of the project.


﻿11
ISDS
ILD.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
General. The main targeted beneficiaries in Gansu and Xinjiang are farmers and herders. A large
portion of the beneficiaries ethnic minority farmers and herders, mainly belonging to the Dongxiang, Hui,
Kazakh, Mongol, Tu, Uygur, Tibetan, and Yugu ethnic groups.
Social Assessment Process In order to ensure effective project preparation and implementation, a
social assessment (SA) process was established. The overall purpose of the SA was to assist in designing
and later in implementing the project with the support and active involvement of individuals and groups
most directly affected. The social assessment work paid close attention to appropriateness of the project
activities relative to the different ethnic minorities as to make sure that all activities are culturally
appropriate and in accordance with their wishes. Two rounds of consultations were conducted; the first
preliminary round in the spring of 2000 to determine background conditions and general project-related
needs, and the second a social assessment in the summer of 2001. The objective of the consultations were
to identify the needs and interests of the potential project beneficiaries.hs participation ranged from
simple one-way communication, such as information disclosed in publicity campaigns and surveys, to
more intensive interactions involving two-way discussions in which the informant's opinion is recorded
and considered in the project's design and implementation arrangements. Main issues and needs
identified by the herders and farmers included the need to increase their income from sheep production,
lack of availability of improved sheep breeds, lack of adequate support services for livestock
development and inadequate winter forage. Findings from the consultations played an important role in
shaping the project as it currently stands. The SA should be viewed as a continuous process of
consultation to take place throughout the project's life cycle.
Beneficiary Participation Manual In order to "stream-line" beneficiary participation in
implementation, Beneficiary Participation Manuals (BPM) have been prepared. The BPMs describe in
detail and formalize the consultation and participation process with affected groups. As such, they define
a strategy for allowing stakeholders to influence the decisions and resources that affect them. The BPMs
are to be viewed as a working document that is modified to reflect any changes in the project and/or in
the social and economic conditions.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               3/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           3/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            3/29/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable


﻿12
ISDS
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              3/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          5/31/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           8/22/2002
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              8/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            5/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           5/2/2003
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Sari K. Soderstrom                          5/09/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Robert D. Crooks/Person/World Bank     5/12/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Chaohua Zhang/Person/World Bank       5/12/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                         5/15/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Mark D. Wilson                             5/09/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDBACK      SITE MAP       SHOWCASE
20 - Released To IRIS


