Ac"qo
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: CHINA                                    Project ID: P066955
Project: Zhejiang Urban Environment Project       Task Team Leader: Wiebe Moes
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 18, 2003      IBRD Amount (Sm): 133.00
Bank Approval: January 29, 2004                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR                              Sector: Sewerage (35%); Roads and highways (25%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Other social services (25%); Solid waste management
Status: Lending                                  (10%); Water supply (5%)
Theme: Municipal govemance and institution building
(P); Pollution management and environmental health
(P); Access to urban services for the poor (P);
Infrastructure services for private sector development
(S); Other urban development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the Zhejiang Urban Environment Project (ZUEP) is to enhance the efficiency and equity of
waste management in Ningbo and Hangzhou municipalities and the redevelopment of the historic inner city
in Shaoxing and Cicheng, and thereby facilitating the sustainable development of these cities and
establishing a model for conservation of cultural heritage in other Chinese cities.
The project will support measures to increase the utilization of waste treatment facilities, increase sewerage
services in underserved areas including the fast-growing suburban areas and satellite towns in Ningbo; and
to improve waste management institutions and finances through implementation of utility reform measures.
Redevelopment of the historic inner-city and conservation of build heritage in Shaoxing and Cicheng is a
top priority of the municipal governments and the project will contribute to improving the quality of life of
their citizens, sustain their cultural and historic nature through tourism development, upgrade their housing
stock and safeguard environmental conditions.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project in the three municipalities of Ningbo, Shaoxing and Hangzhou consists of a mixture of
environmental infrastructure services, urban redevelopment and cultural heritage conservation components,
along with associated technical assistance.
Components:
Ningbo
(a) South Jiangdong Sewerage and Treatment Plant
(b) Zhenhai Sewerage and Treatment Plant
(c) Cicheng Infrastructure Development
(d) Dongqian Lake Development
(e) Shaoxing Historic City-Center



2
ISDS
(f) Hangzhou Landfill Expansion
(g) Services, training and Implementation Support
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Zhejiang Province (population 39 M) is one of the most important of the eastern coastal provinces in
China. It is an integral component of the Yangtze Economic Zone and has a strong industrial sector and
prosperous agricultural base.
Hangzhou (urban population 3.7 M) is the provincial capital and has an important geographical location on
the N bank of the Qiantang River at the apex of Hangzhou Bay. The city is a major tourist destination, a
major attraction being the famous West Lake. Waste generation in the city is increasing rapidly, in part
due to improvements in collection, and there is an urgent need for new disposal facilities as the existing
landfill is nearing completion. The project proposal is to extend the existing well operated landfill, located
in a small valley some 18 km N of the urban center; this option was selected in preference to 8 potential
new landfill sites elsewhere on grounds of lower incremental environmental impact.
Ningbo (urban population 1.26 M) is an important port and industrial center located at the estuary of the
Yongjiang River. The urban center of Ningbo and the outlying township of Cicheng are traversed by a
number of small rivers, which currently receive large wastewater discharges. Dongqian Lake is located
about 15 km from the Ningbo urban center and is the only major scenic area for Ningbo. There are
proposals to expand tourism in the lake area, but the lake is also an important water source for urban
supply and agriculture. Existing and potential further pollution threatens these beneficial uses.
Shaoxing (urban population 0.5M) is in the NE of Zhejiang and is one of the key cities in the Changjiang
River delta. The city has a long history and has been the regional political, economic and cultural center
since ancient times. Much historical and cultural heritage and many historical street areas are still well
preserved, and the old city has a network of canals fed from the moat that surrounds the city. Areas
adjacent to these canals in the historic areas of the city house in the order of 30 000 people, but urban
services are poor and properties lack basic water, sanitation and energy supply facilities.
The project would directly benefit about one million people through improved water supply, wastewater
and solid waste collection and disposal, energy supply services, housing in the historic city centers, roads
and transportation, flood control, and recreational facilities. A small number of people will be directly
affected by the project because of resettlement and enterprise relocation from crowded inner-city locations
and displacement by construction activities. The total number of people to be permanently resettled is
estimated at 7,600 while the number of people affected by enterprise relocation is estimated 2,100.
The project components in Shaoxing and Cicheng are located within culturally sensitive areas but issues
are adequately dealt with because of the heritage conservation approach with these components. Dongqian
Lake project component is located within an environmentally sensitive area.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments:



3
ISDS
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on Q for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)     0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)             0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                              0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                            0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                    * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                        0 Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*  0 Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The environmental impact of the project is expected to be on balance substantially positive in
terms of improved water quality in the rivers and canals in the urban areas of Ningbo (and
surrounding towns) and Shaoxing and of improved and sustainable wastes management in
Hangzhou. There are, however, two significant impacts in Ningbo/Shaoxing and two in
Hangzhou.
The major increases in the level of wastewater treatment in Ningbo Municipality will substantially
increase the quantities of wastewater treatment sludge requiring disposal. It is hoped that in
future there may be beneficial use of treated sludge, but, at least in the immediate term, there will
be an increased burden on municipal solid wastes management services. Dredging of urban canals
in Cicheng (Ningbo) and Shaoxing and of Dongqian Lake is proposed, but the justification has not
as yet been demonstrated in all cases. If dredging proceeds, disposal of dredgings may have
significant impacts, and detailed monitoring of sediments will be necessary to determine
acceptable disposal routes.
In the case of the Tianziling landfill in Hangzhou, although the facility will meet international
standards of sanitary landfill, there will be the inevitable potential impacts of leachate and landfill
gas generation. Each will occur throughout the lifetime of the site and in the case of gas
generation for a considerable period thereafter. The potential impact of leachate in terms of
groundwater contamination will be mitigated by means of a comprehensive site liner and
collection and treatment of leachate. The impact of gas generation will be mitigated by forced
extraction of gas with beneficial use of the gas for power generation.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or



4
ISDS
due to multiple project component.
The need for sludge disposal from wastewater treatment in urban Ningbo will be increased by the
centralisation of wastewater treatment at the Jiangdongnan wastewater treatment plant, which will
receive wastewater from the nearby town of Cicheng and from the area surrounding Dongqian
Lake.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The quantities of sludge requiring disposal will continue to increase as a consequence of
population growth, increases in the wastewater treatment rates in Ningbo and the potential future
further centralisation of wastewater treatment. Accordingly the Ningbo Municipal Wastewater
Company is preparing a comprehensive Sludge Management Plan for all wastewater treatment
sludge generated in Ningbo Municipality area.
Rates of waste generation in Hangzhou, and therefore potential deposition at the Tianziling
landfill site, will increase due to population growth and increases in the wastes collection service
area. Such an increase would reduce the operating lifetime of the site, but at the same time there
are proposals to increase the current low recycling rates for waste stream components, which will
have the effect of increasing the site life. An increase in waste deposition rates may increase gas
generation rates, but the overall period of gas generation at the site should be largely unaltered in
view of the fixed capacity of the site.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The need for centralisation of wastewater treatment at Jiangdongnan in terms of cost and
environmental advantages has not as yet been suitably demonstrated. Localised wastewater
treatment at Cicheng and Dongqian Lake has potentially greater residual water quality impact
because of the lower assimilative capacity of the smaller potential receiving watercourses.
However, the wastewater is entirely of domestic origin and there may be opportunities for
beneficial use of the sludge. Investigations into these issues are ongoing
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Compliance with the Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Programs, Resettlement
Action Plans, and Resettlement Policy Framework will be monitored by independent institutions that will be
hired under the project management
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The participatory approach for the resettlement aspects of the project, particularly those associated with
inner-city redevelopment will be dealt with in RAP, following closely the China and Bank procedures and
guidelines. Tourism development by its nature require consultation and participation of the local
communities, businesses and civil society institutions at large. The development of the tourism strategies in
Shaoxing and Ningbo and the preparation of tourist master plans will be carried in a participatory
approach.



5
ISDS
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[ S 52. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/25/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/25/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 1/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             1/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/15/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Wiebe Moes                                  01/07/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Anil H. Somani/Person/World Bank       01/17/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Daniel R. Gibson/Person/World Bank     01/28/2003



6
ISDS
Approved by:                  Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                         01/30/2003
Sector Manager/Director       Keshav Varma                               01/10/2003



