25322
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA                                   Project ID: P075728
Project: Guangdong Pearl River Delta Urban       Task Team Leader: Thomas L. Zearley
Environment Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 26, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m): 200.00
Bank Approval: May 25, 2004                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR                             Sector: Sewerage (70%); Solid waste management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  (20%); Sub-national government administration
Status: Lending                                  (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (P);
Environmental policies and institutions (P); Pollution
management and environmental health (P),
Infrastructure services for private sector development
(S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to improve the quality of the urban environment in key cities in the
Pearl River Delta (PRD), by following an integrated regional planning approach, in order to facilitate
continued economic and social development.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would support infrastructure investments as well as technical assistance and capacity
building at both provincial and city levels, as follows:
(a) Wastewater Management in Guangzhou City, would include increase in the wastewater treatment
capacity by about 400,000 m3/day in two plants, construction and rehabilitation of sewage networks to
collect wastewater generated, interception of wastewater entering creeks and rivers, and storm water
management
(b) Incentive-based Lending for Inter-Muncipal Environmental Infrastructure in PRD Municipalities
and Towns, would fund wastewater treatment and solid waste investments for groups of two or more
contiguous municipalities or towns willing to plan, construct and manage shared facilities. Candidiate
towns will be identified by appraisal, along with proposed investments, and institutional arrangements for
construction and management of the facilities.
(c) Solid Waste Management in Guangzhou City, would include investmerits in landfills and/or waste
treatment plants for disposing of solid waste in Guangzhou and neighboring towns.


﻿2
ISDS
(d) Water Qualty Monitoring and Information Systems, would include a range of laboratory and field
equipment (including automatic water quality recorders) and development of MIS to measure water
quality in rivers in the PRD, and to enhance the capacity of the Provincial Environmental Protection
Bureau to improve its efficiency and effectiveness for pollution control.
(e) Technical Assistance and Capacity Building, would include (i) project implementation support for
detailed design and construction supervision; (ii) launch of a public awareness campaign to inform
citizens about the government's plans to clean up the river system, water quality objectives, and potential
benefits and citizen support to detect and report polluters; (iii) strategic studies for urban development,
water resource and environment management, wastewater and storm run-off management, agricultural
and animal waste management, private-private partnerships in funding and managing environmental
infrastructure, and financial policies and instruments for mobilizing long-term resources for
environmental investments; and (iv) training in urban development, wastewater, solid waste management
and water quality monitoring.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Pearl River Delta is located in the Province of Guangdong in the south of China. This province has a
land area of 178,000 sq. km., constituting 1.9% of the country's total, and a total registered population in
1999 of 73 million or 5.8% of the total China population. Based on unofficial counts, the floating population
of Guangdong, people who typically stay more than six months in the province, is estimated at between 12
and 15 million.
While the project area is generally defined as the PRD, the majority (if not all) the investments to be funded
by the Bank would be concentrated in metropolitan Guangzhou, which is the political, economic and cultural
hub of the PRD. Here is where the three major branches (Xi Jiang, Bei Jiang, and Dong Jiang) of the Pearl
River meet, and then flow into the South China sea via eight outlets forming the tributary channels within
the Delta.
Since the opening of China in 1979, the Delta region has witnessed phenomental economic growth with
average GDP rising by 14.7% on average over the period 1990-2000, the Delta has strong ties with the two
Special Adminsiration Regions of Hong Kong and Macau, and has become the major outlet for
manufactured goods to the rest of the world. Both the total population and the urbanization rate have
increased equally rapidly. During 1990-2000, the population in the PRD rose by almost 7% to nearly 40
million inhabitants, largely due to inward migration of workers seeking employment.
This rapid growth has come at a heavy environmental cost. Investment in environmental protection has not
kept pace with the rapid economic advances, which is evident in the serious deterioration in river water
quality during that period. Today many of the reaches of the Pearl River, especially in the vicinity of
Guangzhou are at Class V or worse, and therefore unfit as a drinking water source. A growing volume of
municipal, industrial and hazardous solid waste also present considerable risks to health, surface and ground
water sources in the PRD.
This deteriorating situation poses serious threat to drinking water sources, including the drinking water
supply to Guangzhou and Hong Kong. It also renders the river system unsuitable for irrigation, aguaculture
and potential recreational use. The government's strategy has been to move drinking water intakes upstream
to avoid contaminated supplies. This approach is not sustainable.


﻿3
ISDS
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                       Yes   No   S TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                               Yes *No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         Yes 0 No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes *No     CTBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                 Yes    No   *TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  Yes *No     STBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes    No   C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 S Yes *No     S TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         C Yes 0 No    S TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 S Yes * No    S TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section H - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Overall the project is expected to have considerable positive environmental impact on the PRD, through a
combination of expanded infrastructure investments, policy reforms, and capacity building and strategic
studies.
The main environmental issues that will be tackled during preparation include:
(a)    Industrial, and Non-Point Source Pollution. Treatment of municipal wastewater alone will not
meet the objective of improving water quality in the PRD river system, if complementary action is not
taken to address pollution from industry and non-point sources Industrial pollution control will be
addressed through a parallel program of the Guangdong Provincial Government (GPG) under the
Industrial Pollution Control Action Plan, which will target the worst polluters from among about 165
industries. However, the pollution load contribution from the small town and village industrial
enterprises (TVIE), of which there are many, is not strictly regulated yet. The challenge for the project
will be to develop fail safe measures to capture and treat this source of pollution. Another area is the
wastewater from agriculture and livestock farming, the impacts of which are not known. The project will
include a study of this problem and it is expected that a regulatory framework to control this source of
pollution will be formulated. The project preparation will also look at the impact of water pollution on
the aquaculture industry in the PRD, and suggest ways this problem can be mitigated.
(b)    Levels of Wastewater Treatment. The government's recommendations are for full secondary
treatment, without regard for the receiving water quality, which is often an unaffordable and unnecessary
solution. Options for least-cost wastewater treatment would be examined, due to the high cost of
secondary treatment, and the prevailing low tariffs, which grossly under-price services. Options to be
considered include: (i) interception, transmission downstream of Guangzhou city, and discharge to the


﻿4
ISDS
river, following preliminary treatment, if adequate dilution and dispersion can be achieved; and (ii) a
range of other levels of secondary treatment.
(c)    Treatment and Disposal of Sludge. The volumes of sludge generated with the installation of
increased treatment capacity will present challenges to PRD cities. Treatment and disposal of sludge in
an environmentally-safe manner will be developed as an integral part of the project. It has been reported
that Guangzhou city is about to contract a BOT operation for sludge treatment for the city. Whether the
capacity is adequate to treat the sludge generated from the proposed 400,000 m3/day plant under the
project is not known at this stage. The problem would need to be addressed for Guangzhou, and any other
cities that would decide to participate in the project.
(d)    Tunnel Spoil. If the tunneling option is adopted, there will be large quantities of excavated
material that would need to be safely disposed The EIA will address this issue and specify mitigation
measures.
Among the key social issues that may be encountered are:
(a)    Of possible concern is the affordability of improved wastewater services especially among lower
income households. This issue will be reviewed during project preparation through the "willingness to
pay survey". The results of this survey will help establish the new tariffs for wastewater services for
Guangzhou to ensure they are affordable.
(b)    The Guangzhou wastewater component will involve some resettlement of residents where the
new intercepters, sewage network pipes and landfills are to be installed. While many of the residents
will certainly benefit from receiving better accommodations and services, the relocation could impact the
social structure of these areas and possibly the economic situation of the affected persons. Following a
survey of all affected persons, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared ensuring consultations
with, and full participation of stakeholders, in accordance with the Bank's social safeguards policies and
practices. The RAP design will demonstrate that negative impacts have been mitigated as much as
possible.
(c)    The task team has proposed that the Technical Assistance component of the project include the
design and launch of a public awareness campaign to inform residents in PRD cities about the Provincial
Government's (a) investment plans to clean up the river system, (b) water quality objectives and their
potential benefits, (c) rationale and need for consumers to pay higher charges for improved infrastructure
services, and (d) what citizens can do to detect and report polluters. The details of this activity will be
more fully developed during project preparation.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not Applicable.
II.D.Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The need for a coherent and integrated regional development strategy to guide future PRD environmental
investment planning underscores the importance of the proposed project.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)


﻿5
ISDS
Both waste water and solid waste treatment options would be evaluated in the usual manner for such Bank
projects in order to acheive least-cost and optimal environmental impact solutions.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Compliance with the Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Programs, and
Resettlement Action Plans will be required.
Not applicable.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project is being designed and prepared in a participatory manner. The GPG-PMO, with its team of
international and national consultants, have held numerous consultative meetings and formal workshops
with representatives of the provincial and municipal governments to apprise them of the environmental
and development issues, and to formulate the strategic framework for addressing environmental issues in
the PRD. Similarly, these and other GPG-PMO consultants are visiting local governments to assess their
environmental investment plans and priorities and their interest in the Bank-financed project. This is all
aimed at facilitating participatory consultations, garnering stakeholder support for the project concept,
and educating these stakeholders beforehand on their roles and responsibilities in project execution.
The GPG-PMO, together with faculty and students at Zhongshan University (of Guangzhou), are carrying
out social surveys of potential beneficiaries and users of project services. These surveys will provide
information for project design by, inter alia, analyzing beneficiary demand for improved wastewater and
solid waste services, and the willingness and ability to pay for them. Special attention will be given to
ensuring that poorer households can afford services provided under the project.
The participatory approach for the resettlement aspects of the project, particularly those associated with
the construction of an expanded Guangzhou wastewater network, which will be included in the project,
will be dealt with in the RAP, following Chinese and Bank procedures and guidelines closely.
Guangzhou city has had previous experience in successfully handling resettlement on the ongoing
Bank-financed Transport Project (Ln. 4329). The most recent supervision report states that this "is a
model project for resettlement" and that the "techniques and procedures adopted are being used as
examples of good practice for other projects" The proposed project would draw upon these experiences.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SL. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements


﻿6
ISDS
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                7/18/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            6/18/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/10/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  12/1/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                7/18/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            6/18/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/10/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Thomas L Zearley                            1/06/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1- Chongwu Sun, Environment
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Chaogang Wang, Social Development
Project Safeguards Specialists 3.
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glen Morgan                             1/06/03
Sector Manager/Director.      Keshav Varma                               1/06/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
51ARc          rEOACK      51E MAP      sHOWCASE


