Report No. 23859
Report No: I065463 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA Project ID: P065463
Project: Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural Modernization Project Task Team
Leader: Sari K. Soderstrom
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 18, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASRD     Sector: AI - Irrigation & Drainage; AM - Agro-Industry
& Marketing; AY - Other Agriculture; BI - Institutional Development
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve the
livelihood of the farmers in the project areas through establishment of
integrated, sustainable and market driven agricultural production systems
focusing on productivity and high quality agricultural output. Improved
livelihood is defined as increased incomes as well as other indirectly
income generating improvements such as access to irrigation and drainage,
access to markets, and access to information and knowledge.
I.A.3. Project Description:
General. The proposed project has three main components: (i) Irrigation
and Drainage; (ii) Farm Production Improvement; and (iii) Market Systems
Development. In addition, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation is
treated as a separate component.
The proposed project includes 96 small scale irrigation schemes scattered
throughout the province, basically representing all landform features of
the province. Each sub-project comprises of an upland reservoir or weir,
diverting irrigation water into a system of lined and unlined canals
extending from the foothills to the flat irrigated areas mainly located
within river floodplain and river terraces. The proposed project also
includes improvement of existing rural (access) roads.
Irrigation and Drainage Component. The specific objectives of the
Irrigation and Drainage Component are to: (a) ensure sustainable use of
land and water resources for irrigated agriculture (including improving
irrigation water use efficiency); (b) increase agricultural productivity;
and (c) demonstrate a model of tertiary (household level) irrigation
development for agriculture modernization. The component would include:
(i) rehabilitation of existing irrigation works including diversion weirs;
main and secondary canals and drains, canal and drainage structures; and
pumping stations (works and goods); (ii) construction of tertiary
(on-farm) irrigation and drainage systems (works and goods); and (iii)
construction of access and farm roads (works). On the institutional
development side, the component would support the establishment of
Self-Managing Irrigation and Drainage Districts (SIDD) systems for the
irrigation command areas upgraded under the project to ensure more
efficient and sustainable use of land and water resources for irrigated
agriculture (technical assistance).



Farm Production Improvement Component. The specific objective of the Farm
Production Component is to support improved (i.e. higher value)
agricultural production based on irrigated and drained land, including:
(a) irrigated field crops; (b) livestock (pigs, chickens, ducks, geese);
(c) small-scale on-farm fish production; and (d) upland crops. The
Component would be targeted to the farmers who benefit from the Irrigation
and Drainage Component, and it would include the following sub-components:
(i) soil fertility improvement; (ii) farm production support, (iii)
training and extension, and (iv) support to women farmers.
Market Systems Development Component. The specific objective of the
Market System Development Component is to increase farmers' access to
markets and to ensure efficient delivery of high quality products from
producers to consumers at the lowest possible cost. The Component would
focus on activities that add value to the investments in irrigation and
drainage and in the improved agricultural production. The Component
consists of the following sub-components: (i) provision of marketing
advice; (ii) promotion of farmers' marketing groups; (iii) support to
agro-enterprises; (iv) agricultural product markets; and (v) "marketing
assistance grants" including strategic market studies, promotion of the
adoption and use of quality standards, and improvements to market
information systems.
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The objective of this
Component is to develop and strengthen the overall implementation capacity
of the various levels of project management offices and promote effective
community participation in project activities. The component includes: (a)
project management; (b) institutional strengthening of Project Management
Offices (PMOs) at provincial, prefecture/city, county and township levels
(goods and training); (c) establishment of a monitoring and evaluation
system that includes environmental and social indicators (technical
assistance and training); and (d) development of community
advisory/participation groups (technical assistance and training).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Geographic Location. The proposed project is located in 21 counties in
Jiangxi Province. (Chongnen, Nancheng, Yihuang, Chongyi, Gan, Golden
Development District, Longnan, Quannan, Shicheng, Xinfeng, Xingguo, Xunwu,
Zhanggong District, Hukou, Pengze, Wuning, Yongxiu, Dexing, Hengfeng,
Guangfeng, Yugan).
Key Environmental Characteristics. The majority of proposed project
counties (18 of 21) drain into the Poyang Lake and its wetlands through
five river systems of Gan, Fu, Xing, Rao, and Xiu that originate from the
mountainous and hilly areas to the east, south and west of the province.
Poyang Lake, the largest fresh water lake in China is located in the
northern part of Jiangxi, on the right bank of the Yangtze River. Poyang
Lake is a flow-through, seasonal lake and after a period of residence in
the lake, the lake water flow north and drain into the Yangtze River.
Proximity to Protected Areas and/or Critical Natural Habitats. In total,
55 natural reserves are established in Jiangxi Province. Based on a desk
study, it appears that four natural reserves are found to be very close to
the proposed irrigation schemes. The EIA has therefore recommended that
before any construction activity starts adjacent to such areas, the
- 2-



project proponent should contact the respective authorities at the Jiangxi
Wildlife Protection Administration Bureau of the Jiangxi Forestry
Department or their National counterparts. It has been agreed that no
project works will take place in natural reserves or within buffering
zones of natural reserves.
The table below indicates the natural reserves that are potentially close
to proposed project activities. However, since the final plans for these
activities are not finalized, the actual impact cannot be assessed. Final
sub-project designs will be amended to prevent any impacts on natural
reserves and will be reviewed by the Bank prior to implementation
Main Natural Reserves in the Project Counties
Name    Position         Area    Main Protection Object   Remarks
Taohongling
Sika (Cervus nippon kopsci) Natural Reserve      Located in the border of Huanghua,
Huangling and Dongsheng in the eastern Pengze,
E 16 40?>116 45, N, 29 48?>30 53?     4500 ha (core area 2700 ha, buffering area 7000 ha)
The southern sub-species of Cervus nippon kopsci.     National Natural Reserve. The
vegetation is mainly shrub and grass thicket in low hill woodland. Other
fauna species include Panthera pardus, Hydropotes inermis, Muntiacus
reevesi and Cuon alpinus etc. The nearest straight distance of the Fang
Lake Irrigation Area is about 1.0-1.5 km from the boundary of the
protection zone.
Yihuang South China Tiger (Panthera tigris amoyensis) Natural Reserve     Located in
Yun Mountain Range surrounding Yuyazhang Peak in the southeastern Yihuang,
E116 14?>116 17?
N27 10?>27 20?   52600 ha (core area 7000 ha)     Panthera tigris amoyensis and its
habitat Provincial Natural Reserve. The Yishui Irrigation Area could be located
inside the buffering area of this natural reserve.
Jiulian Mountain Natural Reserve         Located in the southern Longnan,
E114 27?l114 28?' N, 24 31?>24 39?     4066 ha (core area 1700 ha)     Subtropical evergreen
broad-leafed forest the wild animals in it.
Natural Reserve. The Taipingjiang Irrigation Area is partially
within the natural reserves protection zone.
Yangling Natural Reserve     Located in the northeastern Congyi E114 20?, N25 45?     1880 ha
Subtropical evergreen broad-leafed forest and the wild animals. Provincial Natural
Reserve. The Xiaojiang Irrigation Area is envisaged to be located near the
boundary of the protection zone.
Poyang Lake, Taibo and Fang Lake of Pengzhe County, Nanbei Lake Port of
Hukou County, and the lakeside beach in Yugon have become the over
wintering habitat of some rare migratory birds such as Siberian White
Crane (Grus lencogeranus), White-napped Crane (Grus vipio), Whistling Swan
(Cygnus columbianus), Acopoli (Anser albifrons), Oriental white stork
(Ciconia boycina), white spoonbill (Platalea leucorodia), and Linnacus
(Anser cygnoides). In order to prevent any negative impact of potential
noise and construction workers hunting of the birds, the EIA recommends to
halt construction work in proximity of their wintering areas during peak
periods in the months of November and December. It has also been agreed
that detailed design of the irrigation and drainage works will be carried
out so that there will be no net loss of wintering habitat for these birds
as a result from the project.
Key Social Characteristics
-3-



Socio-Economic Situation of Project Beneficiaries. The majority of the
directly targeted beneficiaries of the proposed project are farm
households which farm in poorly irrigated and drained areas, primarily
from the poorer strata of rural society. Their subsistence depends to a
high degree on rice and other food produced on the approximately one mu
(=1/15 ha) of land they have per household member. Crop production is
frequently complemented by animal husbandry activities such as raising
pigs or chickens, and off-farm employment which adds significantly to
household income. The availability of effective drainage and irrigation is
of crucial importance for the livelihood of these families since it
enables them to grow a second and third crop, to reach higher yields, and
to become engaged in the production of higher-value (cash) crops.
Other beneficiaries and stakeholders of the project are: (i) farmer
peasant families in other areas of the project counties who could benefit
from the market system development, training, applied research and
agricultural extension; (ii) employees, managers and owners of
agro-enterprises; (iii) other parts of the population (consumers of food
products); and (iv) government officials and employees in the project
counties.
Religious and Linguistic Composition. Followers of Chinese folk
religion--that amalgam of Buddhism, Taoism and ancestor reverence--are
prevalent among the population in the project areas. A small minority is
Christian. The project areas in the northern and central parts of Jiangxi
speak the Gan dialect of Han Chinese, while most of those in the southern
project counties speak Hakka, another Han Chinese dialect.
Ethnic Composition. Over 99% of all residents in the directly affected
project areas are of Han nationality; only small numbers of the Shi, Yao,
Li, and Hui minorities are resident there. The She, mostly recent migrants
from Zhejiang Province to the east, live fairly dispersed throughout the
project areas, and are basically acculturated to Han patterns. The Yao are
mostly concentrated in the southwest of the province, in the counties
abutting Guangdong, and have maintained both their residential segregation
and their Yao cultural distinctiveness. There is one significant Yao
village in the project area, Yaoshan. There the local Yao are mainly
engaged in hunting, timber felling, corn, potato and taro planting and the
collection of mountain forest products. The proposed project is paying
particular attention to this village by allocating funds for
infrastructure and small-scale loans and by providing additional support
with the help of the Provincial Women's Federation.
Social Structure in Villages. Historically, clan organizations were
ubiquitous in rural communities of Jiangxi. Today, the project areas can
be classified into three types in terms of their social structure in
accord with marriage relations, internal village organization, and the
degree of clan influence on community affairs. In some areas, the clan
elders are the key decision-makers, while in others, local entrepreneurs
or local cadre are equally important, if not more so. The project
villages will be classified according to social structure to facilitate
beneficiary participation in project implementation.
Level of Education and Health Services. As elsewhere in China, all levels
of governments are trying to achieve universal elementary school
enrollment. Nevertheless, some problems of low enrollment rates and high
drop-out rates in both junior and senior high schools remain. Medical and
public health institutions and villagers' access to medical treatment are
of on average satisfactory quality. However, many medical apparati are
outdated and women report severe gynecological problems. Most importantly,
- 4 -



fees for health services are often not affordable to farmers and other
rural dwellers.
Status of Women. The status of women in Jiangxi has improved considerably
over the last decades. Today, most women actively participate in
decision-making on major family matters. However, inequalities still
exist. Women are generally less well educated than men and if they work
outside the house, they work in relatively low-paid positions. Due to
seasonal out-migration of middle-aged men and younger (both male and
female) workers, many farm households are headed by women and a large
share of the farm work is carried out by women. This feminization of
agriculture in Jiangxi means that women make up a very large part of the
targeted beneficiaries of the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Environmental Impact Assessment. An environmental impact
assessment (EIA) of the proposed project has been carried out in parallel
with project preparation. The EIA has: (a) established a reliable
environmental baseline against which to measure future change; (b)
established environmental objectives, standards and performance
indicators; (c) identified additional environmental project
sub-components; (d) identified benefits and residual impacts or risks
(i.e. those that cannot be avoided or mitigated); (e) designed
environmental monitoring and mitigation plan with a schedule and triggers
for action; and (f) provided guidance to more detailed planning and
implementation.
The project has been categorized as a Environmental Risk Category B and
Safeguards risk category S2.    The ratings were given on the basis that
the project only involves works in existing schemes and mainly involves
rehabilitation of these works. This category is consistent with guidance
given in GP 4.01 Annex 1(b) and is consistent with recent practice in the
East Asia Region on projects of similar scope. Adverse impacts, if any,
are expected to be localized. Environmental issues which may be
encountered under the project can be managed with known mitigation
measures which are defined in the Environmental Management Plan.
Anticipated Environmental Impacts. The environmental analysis of the
proposed project indicates that the project would have no major direct
negative impact on the natural environment. The overall objective and
proposed design of the project suggest that the net environmental impact
of the project, if successfully implemented, will be positive and that any
negative environmental effects will not be irreversible or long-term.
The proposed project would bring environmental benefits through a more
efficient use of natural resources. Most importantly, the rehabilitation
and institutional reform of existing irrigation and drainage schemes would
lead to more efficient land use practices, reducing the incidence of
waterlogging and soil salinity, and soil erosion/mining. Other positive
impacts are expected through the farm production improvement and marketing
component, which would address issues like soil erosion, soil fertility,
nutrient leaching, and promote environmentally sustainable agricultural
production (including Integrated Pest Management) and marketing practices.
The most substantial potential negative impacts of the proposed projects
could be expected from a more intensive agricultural production that might
cause a general increase in non-point source pollution, especially from
nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) fertilizer application. The present P
levels at Poyang Lake are reaching the higher limits and increase in use
- 5 -



of such fertilizers, if not well managed, could have negative impact.
Over use of N fertilizer by the local farmers could also cause
eutriphication within major water bodies, including Poyang Lake. The
proposed project in its design will put strong emphasis on mitigating
these effects by introducing more efficient application techniques to
farmers. Most importantly, the proposed project would support integrated
pest management (IPM), including: (a) managing pests (keeping them below
economically damaging levels) rather than seeking to eradicate them; (b)
relying, to the extent possible, on non chemical measures to keep pest
populations low; and (c) selecting and applying pesticides, when they have
to be used, in a way that minimizes adverse effects on beneficial
organisms, humans, and the environment.
Other potential negative impacts include a possible increase in incidents
of schistosomiasis within the project counties in the perimeter of the
Poyang Lake and Yangtze River, and to a much smaller scale, noise or
pollution of construction sites, increased transportation under the
proposed project, and increased waste disposal from wholesale markets. To
prevent or reduce the adverse direct and indirect environmental impact of
the proposed project as identified in the EIA report, an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) has been developed to provide a plan to implement
the identified monitoring and mitigation measures. The EMP also provides
a budget estimate, manpower needs and training/capacity building
requirements in order to ensure efficient implementation of the EMP.
The EIA has been carried out by an independent local institute (Jiangxi
Provincial Environmental Protection Research Institute) who is certified
to undertake environmental impact assessments according to Chinese
regulations. A Bank contracted consultant worked closely with the EIA
team to advise them in their work. The EIA work is fully in line with the
highly participatory preparation approach of the proposed project.
An inception report including a detailed work plan and outline of the EIA
report was prepared and submitted to Provincial PMO and the Bank before
any work started. A first draft of the EIA was completed in mid September
2001 and submitted to the Bank for review. It was distributed to all
project-affected groups and other key stakeholders (as identified by the
Social Assessment team) to be used as background for project appraisal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      Yes
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      Yes
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
-6-



II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, and Pest Management: See
above. The final designs for project activities will be such that no
impact will take place on natural habitats or any cultural properties.
Cultural Property. It is possible that cultural heritage will be damaged
due to the project, the main threat being the removal of earth for
construction purposes. For this reason, a Cultural Heritage Desk Study was
carried out by the Borrower and a report issued. Based on the outcome of
this study, a full Cultural Heritage survey was determined not to be
needed for any project county or site. However, the study will be
distributed to all county project management offices and implementing
entities to raise the awareness about risks to cultural heritage under the
proposed project. Moreover, training will be provided to the construction
teams for the rehabilitation and extension of irrigation and drainage
sites to raise their awareness and teach them how to proceed in case any
items with cultural heritage significance are found.
Indigenous People. While the number of minorities in the project area is
very small, some Shi, Li, Hui and Yao do reside there . Given this
situation, a social assessment was carried out to learn more about and
from these minorities and to recommend to the Borrower and the Bank as to
whether a minorities-targeting development plan needed to be devised. It
was determined that current conditions for the "Shi" nationality and the
"Yao" nationality warranted such a Multi-Nationalities Development Plan
(MNDP) as the appropriate approach for the application of OD 4.20 to the
project to ensure that indigenous people benefit from development projects
and to avoid or mitigate potentially adverse effects on indigenous people
caused by Project activities. A draft MNDP has been submitted to the Bank
for review.
Involuntary Resettlement. Some project activities such as construction of
roads, canals, and market places might make unavoidable the permanent or
temporary acquisition of land that is used by individual farm households
or communities. Although at the time of project pre-appraisal no such land
acquisition (or any kind of involuntary resettlement) was identified, a
Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land Acquisition has been prepared
in case such resettlement or land acquisition would occur during project
implementation. The draft Land Acquisition Framework has been submitted to
the Bank for review.
Safety of Dams. Only rehabilitation of existing reservoirs will be funded
under the project. However, about three-quarters of the irrigation
districts tentatively included for rehabilitation and construction under
the project are served by reservoirs. According to Chinese national
regulations relating to dam safety and consistent with World Bank
guidelines on Dam Safety, existing dams serving irrigation areas which
will be rehabilitated under the project would be subject to safety review
in accordance with procedures acceptable to the Bank if such dams exceed
15 meters in height or 10 meters in height and 2.5 million cubic meters in
storage capacity. These dam safety reviews, and strengthening of dams
where necessary, would be financed by counterpart (grant) funds. Safety
reviews shall be carried out prior to any irrigation rehabilitation and
construction.
Jiangxi Province has good knowledge in and capacity in implementing
project in accordance with        OP 4.37.  Jiangxi has had a number of
project including large-scale irrigation works that have triggered the
-7 -



policy.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
n/a
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
n/a
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
n/a
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Borrower is well aware of the Bank's safeguard procedures and has fully
integrated them into the project design. Monitoring of safeguard issues
has been made part of the regular monitoring activities.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The nature of the proposed project requires that it is highly community
driven in design, preparation and implementation. This bottom-up approach
was already initiated through the initial PRAs carried out in July 1999.
Moreover, beneficiaries need to be intimately involved in the design of
the various project components and activities. Therefore, during later
preparation, another round of PRAs, utilizing the fieldwork methods of
cultural anthropology and a semi-structured questionnaire survey, were
carried out as an integral part of a Social Assessment (SA) process. This
approach of SA will continue during implementation.
In order to seek local support, to increase transparency and
accountability to the public, to reach consensus with various
stakeholders, and to enhance ownership of the environmental management and
the proposed project, participation of beneficiaries and other
stakeholders was of crucial importance in the environmental assessment
process. In order to keep all beneficiaries informed, the EIA Terms of
Reference (TOR) were sent to the libraries within the affected communities
for review and comment by the interested parties. Notices were issued and
were put up on notice boards. News media including local newspapers,
television and radio were also used extensively to inform all
beneficiaries and potentially affected people within the areas of project
impact about the planned environmental study, and their input was sought
actively.
In order to "streamline" beneficiary participation in project design and
later in implementation a separate Beneficiary Participation Plan (BPP)
was prepared in close cooperation with the EIA and established the means
and mechanisms by which project beneficiaries would participate in a
meaningful way in project implementation. All consultations were
appropriately recorded.
Training and capacity building are proposed as part of the project to
enhance the Borrower's ability to implement the project in a participatory
manner. The purpose of the BPP is to describe in detail and formalize the
consultation and participation process with affected groups. As such, it
is a strategy for allowing stakeholders to influence and share control
- 8 -



over the decisions and resources that affect them. The BPP should be
viewed as a working document that is modified to reflect any changes in
the project and/or in the economic, political, and social conditions.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available    9/28/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     9/28/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available    1/2/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available    10/31/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     11/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available    9/28/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     11/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available    11/30/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     11/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available    11/30/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     11/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Sari K. Soderstrom       12/14/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Zong-Cheng Lin/Person/World Bank         12/17/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Robert D. Crooks/Person/World Bank       03/05/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Chaohua Zhang/Person/World Bank 03/08/2002
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan 03/08/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Mark D. Wilson   12/17/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-9-



