Report No. 23577
Report No: I068049 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CHINA Project ID: P068049
Project: Hubei Hydropower Devt. In Poor Areas    Task Team Leader: Barry
Trembath
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 6, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m): 125.00
Bank Approval: April 16, 2002    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASEG     Sector: PH - Hydro
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status:  Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project has three objectives: (a) expand electric power generation
capacity in Hubei in an economically and environmentally sustainable
manner in order to facilitate economic growth; (b) commercialize county
level generation companies in Hubei; and (c) contribute to poverty
alleviation efforts in poor communities in Hubei.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
1. Dongping Hydroelectric Power Station including:
a) Construction of a hydroelectric power station at Dongping, Xuan-en
County, in Hubei, including: (i) a single purpose concrete arch dam 134
meter (m) high with a crest length of 268m; (ii) an underground power
house with installed capacity of 110 (2x55) megawatts (MW); and (iii) an
associated step-up substation.
b) Carrying out of a program of institutional strengthening of Dongping
Company, including: (i) development and implementation of a financial and
management information system; and (ii) provision of training to Dongping
Company staff in project management and hydropower station operation.
c) Development of a plan for enhancement of poverty alleviation efforts in
the Dongping project area to be funded from fiscal revenues accruing to
Xuan-en County as a result of the Project.
d) Compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of approximately 3,047
affected persons.
2. Lajitan Hydroelectric Power Station including:
a) Construction of a hydroelectric power station at Lajitan, Laifeng
County, in Hubei, including: (i) a single purpose 39 m high single purpose
concrete gravity dam with a crest length of 200m; (b) a surface power
house with installed capacity of 36 (3x12) MW; and (iii) an associated
step-up substation.
b) Carrying out of a program of institutional strengthening of Lajitan
Company, including: (i) development and implementation of a financial and
management information system; and (ii) provision of training to Lajitan
Company staff in project management and hydropower station operation.
c) Development of a plan for enhancement of poverty alleviation efforts in
the Lajitan project area to be funded from fiscal revenues accruing to



Laifeng County as a result of the Project.
d) Compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of approximately 2,565
affected persons.
3. Songshuling Hydroelectric Power Station including:
a) Construction of a hydroelectric power station at Songshuling, Zhushan
County, in Hubei, including: (i) a single purpose concrete gravity dam 65m
high with a crest length of 128m; (ii) a surface power house with
installed capacity of 50 (4x12.5) MW; and (iii) an associated step-up
substation.
b) Carrying out of a program of institutional strengthening of Songshuling
Company, including: (i) development and implementation of a financial and
management information system; and (ii) provision of training to
Songshuling Company staff in project management and hydropower station
operation.
c) Development of a plan for enhancement of poverty alleviation efforts in
the Songshuling project area to be funded from fiscal revenues accruing to
Zhushan County as a result of the Project.
d) Compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of approximately 465
Affected Persons.
4. Xiakou Hydroelectric Power Station including:
a) Construction of a hydroelectric power station at Xiakou, Nanzhang
County, in Hubei, including: (i) a multi-purpose concrete arch dam 85m
high with a crest length of 195m; (ii) a surface power house with
installed capacity of 30 (2x15) MW; and ' an associated step-up substation.
b) Carrying out of a program of institutional strengthening of Xiakou
Company, including: (i) development and implementation of a financial and
management information system; and (ii) provision of training to Xiakou
Company staff in project management and hydropower station operation.
c) Development of a plan for enhancement of poverty alleviation efforts in
the Xiakou project area to be funded from fiscal revenues accruing to
Nanzhang County as a result of the Project.
d) Compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of approximately 1,043
affected persons.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Geographic Location
All four projects are located in mountainous western Hubei Province, PR
China, on tertiary or quaternary rivers that eventually drain to the
middle reach of the Yangtze River. The specific location of each project
is as follows:
I Dongping Hydropower Station - on the Zhongjian River, in Xua'nen County
I Lajitan Hydropower Station - on the Youshui River, in Laifeng County
I Songshuling Hydropower Station - on the Guandu River, in Zhushan County
I Xiakou Hydropower Station - on the Ju River, in Nanzhang County
- 2-



Key Environmental Characteristics
The four small/medium size hydropower developments will each consist of a
concrete dam, above ground or underground power house, switch yards,
ancillary facilities, and transmission lines. Because of their limited
seasonal storage they will tend to operate on base load in the wet season
and peak load in the dry season. Each project will exploit sections of
tertiary rivers that are otherwise already dammed downstream, and in the
case of Dongping, Lajitan and Xiakou, upstream as well, to generate
electricity or impound water for agriculture/municipal water supplies. The
existing dams have already had a significant impact on eliminating
migratory fish populations from the respective project areas, and reducing
the level of productivity within these remaining reaches. Due to the steep
mountainous geography of the region, the reservoirs will be long narrow
bodies of water, with relatively little inundation of valuable land. The
lower elevation valley areas in which each reservoir will be formed
provide little in the way of forest resources and, thus, little in the way
of suitable wildlife habitat. This is primarily due to the steep rocky
terrain and thin soils that support primarily woody shrubland type
vegetation. In those areas where terrain and soils are more conducive to
forest growth, decades of human habitation have resulted in native forests
being replaced by farmland, orchards, or cultivated commercial forests.
The transmission lines will primarily extend across mountainous terrain,
but will be designed and constructed so as to take advantage of
topographic features so as to minimize the need to remove vegetation.
Transmission lines will extend from substations that will be constructed
at each damsite, and connect to new substations that will be constructed
on vacant wasteland on the outskirts of existing communities.
Key Social Characteristics
The counties, within which the four hydropower stations are proposed, are
among the poorest counties in all of China.    The average annual income
for workers within the project areas ranges from 1,047 RMB in the Dongping
project area to 2,047 RMB in the Xiakou project area. By comparison, the
annual salary of urban and rural residents in more developed communities
along the Yangtze River is in the range of 4,000 RMB to 9,000 RMB, and the
net income per capita is in the range of 2,000 to 3,000 RMB.
The local economies depend primarily on agriculture. However,
agriculture productivity is limited by the high relief topography that
limits the availability of land suitable for agriculture, and generally
produces poor quality, thinly layered soils. The exception is the limited
amount of rich valley bottom paddy land, most of which has been developed
on the Quaternary River terraces and terrace fragments.
The high relief terrain conditions make road building a very costly
endeavor, which leads to these project affected areas being economically
isolated from more productive areas of Hubei Province located outside of
the mountainous western region. There are no major industrial
manufacturing enterprises within the four project areas, although there
are minor industries based on processing agriculture and forestry
products. Difficult transportation and chronic power supply shortages
combine to limit the region's productivity. The dependence on seasonal
agriculture and minor manufacturing, in turn, provides for low employment,
low average income levels and low standard of living.
-3 -



The project areas are reasonably well served by schools and basic public
health and medical services. However, for more serious medical
situations, the four project areas can provide only limited medical
support. Otherwise, people must seek medical attention outside the
region, which is difficult to do given the current economic conditions in
the project-affected areas.
Proximity to Protected Areas
There are no national or provincial parks, protected areas, or nature
preserves within the project affected areas of the four proposed
hydropower development projects.
Critical Natural Habitats
There are no critical wetland habitats. Although karst features are
found along the affected river reaches of the Dongping and Lajitan
reservoir areas, a Karst Biodiversity Assessment indicates that the karst
features do not provide critical habitat for rare or unique flora and
fauna.
Culturally/Socially Sensitive Areas
Resettlement Action Plans have been prepared, and Social Assessments
carried out, for each project. County-level surveys for cultural and
heritage resources have been carried out for each of the four project
areas. To date, no significant archaeological or heritage resources have
been identified, that could be affected by any of the projects.
Social assessments were commissioned by the Borrower to ascertain the
views of people in the project area, including members of minority
nationalities, regarding project impacts and opportunities to share in
project benefits. This process has included consultations with members of
minority nationalities, disclosure of project-related information, and a
legal assessment of minority rights. The study findings conclude that the
Tujia, Miao and Dong people in the project area do not engage in
distinctive activities or behaviors that may make them vulnerable to
disadvantage because of the project. In fact, there is a high degree of
acculturation within the local area. Those consulted, including members of
minority nationalities, reported that minority languages are not spoken
within the project area, and that there are no discernible patterns in
natural resource use, dress, appearance, cultural values or activities,
access to services, or standards of living. Those consulted consistently
indicated that official ethnic identity will be irrelevant as a
determinant of the distribution of project-related impacts, including
opportunities to share in the social and economic benefits derived from
the project
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: Project involves construction and operation of four new
hydroelectric facilities and reservoirs, as well as new transmission lines
and substations. Therefore, project has been rated as a category A
project, which requires a full Environmental Impact Assessment. At the
outset of project preparation, the Bank's Policy Safeguards Specialist
indicated that each of the four sub-projects would require a separate EIA,
- 4 -



but that a single Summary EA would be acceptable for the overall project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       Yes
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
There are three primary safeguard issues/impacts that are triggered by
the four projects. These include:
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01) - Evironmental impact
assessments (EIA) and environmental management plans (EMP) conforming to
OP4.01 have been prepared for each of the four projects. In addition, a
Karst Biodiversity Assessment was completed as a supplementary report to
the Summary EA, to evaluate the potential impacts on karst features within
the project areas, in conformance with OP4.04.     An Aquatic Ecological
Assessment of the four project affected rivers was initiated in
mid-October 2001 for completion by the end of December 2001. The most
important impacts are:
Loss of riverine aquatic environment for a distance of 32 km (Dongping),
33 km (Lajitan), 19 km (Songshuling) and 18 km (Xiakou), and replacement
with lacustrine environment;
Potential dewatering of short sections of river downstream of each dam
during dry season operations when reservoirs are being recharged;
Potential dewatering of the Luxiawan Irrigation Canal immediately
downstream of the Xiakou project;
Exposure of cut and fill slopes to the forces of erosion during
construction of the hydropower projects, roads, and resettlement villages;
Short-term impact of large construction work forces moving into rural
areas which have relatively sparse populations at present;
Some tree cutting and vegetation clearing along short sections of the
transmission line rights-of-way, where clearance distances cannot be
provided by tower siting on high points of land; and
Potential effects of noise and electro-magnetic flux (EMF) from
transmission lines and substations.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.30) - A total of 7120 people will be
- 5 -



involuntarily resettled as a result of the Hubei Hydropower Project. The
majority of persons to be resettled are rural people involved in
agriculture. A detailed resettlement program, including a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for each of the four subprojects. The
resettlement program for the overall project follows all applicable
Chinese State, Hubei Province laws and regulations, and World Bank
policies and guidelines. Procedures for handling grievances and
complaints are adequately addressed.
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37) - A Panel of Experts (POE), comprising
relevant international and national technical specialists (Cheng Kunhuang
[Chairman], Fabio Villegas, Michel Lino, Wang Xianru, Xu Ruichun, and
Chang Xiaolin), were appointed to review key technical aspects of the
project, including but not limited to: dam safety under extreme flood
conditions; engineering geology in Karst conditions; hydraulic structures
design; flood hydrology; major equipment layout and specifications;
concrete technology; and construction of dams and hydropower facilities.
The POE submitted its first report on 30 October 2000.
In its report, the POE concluded that the Dongping and Xiakou concrete
arch dams, will be located on competent rock and will have an inherently
high factor of safety in case of being overtopped by a probable maximum
flood (PMF). Further, they concluded that dam stability concerns related
to overtopping are not so critical for the the Lajitan concrete gravity
dam due to its relatively low crest height, and small reservoir volume,
which is of the same order of magnitude of the predicted PMF. The POE
also notes that the Songshuling concrete gravity dam will also hold a
relatively small reservoir, but recommend that measures to protect the dam
from overtopping be incorporated into the dam, including such things as
parapet walls close to both abutments, and relocation of gantry and other
equipment away from the dam crest. For the Xiakou dam, the POE has
recommended that the routing of the PMF be analyzed and the spillways and
dam crest designs be adjusted to facilitate potential overtopping.
Also related to the issue of the PMF, is the ability of spillway gates to
function effectively to release flood waters at all four dams. The POE
notes that there are recent examples of dams constructed to high
standards, equipped with modern gates manufactured by well reputed
manufacturers that have failed to open during extreme floods. Therefore,
the POE has recommended that the designers analyze emergency scenarios of
gates failing to open, the consequences of such events, and measures to
address this issue.
The POE notes that the Donping reservoir will be situated in a highly
karsified limestone zone in which current leakage estimates are quite high
(i.e., 1 m3/sec), and has recommended that additional analysis be carried
out to more accurately estimate the leakage rate, and design engineering
measures to reduce it, if necessary.    Likewise, the POE noted that the
Lajitan dam will be located in a moderate to highly karstic limestone
zone, in which leakage is occurring. The POE has recommended that further
investigations of the karst system be carried out, and that grout curtains
be installed to prevent seepage through the foundation and around the
abutments. For the Xiakou project, he POE has recommended that the
stability of the banks under the loads imposed by the dam be studied, and
that investigations be carried out regarding the possibility of leakage
from the reservoir towards the Xiaoxiahe River valley. Leakage is not an
issue for the Songshuling dam.
-6-



Regarding seismic stability, the POE concluded that the Songshuling
project is located fairly close to the Qingfeng Fault, an active regional
fault. Therefore, the POE has recommended a specific review of the
earthquake intensity and prediction of the risks of reservoir-induced
earthquakes. The POE indicated that the conclusions and results of the
Chinese designer's stability studies are in accordance with China's
current criteria. However, due to the close proximity to the fault,
recommendations have been made for increasing the dam's stability by
including additional structural measures in the design.
Immediately upstream of the Dongping Project, there is a large volume
historic landslide (Baijiabao Landslide) with a volume of 2.4 million m3.
The POE concluded that the stability of this landslide could have a
critical impact on dam safety. Therefore, the POE has recommended that
additional investigations be carried out to support designs of stabilizing
works necessary to guarantee the stability of the Dongping dam.
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20). On the basis of the social assessments
described above OD 4.20 does not appear to be applicable. However, this
determination will be reviewed as part of the appraisal process.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Each of the four proposed hydropower projects represents another
development in a series of existing and proposed cascade hydropower
projects on the respective river basins.    The primary cumulative impact
is the diminished length of unregulated torrented river system within the
four river basins.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The primary long term operational impact associated with the Hubei
Hydropower Project is the loss of riverine aquatic environment for a
distance of 32 km (Dongping), 33 km (Lajitan), 19 km (Songshuling) and 18
km (Xiakou), and replacement with lacustrine environment. It is not
possible to fully mitigate this type of impact.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Three viable alternatives to the proposed Hubei Hydropower Project have
been reviewed as follows: 1) do not proceed with the proposed Hubei
Hydropower Project or any of its four subprojects (the "No Action"
alternative); 2) build a single thermal generating station to provide
power to the provincial grid; and 3) construct the four hydro projects but
select different sites for locating the dams and/or generating stations.
The benefits of proceeding with the proposed hydropower project
significantly outweigh the negative consequences of adopting the 'No
Action' alternative.
A single thermal power project located somewhere in the region, which is
able to provide adequate base, shoulder and peak power to the provincial
grid, could be constructed at a lower capital cost than the four
hydropower projects combined. However, the additional operating and
-7 -



annual investment costs of the thermal plant option would be much higher
than for the hydropower alternatives, resulting in more costly electricity
on a per kilowatt hour basis. Although a regional thermal plant would
provide much needed electricity within the region, the cost to the
environment in terms of atmospheric emissions, coal ash disposal, water
quality concerns, etc., would be orders of magnitude higher than for the
hydropower alternatives.
A number of possible locations have been examined for each of the four
hydropower sites as part of the feasibility study.     The best location for
each project has been determined based on the ability to optimize power
production, and minimize environmental and socioeconomic impacts.
Considering the various project alternatives evaluated, the proposed
Hubei Hydropower Project, with its four identified sites, is the best
alternative for meeting the project objectives -- providing electricity to
the Hubei Province power grid at minimal cost to the environment;
providing economic development opportunities within the project-affected
areas; and alleviating poverty.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
To minimize the effects of peaking operations on downstream riparian
flows during the dry season, when there is no spilling, the EMP provides
that minimum releases of 30 percent of the average driest month flows
(i.e., January) to ensure the river channels downstream of the respective
power houses and upstream of major tributaries that contribute
augmentation flows, are able to sustain fish and other aquatic organisms.
This only applies to operation of the Lajitan and Songshuling projects,
since Dongping will empty to the Shuibuya reservoir, and Xiakou will
follow the existing status quo situation. However, for Xiakou, a constant
0.3 m5/s supply of water will be provided to the Juxiawan Irrigation Canal
throughout the construction and operation periods, to ensure the paddy
lands presently irrigated by the canal are not adversely affected by the
project.
With regard to environmental management during construction, each project
has identified measures for minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation of
watercourses, treating aggregate and concrete process and domestic
wastewater from the construction zone and camps, disposing of construction
debris and domestic solid waste, controlling noise and dust, locating and
constructing transmission lines so as to minimize impacts to vegetation,
and minimizing impacts of EMF on local populations during operation. The
program of environmental monitoring is adequate as is the institutional
mechanism for overseeing the environmental protection and monitoring
activities. A realistic budget for carrying out environmental management
of each project, both during construction, and later during operation, has
also been developed.
Environmental compliance of the resettlement program will be monitored by
the Project Environmental Management Office (EMO) and an external
monitoring and evaluation unit, represented by the East China
Investigation and Design Institute (ECIDI). Environmental Construction
Inspectors (ECIs) representing the Project EMO's will need to ensure the
environmental specifications are implemented effectively. Overall, the
environmental success of the resettlement program is dependent upon
development and implementation of environmental specifications. Effective
surveillance and monitoring is the key to successful implementation.
- 8 -



To ensure the environmental aspects of each project's resettlement
program are implemented effectively, a number of measures have been
identified in each project RAP. The RAPs include adequate environmental
specifications for locating, designing and constructing new resettlement
communities, including associated water, wastewater, transportation and
other infrastructure components. They also address the requirements for
reservoir clearing and sanitation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
To obtain public opinions of the project and to strengthen environmental
consciousness, four opinion and data surveys were carried out for each
project, two during the development of the initial draft EA, and two when
the draft EA was being revised to bring it into compliance with World Bank
EA standards. The questionnaires, results and analyses are fully
presented in the EA for each of the four projects.
Meetings were held with the local county peoples congresses, standing
committees and consultative committees, the media, workers associations,
farmers, and local residents. All organizations within the project
affected areas indicated strong support for the respective projects,
primarily because it is believed that the projects will contribute much
needed economic development within each of the four counties, thereby
helping to alleviate poverty.
In addition to the public consultations, project evaluation and review
meetings were also held. These were attended by design institutes,
academics, state and provincial project sponsors, local county
environmental protection bureau staff, and staff from local county
resource management agencies. The group systematically reviewed the
project environmental impacts and proposed mitigation measures. The
projects were subsequently approved by the Hubei Province Environmental
Protection Bureau, Hubei Provincial Finance Department, and State Power
Corporation.
Public disclosure of the draft EA report for each project was carried out
by providing the EA reports to the environmental protection bureau office
of each project affected county in autumn 2000. Advertisements were
placed in the local newspapers and notices broadcast on television,
inviting members of the public to review the documents and provide
comments to the project sponsors. The public disclosure activities are
fully described in the respective EAs and in the Summary EA.
In addition to the public consultation and disclosure process carried out
as part of EA preparation, public consultation was also carried out in
preparing the RAPs and as part of the Social Assessment.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[XI S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
-9-



[   S3. - No safeguard issues
[   SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              10/1/2000
Date of "in-country" disclosure          11/1/2000
Date of submission to InfoShop           1/8/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        11/14/2001
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              7/1/2000
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/1/2006
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Borrower's social assessment indicates that OD4.20 is not applicable;
however, Bank will conduct its own asssessment as part of the appraisal
process.
OP4.37: Bank procedures do not require disclosure of dam safety plans.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Barry Trembath
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Robert D. Crooks
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Chaohua Zhang
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan 1/16/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         M. Farhandi      1/15/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 10 -



