Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC221 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 6, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P069862 
Project Name: Agricultural Technology 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Juergen Voegele 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9,  
2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 100 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research 
(100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Gregory Guldin 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The objective of the project is to raise rural incomes in selected areas in China by supporting 
restructuring and modernizing agricultural production, processing and marketing through viable 
models featured by a high science and technology content, and sustainable and efficient natural 
resource use. Specifically the project will: 1) strengthen the management of agricultural 
resources particularly in resource constraint areas, 2) improve the efficiency and speed of 
transfer of agricultural technologies, 3) support the emergence, inclusiveness and sustainability 
of new institutional arrangements and 4) make research and technology development more 
demand oriented. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project is designed to pilot novel approaches for setting enabling environments for 
agricultural technology development and transfer, as well as for creating partnerships between 
technology generating institutions, private sector industrial/marketing concerns and small 
farmers for the purpose of increasing rural incomes. The project would include the following 
components: 
 
Page  2
 
 
 
1. 
  
Capacity Building for Agricultural Resource Management Strategy and Technology             
Policy in Resource Stressed Areas  
Under this component, the Project would finance the establishment of new or the 
strengthening of existing policy and strategy units to guide the sustainable management 
of agricultural resources in the four project provinces. 
 
2.    
Technology transfer and information markets and services 
Financing for this component would include the building of a set of large scale 
technology transfer markets in or near the Yangling Demonstration Zone to be used for 
exhibition and/or trade of agricultural technologies and information.  The proposed 
technology market concept builds on modern communication technologies and is 
designed to respond to farmers’ demand for new ideas, technologies and business 
opportunities. 
 
3. 
   
Promotion of Commercially Attractive Key Technologies and new institutional  
arrangements     
a) Researcher-Investor-Farmer Technologies, 
which would involve the financing of typical tripartite joint ventures with the 
objective of designing successful investment models in which researcher-investor-
farmer partnerships are tested 
b) Research-Investor Technologies, 
which would finance proposal, where companies
 
join forces with researchers 
developing and marketing desirable technologies featured by high innovations with a 
strong public interest or public goods nature (energy saving, water saving, etc.) 
c)  Targeted Technology Transfer, 
which would finance technology transfers targeting farmer groups who do not have 
adequate access to information, capital or decision making power to enable them to 
adopt technologies on their own. 
 
4.    
Public Sector Technology Support Programs  
This component is dedicated to: a) financing activities that enable the private sector to 
realize its role in commercializing innovative technologies; and b) directing public funds 
to technologies that do not appeal to the private sector, but have a clear public goods 
nature. 
 
5. 
  
Innovation Support Fund 
This fund would be available for supporting proposals in a second stage of the project 
under the components 3 and 4 above. Fund would be allocated on a competitive basis 
with a fixed share going to farmer groups and organizations. 
 
6.    
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Under this component, the Project would finance a range of training activities at all 
levels, the provision of vehicles and equipment, as well as detailed M&E activities. 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
 
D.  Project location 
(Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social 
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected 
areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
  
 
The project will be located in the Yangling Agricultural High-tech Industries Demonstration 
Zone, - China’s only nationally level agricultural high-tech development zone located some 
80km West of Xian in Shaanxi Province, and in the three provinces of Helongjiang, Hunan, and 
Anhui. 
 
Most of the project investment such as construction of technology markets and exhibition 
centers, agricultural processing facilities, or agricultural machinery or input supply facilities will 
be in the vicinity of major towns or cities within the industrial or commercial development areas 
of those towns or cities. The farm outreach (e.g. development of high quality production, 
production of agricultural raw material) will be on existing agricultural land. No new or 
additional non-agricultural land will be reclaimed for production purpose.  While the project is 
intended to address new income opportunities for the entire farming community, some 
components are specifically designed to reach poorer farmers, women or other disadvantaged 
segments of the farming population. The project activities are not located to negatively affect 
minority groups, protected areas or culturally or socially sensitive areas.          
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
The borrower and in particular the State Office of Comprehensive Agricultural Development 
(SOCAD), which is the responsible office, has extensive experiences with Bank projects and the 
applicable safeguard policies in such projects. Its institutional capacity is adequate.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The Bank requires environmental assessment (EA) of projects proposed for Bank 
financing to help ensure that they are environmentally sound and sustainable. The 
EA is expected to improve decision making on technologies . 
[
  
 ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
Several proposals if maintained under the project might contain the use of 
pesticides (e.g. the large scale plantation of triploid poplar, or greenhouse 
plantation other than organic production). Such proposals would require the 
preparation and implementation of Pest Management Plans with adequate 
mitigation measures. 
[X
 
] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
While no major resettlement is expected, a small number of people could be 
Page  4
 
 
negatively affected by proposals, which require acquisition of land or other 
permanent or temporary impacts during construction (e.g. construction of 
technology markets, technology research and demonstration facilities etc.). 
[X ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
In at least two of the project counties the presence of significant minority 
nationality population, as documented in the SA Report will invoke the Bank’s 
Safeguard policy on Indigenous Populations. Accordingly, the task team informed 
the Borrower that Multi-Ethnic Group Development Plans would need to be 
prepared by the PMOs in Heilongjiang and Hunan according to the requirements 
of the Bank’s OD 4.20 
[   ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[  
 
] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[   ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[   ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[   ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
The set of proposed project investments suggests no major environmental issues and therefore 
the project would be categorized as an Environmental Risk Category B project. This rating is 
based on the Task Teams environmental screening and stakeholders discussions with PMOs, 
companies, and farmers. An Environmental Assessment Report will be prepared before 
appraisal.  
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
Several safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are technically 
and institutionally manageable.
 A Social Assessment Teams has prepared a detailed SA report, which 
is available in Chinese and English language.
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
The borrower has been well informed about the Bank’s safeguard policies. The borrower agreed 
to make the environmental and social assessment integrated elements in the design of the project.    
 
Environmental Assessment: The project demonstrates technology transfer mechanisms and new 
organizational ways of farmer-company relationships and will be selective in the types of 
production and processing technologies. Environmentally harmful technologies and proposals 
with potentially environmentally harmful effects will be excluded. Several project components 
would have a clear positive impact, such as the production and propagation of organic 
vegetables, the Integrated Pest Management, or the Organic Food Production Advisory and 
Certification Service component. However, good practice for environmental protection needs to 
be applied
 
in all components (for example high standard water treatment facilities for the agro-
processing plants, safety measures and pollution control during construction, etc.).  The borrower 
also agreed that the responsible Environmental Protection Bureaus would check and approve 
each of the individual feasibility studies and propose environmental mitigation measures in case 
of any negative impact.      
At the current stage of project preparation the selection of individual project investment 
proposals is not concluded. The EA would design adequate mechanisms for appropriate 
environmental screening of those not yet identified proposals. 
Investments involving GMO technology would be excluded from the project.  
Some of the project proposals include the production and processing of medicinal herbs or other 
plants for the pharmaceutical or other chemical industry. All of the presented proposals aim for 
contractual arrangements with farmers to cultivate the plants on existing agricultural land.  The 
companies involved agreed that they would prepare and implement action plans to completely 
move their raw material supply away from collection towards cultivation of medicinal herbs and 
other plants. Adherence to the commitment using only cultivated products would be monitored. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement: No major resettlement is expected to become necessary under the 
project. However, a small number of people could be negatively affected by proposals, which 
require acquisition of land or other permanent or temporary impacts during construction. The 
borrower agreed that the Bank’s policy for compensation of project-affected people would be 
followed and all project-affected persons would be adequately compensated. A Policy 
Framework for Compensation, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons 
would be prepared and agreed before appraisal of the project. 
 
Social Assessment: Four focus areas for the social assessment work have been identified: i) the 
interaction of farmers and companies in the outreach models, ii) the participation of women and 
how women could meaningfully be involved in technology transfer mechanisms, iii) targeting of 
poor farmers (and minority nationalities), and iv) the effectiveness of exhibition centers and 
technology markets with an emphasis on what social groups are reached by these facilities. 
During fall 2002 an assessment was made of the efficacy of the Yangling Annual Technology 
Page  6
 
 
and Information Market Fair in promoting technology transfer to farmers and recommendations 
made for improving the process. The main objectives of this first phase social assessment were 
to: a) describe the nature of farmer interactions with local companies and Demonstration Zone 
personnel during the fair, b) analyze the strengths and weaknesses of such interactions for 
facilitating the transfer of agricultural technologies, and c) formulate draft suggestions for 
improving such interactions both during future fairs and throughout the year.  
During the summer of 2003, a full Social Assessment (SA) on all current project proposals was 
conducted by a team from Zhongshan University. The Social Assessment work revealed that the 
companies were most concerned about farmer non-delivery of contract-promised produce or 
other items, while farmers were suspicious of the promises of companies to buy their goods at 
fair prices. The need for both a grievance procedure and the good offices of the local government 
as an honest broker between the parties was highlighted, as was the need to support and raise the 
capacity of locally-generated farmers’ associations.  
 
Indigenous Populations, OD 4.20.  The task team noted that given the presence of significant 
minority nationality populations in at least two of the project counties, as documented in the SA 
Report for both Heilongjiang and Hunan that the Bank’s Safeguard policy on Indigenous 
Populations, OD 4.20, would be invoked for this project. Accordingly, the task team informed 
SOCAD that Multi-Ethnic Group Development Plans would need to be prepared by the PMOs in 
Heilongjiang and Hunan according to the requirements of the Bank’s OD 4.20. Given the nature 
of the project, where not all subproject are currently defined, the Multi-Ethnic Development 
Plans should build in procedures for identifying and consulting with ethnic minorities during 
project implementation.  
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The Social Assessment team consisting of four groups of four researchers met with provincial 
and local officials as well as company representatives and local farmers. Through the collection 
and review of local district and project documents, focus groups with company staff and farmers, 
case studies, and various Participatory Rapid Appraisal approaches, the SA team analyzed the 
potential sub-projects from the perspectives of the various stakeholders, noting their concerns 
and aspirations. The SA team’s work laid the foundation for a “Farmer Beneficiaries 
Participation Framework (FBPF)” for each component which outlines how the farmers would 
participate meaningfully in project design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation under 
each of the project components. The Frameworks will need to be revised and updated as the 
project continues to evolve. 
Participatory monitoring would be used as a tool to provide direct feed-back the interaction of 
farmers and companies in the outreach models.   
The All-China Women Federation would have members in the Project Leading Groups at all 
levels to ensure adequate integration and monitoring of gender issues in the project. 
 
Disclosure of project information will be ensured during project preparation in accordance with 
Bank guidelines and policies. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
Page  7
 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
The PCN review meeting endorsed the course of action outlined by the task team as described in 
Section III above.  It was decided to call for a safeguards review meeting soon after the PCN 
review meeting.   
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: December 5, 2003 
 
WB83848 
N:\CHINA\Agricultural Technology\AG TECH ISDS Nov6.doc 
November 6, 2003 11:51 AM
 
