INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
26506
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:                                     July 31, 2003
1. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: China                        Project ID: P071439
Project Name: Yantai IGCC             Task Team Leader: N. Berrah
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2004  Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
Estimated Board Date: December 2004   GEF amount ($m.): 15 to 18
Managing Unit:EASEG                   PCF amount ($m.):
Lending Instrument:                   Other financing amounts ($m.) by source:
Sector:                               Equity; 80
Theme:                                Domestic Loans: 322
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task
team: Bernie Baratz (Environment) and
Yuxuan Zhu (Resettlement)
B. Project Objective
The objectives of the project are to: (a) reduce China's greenhouse gas emissions and
local air pollutions from coal-fired power generation by accelerating the adoption of the
integrated gasification and combined cycle (IGCC) technology; and (b) help the Chinese
government to develop and to gradually implement a "zero CO2 emissions from coal
strategy" and plan for a pilot hydrogen production and CO2 sequestration project, as a
first, practical step to implementing such a project. The project would (a) provide
Chinese government and utility industries with full access to cutting-edge knowledge of
IGCC technology and international best practice in plant design and operation, which
would both accelerate construction and improve plant performance, thus enhancing the
technology's replication potential and prospects; (b) strengthen the design and
implementation of China's IGCC replication strategy and action plan, and thus speed and
deepen the dissemination of experience gained from constructing and operating the
Yantai plant and; (c) by modifying the plant design to facilitate CO2 sequestration, help
China to immediately develop and subsequently begin implementing a long term strategy
to gradually move towards a "power generation zero emissions" objective.
C. Project Description



The proposed project consists of the construction, commissioning, operation,
demonstration and replication of a green-field 300-400 MW IGCC plant at Yantai,
Shandong Province, and the development of a long-term strategy to gradually achieve
zero CO2 emissions from coal-fired power generation in China. The overall IGCC plant
train system would include an air separation plant for producing oxygen, an entrained
coal gasifier, a gas clean-up system to remove sulfur gases, ammonia and ash, and a
combined cycle power generation system. Other important auxiliary systems comprising
the plant would include coal grinding equipment, a pressurized coal feed system, and
associated heat exchangers to heat and cool gas streams. The State Power Grid
Company, Shandong Electric Power Group, Shandong International Investment and Trust
Co., and Yantai Power Development Company will form a Special Purpose Company to
build, operate and manage the Yantai IGCC plant. The plant would be designed to use
indigenous high sulfur, high calorific value and low ash coal.
The total project cost is estimated to be about US$420 million, of which 20% will be
financed by equity, 75% by a domestic loan and (China has requested) the balance by a
US$15-18 million GEF grant. The Chinese Government has decided bear the bulk of the
US$120 million cost difference between constructing a comparable PC plant (the least
cost option) and the IGCC plant. It has requested GEF co-financing of just: (a) the
incremental cost ($9-1 0 million) of making the design changes and increasing the
capacity of the oxygen plant, gas clean up system and other auxiliary system in order to
(i) test various types of Chinese coal and thereby facilitate future replication of IGCC
technology; and (ii) equip the plant for future hydrogen production and CO2
sequestration; (b) capacity building ($2-3 million) to provide state-of-the-art technical
assistance and training during the construction of the plant and to build-up the operational
capacity of the implementing agency to ensure successful and high efficiency operation
of the plant; (c) technology improvement to lower costs ($3 million) which will focus on
experience and knowledge dissemination and on actions that would lead to lower costs by
tapping China's low cost domestic manufacturing potential; and (d) development of a
zero emission C02 coal-fired power generation emission strategy ($1-2 million).
D. Project location
The project will be located in an existing power plant in the middle of an industrial zone
in the suburbs of Yantai City, Shandong province in China. The city is in the northern
coastal area of the Shandong Peninsula about 200 km north east of Qingdao, and about
400 km east of Jinan, the capital city of Shandong province.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity
The implementing agency led by the State Power Grid Company is very experienced in
all aspects of power system construction and management, including environmental and
social assessment and the design and implementation of appropriate environmental and
social impact mitigation plans.



The implementing agency and concerned government agencies have already collected a
considerable volume of information and data on the construction, operation and
maintenance of IGCC plants in the US and Europe.
Required consultancy services and capacity building activities are envisaged to assist the
grant recipient in completing the design of and implementing the project.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policy                               If Applicable, How Might It
Apply?
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)         Preparation of EIA.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                     No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)            No (to be confirmed during project
preparation)
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                  No
Forests (OP 4.36)                             No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                   No
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)  No (to be confirmed during
___ ___ ___ _ _   preparation)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)       No
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  NO
Environmental Assessment Category: A
LA LB O C O Fl O TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:
Safeguard Policies Classification: S2
l SI O S2 FL S3 Cl SF Cl TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard
issues and prepare to mitigate them?
Review prepared EIA. Revision of EIA if needed to meet Bank safeguard policies.
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?
Consultation and disclosure will be addressed based on the experience gained in past
power and energy projects in China.
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding
safeguards during project preparation
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
V. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                      Name                Date
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator        Name                Date
Comments
Sector Manager                         Name                Date
Comments



