ISUS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWord Frce ol Poverty
---__    =-. ---. 
: nfnShnn
,1h0vWM n,Rlakr  _
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/09/2002                                 24 A ef0
Section I - Basic Information                                          -   8-, a  200)2)
~July 0,
A Rodir Prnior )nnta
Country: CHINA                                  |Project ID: P073002
rroject: CN-Basic Education/Western Provinces   l Task Team Leader: Haisey L. Beemer
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 21, 2002  [ IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: May 15, 2003                       IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASHD                              Sector: Central government administration (1O%)'
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Primary education (90%)
[Lendi Lng in                                                  __               - __-
Staeus: Ledn                                     Thm:Cvcenaeet() par ticipJation andt
community driv (S); Gender (S); Indigenous peoples
_(P); Education for all (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To support the universal completion of nine years of quality compulsory education for poor
children in Sichuan, Gansu, Yunnan Provinces, Ningxia Hui and Gaungxi Zhaung Autonomous
I.A.3. Project Description:
Background. China is making a major transition to a socialist market economy with the intention of
becoming a middle-income country by 2020, while monitoring and promoting social development and
cohesion. To do so, China needs an education system that: (a) produces high-quality results in a flexible
manner, (b) uses resources efficiently, and (c) is sufficiently equitable to maintain social cohesion. To do
this, there needs to be (a) effective governance structures at all levels and (b) adequate resources. The
most immtediate pnriritv for the government ic to provide increase fiuntding for the poorest parts of China
to increase access to quality basic education for all of China's poorest children. The second priority is to
increase Llih eficiency of tle use of lcurlrent goveI-rnme,tL eAxpeIUILUl all IevIe. IlICradINU eicieInIclly Will
ensure that current funds are spent wisely while increasingthe quality of education. The third priority is
the introduction of more effective outcome indicators to assure the government that efficiencies have
been achieved by investments made in the system. Once effective outcomes indicators are in place and
efficiencies have been achieved, substantial increased funding for the education system can be carried
out with some assurance that increases in funding will achieve improved educational outcomes. The long
term priority is to address the substantial and widening educational disparities among regions and areas
to promote greater equality in the education system.
Not all of these priorities can be addressed by a single project but this proposed project fitsw  a



2
iSDS
program of five basic education projects supported by the World Bank and one supported by DFID which
is informed and guided by the priorities listed above. The project will introduce new ideas in the
provinces and allow the provinces to test and learn from them. It will aim at improving school efficiency
and w,a,ys of working.. The project will be focused on increased access to and completion of affordable,
quality, basic education for all boys and girls with a special focus on minorities and out of school
children. it wili require an outcome focused approacn. it will continue earlier work done Dy DO F;
and Bank-supported projects to address the constraint of inadequate financing.
Participation. Although not a direct project output, increased participation is an agreed principle.
Participation and consultation in decision making and development, increases the commitment of those
involved. The participation of parents, teachers and children is particularly important in improving both
quality and access at the local school level and the mission recommends that the project seek ways to
encouraging this All activities wniild he designed to sunnnrt eqnuia numhers of hnvo and girk in hbth the
primary and junior secondary cycles and encouraging equitable opportunities for girls and minorities
e.g. uI-linguaI curriculum Uevelopment1 an'Uc c LIUren with special learning nIUAU ICAuuU m 1,.;s
principle. The principle of inclusion should be adopted. No children should be excluded from basic
education in the participating counties.
[PROJECT COMPONENTS ARE INDICATIVE ONLY AS THIS STAGE AND ARE SUBJECT TO
CHANGE AFTER DISCUSSION WITH THE GOVERENMENT. THE PROVINCES. UK/DFID AND
OTHER RELATED PARTIES.]
Project Components. The proposed project design will be formulated around four key principles which
will nals form the hbasi nfthe nrniect noitniits Pnosihle pnrojet ctlivities are also lsted althnnoh the
details of these activities will await the participatory process of project design which will be undertaken
w:ith the? A:nistry ofIE: Eucation andAthe fi've provincial eAucation bureaus. Droject content shoulA ke
VV 1.1  L11l  1vIiII 2L I U   LIU   .LilI  a,u  LII.I V'. j ~IV zII a  .,uuaLIUI  UUIa  I  I.JIVIL3  I.I 1'
determined during the project design period and will address the main constraints to the achievement of
universal basic education. Main constraints and proposed solutions may be different in eacn
participating county.
Component I - Universal access to and completion of nine years of education. This would include such
things as: school construction and upgrading, teaching equipment, strategies for encouraging out-of
school children to enroll including incentives such as schemes to reduce the costs of education for poor
families to enable children to enroll and stay in school, etc; and improved transition arrangements from
Primary to Junior Secondary school - esneciallv for girls - with consideration for the issues related to
village and boarding schools at the junior secondary level. The project would favor the retention and
strengthening of teaching points (incomplete -r;-mar chonlcs in natura! vi!!age)C rather than b-,uilrding
dormitories for primary school aged children.
Component 11 - Qualitv. This would include; all aspects of improved teaching and learning including
training principals and teachers; the development of curricula; teaching and learning materials; and
assessment of learning outcomes. Possibilities exist for the introduction of school based development
and community involvement to improve the way that schools are managed. This component would
include measurements of achievement against the current curriculum over time.
Component III - Efficiencv and Effectivenesq This could include: better ways of exnanding and
targeting intergovernmental grant schemes to increase the amount of national and provincial level
financing available for supo.ndti InI u,.aLIUIU UUUdgets CL Lat VthcuIILny anIU Vi!!age lv ls; beLLtte ways VI
managing budgets and increasing the allocation of funds for basic education in a sustainable manner,



3
iSDS
better planning through the use of accurate data and quality, monitoring, evaluation and impact
assessment, including the use of research to inform decision making and better dissemination of lessons
learned; better ways of managing budgets and improved allocation and use of non-personnel budgets; and
increased capacity of managers to provide better services particularly in addressing the needs of the poor.
Much of the work carried out by the IDF grant-supported Education Economics Network - which
ueveiopeu education iinancing anaiyticai andu teachiiing maLer iais - will help inoI tLhie Uesign o01 t his
component. Other work on the provincial financing of basic education has been supported by ASEM
grants and the results are ready to disseminate. Consideration will be given to creating a Chinese Experts
Panel (CEP) with the responsibility to develop and lead a national discussion on issues of the underlying
costs structure of education and through workshops and seminars disseminate the work of IDF and
ASEM supported activities which focused on financing compulsory education.
Comrponent IV - Information Technology. (NOTE: Although not discussed with the MOP in any detail,
this topic was specifically raised during the recent discussions between the Bank and the Ministry of
Finance. It is also a k-ey area of concern1 of +the MO'iFn  their ongoing dilouewth bth the DFID -an
.1II i t~.   II~a~  A.~  a I ~au. ~ i I  ua.%  1I. L II%I u 1a  UIUII'.JU~ V~11,iii  LSLI LII~ '  L'l   UIL A ll
the Bank and is therefore included at this time for further discussion with the borrower.) MOE and the
project provinces are iikely to discuss expansion of tne MOE's current pians of connecting primary and
middle schools in cities and towns across the country to a distance learning network; expansion of the
current pilot which crates a virtual community of principals and teachers in remote and minority areas;
support of the State Council's "Connecting Every Village" program that would make radio and television
broadcasting available in rural communities; and using the expanding GDLN network to provide teacher
training programs and education management - especially financial management - training for provincial
and county level education authorities. However, previous Bank and other international experience in
distance education calls for great caution in develoning of such nrograms. Teacher training nrograms and
the support of teachers service are areas which have shown some success in the past and could be an
appropri-ate target for support in -his - proet.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infonnation about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be located in villages and townships in approximately 100 of the poorer counties in
Sichuan, Yunnan, Guangxi, Gansu and Ningxia. The target townships are chosen by a combination of
poverty data (i.e., per capita rural income) and reported educational attainment (i.e., net primary enrollment,
net fifth or sixth year comoletion rate. and transition rates to iunior secondarv school). As has been the case
in the four previous basic education projects in a 10 year, Bank-supportred Program to expand access to
quni;tyi eAiueatinn for China'c nnprer chidrpn this nrnPoet will hp imnpemented in areas with substantial
numbers of ethnic minorities, the scope and proportion of which will be laid out in the Social Assessment,
tthe TORn of ...c L is now being   ...use with the Minstr oEdctn.Terc will 1,_ -irtuall no
L   I~ i'J1X 01 WI1iiLii lb II0W  U'ZI11g UilbkUbbUU  WILII Lilt; IVIIIIaiL1y 0I1 t~uu%aLIUll.  1III   III UV, VII Luatiy~
negative environmental impact in that primnary school construction will be limited to sites where dilapidated
schoois now exist, or construction and repairs will be made to or on existing buildings. No asbestos is used
in the construction of Chinese schools in the poor areas and so no issues will arise from such potential
concerns. Positive environmental impact can be envisioned as the result of the expansion of primary
education which contains environmental components in the curricula and by increasing literacy rates which
generally have a positive affect on the choice of agricultural inputs used in the rural areas. There are
currently no known resettlement issues in this nroject nor are any envisioned. Some parts of the project mav
well be implemented in culturally or socially sensitive areas. However, previous basic education projects in
V- *-    I-  1  V..n. 1na. 1iA,~T,n   M e XT n e r nc. air h.,n, Aarlmcnctr,.taA th it lacnsn ,in.-
nIu.;ang, Qmgh....a;, i unnan, Inner 4 VSng-lJ5tia, N -aa, 'J--, t.Lt.. E _A  ncfrnrl flit AI i n % a._.I A
preparation procedures take into account cultural, linguistic, gender, historical issues in such ways as to



4
iSDS
enhance the learning environment. This is done by increasing the number and quality of minority language
textbooks, training more minority teachers, increase enrollments, esneciallv among girls and minorities, and
strengthen the local content in curricula so as to support ethnic minority culture.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: This project is expected to have no adverse environmental impact. Civil works will be limited in
size and scale with much of the work related to repairs and renovations to exisiting buildings. No land
acquistion is envisioned as the civil works will take place on existing school grounds.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered                            __.______.....     _   l
Policy                          I     Appicaoiilty
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes * No    C, TBD
[Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                     | O   Yes * No  C TBD|
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                             1   Y Ye  * No   )TRD I
Safety of Dams(OP/BP 4.37)                                  C O Yes * No  C TBD
Pest Mvianagement (ur 4.09)                               l     Y es w No    I TBD I
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No   C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No    C' TBD
Cultural Propertv (OP 4.11)                               I OYes * No     C TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         | 0 Yes * No    C' TBD 1
'Projects in lnternational 'YVaUtervways ( OP/BP/G t.Jr Jr 1.30)  [lUS Yes  O  :0 I TDjl
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section ll - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will be implemented in poor and rural mountainous areas with some percentage of ethnic
minoritip.' It is similar thprefnreo, tn the foiur nrPvious Bank-supnnnrtPd nrnpocts which havp hbeen
implemented (satisfactorily in all cases) or are under implementation in such provinces and autonomous
rg,uion as Xircjiar,, i1 IIL'-Ja, smir'IIaI, I1n1ner. MVongluIka, i unnain, GjuangAiu,etJUlLllUU, 'I. I ire I rsib
impacts will be positive in that an increased number of poor children, many from minority backgrounds,
will gain the literacy and numeracy skills necessary for full integration into the national economy.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Potential cumulative impacts of the project will be increased literacy and numeracy or poor rural people
which international experience demonstrates increases economic returns to agricultural work, decreases
birthrates, increases health indicators, and allows for better integration into the national economy where
skislk in standard Mandarin are required.
11.Li.I. 1c iescriue any potential long tL,ipas UUd to atLiUipad IULUV  LIVILI III LIn1h prIJec.tL area.
see I1.D.1.b. above
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



5
iSDS
During discussions of the project design with the Ministry of Education (MOE) and the project provinces,
several alternatives to nroiect components have been - and will continue to be - discussed. For instance,
in trying to minimize the distance that rural village primary school children have to walk to school (and
therefore cut dowvmn on poor enrollment and retention rates associated wvith long distans f-o.. s ls
the project plans on supporting incomplete primary schools or teaching points in natural villages rather
than dormitories in auministrative villages and township centers. This is especially important for young
girls whose parents do not like them far from home at grade one and two. Another alternative which the
project has dealt with is the best ways of overcoming the issue of poverty preventing children from going
to school. Scholarship and grant programs have been tried in the past with some success but in this
project efforts will be made instead to eliminate the school based fee structure entirely. Another example
of alternatives faced and dealt with is the language of instruction for children in minority areas. Rather
than support the mass immersion of young children into mandarin at grade one, the project will support
the use of mother tongue instruction with the inclusion of mandarin as a course rather than as a language
of instruction. This will mean increased training of minority teachers who can deal effectively both in
moLl.er tLon1igl alu iiiaiiuai 11l.
ui.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As a part of the Social Assessment process, the borrower will produce ethnic minority profiles which will
be used in the development of all work that is to focused in minority areas. The TOR for the Social
Assessment, which includes substantial participatory activities in sample villages, is being discussed now
with the borrower and will be agreed before March 15, 2002. The TOR for the Economics and Finance
Analysis has been agreed and work will start on that in mid-March 2002 and it will include a household
survey of 150 households in each of four counties in two provinces.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguar, policies, with an  -an-is- onA potentially, affted peopnl-
aai,nua LI UI  IL3 II all ~l1jl1431Ua3 Ull jJUL~ulLually U1 i~t~U FJ~Upu1.
Participatory research in poor communities wiii be particularly important in ensuring that project
design promotes the access of poor children to educational opportunity. DFID has already funded two
participatory studies that have considered the effectiveness of educational components in recent World
Bank rural poverty reduction projects and this proposed project will build on that experience.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
f 1 Si - Significant ciimiiultive and!or irreversihle imnacts; or siynific2nt technic1 and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
r[vi S2 - One or_         Aafard policies are triggereA, but effects are limitedm intheir impact and are
j/xJ OzL. %-.\Inc or moreI sa1vlguar poIsl.~ aI  L I  U~LI.J UUL LllSL OL hI llLeU Il LuS  uIJl-l 41411S
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/AnalysisiManagement Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



6
!SD-S
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
VatC  Vl % UUIIJI 31 JI hi ILsoIIfhjt
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-coUuntry" discliosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
iDate of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Tfin,-countr ydisclocsirp of anxy Nfthe aoive,p dorncments is nnt enpectedr lease exnlain whv
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Halsey L. Beemer                            5/20/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Daniel R. Gibson/Person/World Bank     6/05/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Robet D. Crooks/Person/World Bank      5/29/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Svend E. Jensby/Person/World Bank      5/29/02
Approved bv:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          6/5/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Emmanuel Y. Jimenez                         5/20/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
fArCiS      e ! FiEDsAek   , rsrrE MAP  _   SHOWCA"E



