Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC329 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 3, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P051306 
Project Name: Peace and Development 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Jairo A. Arboleda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 
2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 30 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: LCSEO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (34%);Central 
government administration (33%);Other 
social services (33%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-
conflict reconstruction (P);Other public 
sector governance (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Ann J. Glauber, Elena Correa 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
  
The proposed project is the first stage of a long-term program, whose objective  is to reduce the 
vulnerability of the population in conflict-affected regions and of internally displaced families 
returning to their place of origin. The project development objective is to support local peace and 
development initiatives in selected conflict-affected regions to build social capital, create social 
and economic opportunities among residents of poor communities, and facilitate the 
reestablishment of internally displaced families into municipalities.  
 
Indicators of project success are: (i) local stakeholders, including previously displaced families, 
increase their capacity to work together to formulate and implement social or economic 
subprojects designed to reduce poverty; (ii) local stakeholders are regularly setting their 
development priorities using support from existing state, private and non-public sector programs 
and funds; (iii) project beneficiaries increase access to services and productive assets; and (iv) 
local and regional public institutions become more responsive to citizen’s needs and priorities 
and are accountable for their actions.  
 
Baseline indicators will be established for social capital, human development, and organizational 
capacity at the project outset, and will be continuously evaluated throughout the project.  
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project components are:  
(i) 
Strengthening institutions at local and regional levels
. The objective of this component is to 
develop the capacity of local leadership among local governments, regional offices of the Red de
 
Solidaridad Social
 (RSS), grassroots organizations and members of the PRODEPAZ network to 
promote and carry out the regional peace and development program. Activities include support to 
core team, goods, learning, and TA to public and private organizations to strengthen their 
capacity  to  plan, mobilize communities, engage other stakeholders, support the strengthening of 
community organizations to assess their needs and formulate initiatives to address them, and to 
become more responsive and accountable. 
 
(ii
) Building social, environmental and economic assets
.
 This component will support 
community based  approaches for the design and implementation sub-projects which have a high 
probability of success and promote associative and solidarity schemes. The component will have 
a multisectoral and territorial approach based upon: (a) employment and income generation by 
investments in economic sectors such as agriculture, extractive sectors and services; (b) the use 
of advantages of the development potential of territorial assets such as landscape, culture and 
technology; and (c) mechanisms of social cohesion and social capital of the territories viewed as 
a shared project of the residents. The project will support investments of two types of 
beneficiaries: (i) poor farmers in a subsistence economy to help them develop towards a more 
sustainable livelihood; and (ii) market-oriented subprojects of local farmers with better capacity 
as well as small and medium commercial producers in the territory .
 
Similarly, the component 
will fund small sub-projects to improve the coverage and quality of energy, water,  basic 
education and health services.   
 
(iii) 
Support displacement prevention and the reestablishment of  displaced families
.  
This 
component will focus at the community level, supporting preventative measures against potential 
violence, and at the family level for already displaced families returning to their place of origin 
or relocating to other areas.  It will support the implementation of early warning systems, 
training of local authorities and leaders in the protection of human rights, land titling and 
protection of other assets.  For returning families, the project will support the provision of the 
kit 
agropecuario  
for food security and the integration of family members into education and health 
services. 
 
(v) 
Project management, monitoring and evaluation. 
 This component will support project 
coordination, on-going monitoring and evaluation of project activities based upon indicators 
derived during project preparation, independent evaluations of the project as well as annual 
audits, and the provision of equipment, materials and supplies to the Project Coordination Unit 
within the 
Red de Solidaridad Social. 
 
 
The  project is part of a GOC-led national effort involving other actors. The European Union is 
supporting the GOC’s strategy through the allocation of 105 million Euros for three Peace 
Laboratories (PL), the first of which was established in the Magdalena Medio region building 
upon the two Bank-financed LILs. . The PRODEPAZ network, inspired by the MM projects and 
comprised of 15 civil-society led, regional initiatives is also a partner and beneficiary. The Bank 
Page  3
 
 
offers a comparative advantage as it pioneered this intervention model in Colombia, and has 
accumulated many lessons from a global experience of CDD and conflict prevention and 
reconstruction efforts. 
The 
Red de Solidaridad Social
 will be the executor of the project through a PCU. At the local 
level  there will be project implementation units for each priority region –4 or 5- which can be 
non-governmental or mixed contracted by RSS. At the national and regional level  Oversight 
Committees will be formed with the participation of relevant public and private stakeholders.   
 
The favored approach is an APL to expand the MM experience to other regions of Colombia. 
This choice is based upon the recognition that sustainable results on the ground can be achieved 
only through a long-term commitment to support regional social and economic processes . 
Previous experience has demonstrated that operational capacity of intermediate and community 
organizations is critical to undertake development activities and to gain local respect and 
influence. The process initially requires that community organizations, local economic actors and 
local governments are prepared (i.e. have necessary capacity and trust) through undertaking 
strategic, small-scale social and economic activities. Positive results will trigger a second phase 
of medium to large projects involving several municipalities and strategic alliances between the 
communities and other civic organization, businesses, financial institutions and governments. 
The flexibility provided by an APL, within a sound program framework, is essential for this type 
of intervention.   
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project locations are not defined yet but may include municipalities in the departments of 
Cauca, Valle, Antioquia, Choco, Santander, Sucre, Córdoba, and Bolivar.  
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) EA will identify all environmental 
safeguard policies triggered and develop the framework for required action 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04)  TBD 
 
 
[x ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
). Sub-projects include productive  activities. IPM 
will be developed as part of EA. 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) TBD 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) TBD 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD  
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
An environmental and social assessment will be carried out during preparation to identify which 
social and environmental policies are likely to be triggered, and will be used to develop a 
framework outlining procedures and reporting requirements for all sub-projects that will be 
financed 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Consultations will be done as part of the social and environmental assessment. Disclosure of all 
relevant documents will be done in compliance with Bank’s Disclosure Policy. In addition, all 
safeguards will be discussed with key stakeholders during preparation. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 
