Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 1, 2003
A. Basic Project Data
I.A.1. Project Statistics
COUNTRY: Democratic Republic of Congo    PROJECT ID: P086750
PROJECT: Family and Community            MDTF GRANT AMOUNT: US$2,157,754
Reintegration of Demobilized Child Soldiers
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY: Belgian Red Cross TTL: John Elder
LOCAL AD HOC COMMITTEE DATE:
July 23, 2003
I.A.2. Project Objectives
The general objectives are to:
*  To help achieve peace through demobilization of one vulnerable group: child soldiers;
*  To help create solidarity within communities by helping them better understand problems
faced by demobilized child soldiers and how to prevent their recruitment/re-recruitment.
*  To create a permanent institutional framework to deal with child soldiers and other
vulnerable groups, that is recognized by local authorities.
The specific objective is to:
a  Reintegrate 1,600 to 2,400 demobilized child soldiers into their families and/or communities.
I.A.3. Project Description
This project will consist of three components:
1. Training of Personnel: Personnel of the Red Cross in the DRC would be trained to work
with demobilized child soldiers at transit centers (CTO - centre de transit et d'orientation) as
well as to mediate with their families and conduct sensitization activities at the community
level. This training consists of: psychosocial development and evolution of children and
child soldiers, techniques of communication and observation, mediation, active participatory
research, counseling/psycho-therapy, education activities, preparation for return to and
reintegration of child into the family and community.
2. Sensitization and Prevention: The Red Cross will undertake sensitization activities aimed at
several different groups to increase understanding of the need to better protect children, the
legal framework of child protection, and situation of child soldiers and their reintegration
back into family and community. The groups to be targeted include: government, local
authorities, communities, families, teachers and students. This component will include the
training of Red Cross volunteers on the situation of demobilized child soldiers, who are then
to monitor the situation of demobilized child soldiers and their communities and intervene
when they see children or families having trouble adapting.
3. Reintegration of demobilized child soldiers back into their families and/or communities:
CTOs (transit centers) will be opened that will have the capacity to accommodate 50
children divided between houses that can lodge 10-15 children. A "parental couple" will act
as parental substitutes in each of the houses and will undertake the daily care of the
children, in cooperation with educators, mediators, a doctor, a psychologist, guards and
chauffeurs. The children will remain in the CTO for an average of three months, during
which time their situation will be analyzed and they will be prepared to re-enter their families
and communities. This preparation will consist of a minimal education (reading, writing, etc),
psycho-social counseling, some skills-oriented training, as well as sportive and religious
activities. A file will be created for each child that includes a medical evaluation, a
psychological evaluation, level of instruction reached, family history, socio-economic
situation of the family, and the behavior of the child at the CTO. Individual plans will then be
drawn up, including being reunited with families or alternative care arrangements, individual
and family counseling needs, the amount of follow-up to be conducted once the child leaves
1



I.A.4. Projec7t Locvation
The project will take place in the Democratic Republic of Congo, in Kinshasa and in the southern
part of the Equateur region focused around Mbandaka.
B1. Check Environmental Classification A [ B [X], C [I, Fl [],TBD []
Comments:
This project is classified as an environmental classification B as it is not expected to have any
significant negative environmental or social impacts. It is classified as B as it will include some
rehabilitation of structures that will be used as transit centers for the demobilized child soldiers.
The rehabilitation will include access to safe drinking water, building of latrines, improvement of
infrastructure in and around the CTO, etc.
This project is being processed using OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery Assistance).
C.Safeguard Policies Triggered
t.C1. Table on applicability                           Yes    No    TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)              [XI     I I    I I
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                  [                 _[XI  I I
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                          [1]J[XI       I I
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                            [1]l[XI       I I
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                              [ ] J[XI      I ]I- -
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                     [1     [X]   I ]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      --II                       [XI     I [I
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                          I]    [X]     I I    _
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BPIGP 7.60)             []    [XI    [ I
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)    []    [XI     I ]
Section tl - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
II.D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not
available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
ii.D.1 a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Rehabilitation of structures to be used as transit centers will be small scale and not foreseen to
have any negative or irreversible impacts. The rehabilitation will consist of improvement of access
to safe drinking water, building of latrines, improvement of infrastructure in and around the CTO,
etc
li.D.1 b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard
policy or due to multiple project component.
None
lI.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area.
None
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thlefinal determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas
2



II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required).
None
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared as soon as
possible outlining mitigation measures for any potential negative impacts that project
interventions may have and will incorporate a screening mechanism and form. The ESMF will be
disclosed in the DRC and at the InfoShop, in accordance with procedures for projects processed
under OP 8.50.
Project implementation progress will be monitored closely at various levels, by various resource
persons, and using various tools. As the Special Project will later be absorbed in the national
demobilization and reintegration program, the borrower would benefit from early integration of
environmental/social impact indicators in its monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Belgian Red Cross has designed this project in close cooperation with Red Cross-DRC,
BUNADER (Bureau national de demobilization et de reintegration), UNICEF, Save the Children,
BICE (Bureau o nteaational Catholique de ienfance), and other NG Os working in demobilization
of child soldiers in the DRC. Decisions taken in the course of implementation will be based on
information received from and consultations with a broad range of sources that include the above
entities, as well as representatives of the communities and target groups involved.
E Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any
policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual
safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] Si. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional
risks in management of one or more safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and
are technically and institutionally manageable
SI 3. - No safeguard issues
I]SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development
or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements       Expected Date:           Actual Date.
Environmental Assessment/AnalysisIManagement Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank:           May 31, 2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure:       June 30, 2004
Date of submission to InfoShop:        June 30, 2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank:           N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure:       N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop:        N/A
3



Indigenous Peoples Development PlaniFramework:
Date of receipt by the Bank:              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure:          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop:           N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank:              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure:          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop:           N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank:              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure:          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop:           N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
N/A
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                     r                        C          7
John Elder           Date:
Project Safeguards Specialist:
Fm/ fiNina shee ,7Uvte:
Project Safeguards Specialist:    t,       \   Q(Q!/l W                       o5
Approved by:~~~~~~~ ,YvAeqDJachechi                  Date: I
Regional Safeguards Coordinator _r t/;t 
Comments                                t     >      It 
Sector Manager                                  /v'            D
Comments                                        Ct
ospeh Baah-Dwomoh Date
N/A Not Applicable.
4



