Report No. 24016
Report No: I057296 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/12/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF Project ID: P057296
Project: Emergency Multisectoral Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project
Task Team Leader: Abdelmoula M. Ghzala
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 8, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 2, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 576.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR     Sector: EY - Other Education; HC - Primary Health;
Including Reproductive Health; Chi; PY - Other Power & Energy Conversion;
TY - Other Transportation; WY - Other Water Supply & Sanitation
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Neglect, mismanagement, and damage from the war have led to the near
collapse of the infrastructure and capacity of the government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) to deliver basic services or carry
out government functions. The overall purpose of the proposed EMRRP is to
initiate the long-term process of reconstruction and economic
rehabilitation. The specific objectives of the project are to assist the
DRC to (a) start rebuilding agricultural production and enhance food
security, (b) reconstruct and rehabilitate critical infrastructure, (c)
restore essential social services and build community infrastructure, and
(d) strengthen capacity of government to formulate, implement, and manage
medium and long-term development programs.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed program will be among the first IDA-supported projects to be
implemented in the DRC since the early 1990s. The activities of the
proposed program are drawn from the large multisector program of
rehabilitation and reconstruction prepared in September 2001 by the
Ministry of Planning and Reconstruction in consultation with various
sector ministries. Components are as follows:
Component A: Subprogram A: Rehabilitation and reconstruction of critical
infrastructure. This component will finance the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of critical transportation infrastructure, electricity
services, water supplies, and urban infrastructure. It comprises five
subcomponents: transportation, roads, electricity, water supply, and urban
services and infrastructure. The transportation subcomponent will finance
activities to improve river, rail and air transportation, including
rehabilitation of ports, airports, and bridges, and purchase of equipment
for river navigation and aeronautical communications. The roads
subcomponent will support reconstruction or rehabilitation of main
highways and bridges, including highway RN1 linking six provinces to the
coastal ports. The electricity subcomponent will finance rehabilitation



of the electricity supply networks serving major cities. The water supply
subcomponent will support rehabilitation of water works in cities,
including Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Mbuji-Mayi and Boma, where water works
have badly deteriorated. The urban services and infrastructure
subcomponent will provide support to enable selected urban centers to
maintain and rehabilitate urban streets and drainage systems, control
erosion, and improve solid waste management services. Clause on solid
waste management can be removed if only a study is planned. No need to
alarm ourenvironmentalist friends unnecessarily.
Component B: Subprogram B: Agriculture and social services and community
development. The agriculture subcomponent will finance rehabilitation of
rural roads and access tracks; help establish an agricultural information
system for farmers; strengthen the operations of producers' organizations,
NGOs, and key public service providers; and support the development of a
policy framework that improves the investment climate for agriculture.
The social services and community development subcomponent will finance
essential services in health, education, and social protection. It will
also finance community development projects. Improving and expanding
health care services is the priority among the subsectors because of the
extraordinary extent to which disease is damaging the productivity and
well-being of people in the country. The strategy for these sectors is to
select modest investments with relatively quick and high impact.
Investments in community-selected projects provide a means for
rehabilitating schools and health centers that both promotes community
ownership of facilities and injects cash into the local economy.
Summaries of the elements of the social services and community development
subcomponent follow:
n Health services: assist the government (a) develop and disseminate laws
and regulations governing the health system; (b) rehabilitate and equip
health centers and other health facilities in 100 health zones; (c)
increase the number and upgrade skills of health care workers; (d)
establish central medical purchasing and distribution offices to improve
the availability of medicines and other essential medical supplies
throughout the country; (e) strengthen programs to prevent and treat the
DRC's most serious diseases, including HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis,
and sleeping sickness; and (e) provide health care services targeted to
specific groups, notably mothers, children, orphans, and victims of war.
n Education: finance the rehabilitation of primary schools; procurement of
textbooks and other school supplies and equipment; and training and
retraining courses for new and experienced teachers.
n Social protection: support pilot activities to test approaches for
designing and executing programs to assist extremely vulnerable people.
Activities may include informal and accelerated education for street
children, programs to reintegrate child soldiers into society, and
others.
n Community development subcomponent: finance small-scale projects to
improve education, health, transportation, drinking water and sanitation
services, energy supplies, environmental protection, and the delivery of
basic social and economic services. The projects will be identified,
- 2-



prepared and executed by the communities with the help of NGOs, to assure
that the projects reflect communities' priorities, and that the
communities take responsibility for maintaining the infrastructure and
services.
Component C: Development of the medium and long term sector development
strategies, capacity building and institutional reform. This component
will finance the preparation of the development strategies for the DRC's
most important sectors: agriculture, education, health, transportation
(covering all modes), water and sanitation, electricity, and social
protection. It will also cover costs of implementing sector and
institutional reforms and of building human and institutional capacity.
Finally, this component will finance the principal studies and preparatory
activities for future investment programs.
Component D: Management, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation
of the program and the IDA-financed project. This component will finance
project management, and monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of
the program and the IDA-financed project. This will involve technical
assistance, expertise, consultant services, logistical support and
equipment.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Although the project is nationwide, activities will initially be limited
to areas where security can be assured by the authorities and as confirmed
by the United Nations. It is not anticipated that project activities will
take place near protected areas or critical habitats, or near culturally
or socially sensitive areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments:
Although the project is focused on rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure, the project is classified as environmental category A
because the scale and nature of the project activities, and the potential
for resettlement, displacement, and social tensions due to the project are
significant. The project is an emergency recovery operation, processed
under OP 8.50. A full strategic environmental assessment (EA)(SEA),
including resettlement plans where relevant, will be completed within one
year of project effectiveness. The applicability of the remaining nine
Safeguard Policies will be determined during preparation of the full SEA
and subproject EAs.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      TBD
-3-



Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The environmental and social issues associated with each sector will be
identified during the development of the full SEA. Effects will be
divided into effects that occur during the initial
siting/design/construction period, and during the operational period of
each type of investment. Potential issues are noted below.
Component A: Subprogram A: Reconstruction and rehabilitation of critical
infrastructure
Transport infrastructure. Improvements of transport infrastructure are
expected to take place on existing alignments. During the preparation of
the SEA, each subproject will be scrutinized for its potential to force
the resettlement of people. Where displacement may occur, resettlement
action plans (RAPs) will be designed and submitted for IDA approval in
alignments, and resettlement is not likely to be necessary. However, this
will be verified on a case-by-case basis during the initial screening
process.accordance with OP 4.12. During the construction phase, direct
impacts may include temporary disruption of traffic, air and noise
pollution from the movement of trucks and heavy equipment, disturbance of
land associated with borrow sitespits and disposal sites, accelerated
erosion, and degradation of natural vegetation and forests. Potential
social impacts include increased risk of HIV/AIDS and other sexually
transmitted diseases at construction camps, and the need to resettle
refugees or squatters in areas affected by subprojects. Dredging may
disturb fish and other aquatic life. During the maintenance and
operations phase, potential impacts may include increased road accidents
due to higher speeds and increased traffic volume, degradation of
sensitive biological systems or protected areas, increased poaching of
wild animals for meat, and increased logging of tropical hardwood.
Electricity services. Potential environmental issues associated with the
rehabilitation of electricity services involve the siting of power
generation and distribution facilities (including proximity to populated
areas), the contamination by hazardous chemicals such as PCBs, and worker
safety. Rehabilitation of hydropower facilities may disturb flora and
fauna and affect downstream water users and ecosystems during both the
construction and operational phases of the subprojects. Social issues
associated with the rehabilitation of electricity services may arise from
the acquisition of land and loss of agricultural land in the rights of way
of distribution lines, and the presence of refugees or squatters in the
subproject areas. Other potential social impacts include an increased
risk of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases at construction
- 4 -



sites. Improper disposal of waste material during the construction and
operational phases can result in environmental contamination and threaten
human health.
Increased access to electricity may increase the prevalence of malaria in
urban and rural areas. Rehabilitated power plants will comply with World
Bank guidelines on pollution management, as described in the Pollution
Prevention and Abatement Handbook, and with internationally accepted
safety and occupational health standards.
Water supply and urban streets and drainage. Potential environmental
issues arise from the siting of water supply facilities in relation to
populated areas, need for drainage, and the potential for stagnant water
to lead to increased risk of water-borne diseases (environmental health
issues such malaria, bilharzia, and others). Solid waste management
programs need toadequately plan for appropriate sitingand protection of
disposal areas (study of alternatives) and management of waste according
to internationally acceptable standards. Potential social impacts include
the temporary or permanent displacement of homes and shops. People
involuntarily displaced will be compensated in accordance with the World
Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement (OD 4.30).
Is support for solid waste services, other than a study, included in the
program? Otherwise, no need to mention this.
Component B: Subprogram B: Agriculture and social services and community
driven development
Rehabilitation of rural roads and access tracks. Because all road
improvements are expected to be carried out on existing alignments and
focus on spot improvements, the potential for major impacts related to
land use, hydrology, and resettlement are expected to be minor. During
construction, direct impacts may include disturbance of land for borrow
sitespits and disposal sites, accelerated erosion, and degradation of the
natural vegetation. Potential social impacts include increased risk of
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases at construction camps,
and the need to resettle refugees and squatters on agricultural land being
developed by the subproject. During the maintenance and operations phase,
potential impacts include increased accidents due to higher speeds and
traffic volume, degradation of sensitive biological systems or protected
areas, increased poaching of wild animals for meat, and increased logging
of tropical hardwood.
Support to producer organizations. Potential impacts may arise from the
procurement, use, and improper storage of pesticides, fertilizers and
other chemicals to support agricultural production, although at this time
these risks are considered to be insignificant. Other impacts may arise
from unsound land management practices, such as cultivating crops on steep
slopes without taking mitigation measures. If pesticides are procured
under the project or the project stimulates use of pesticides, an
integrated pest management plan will be prepared.
Health services. Potential issues during the construction phase involve
siting of facilities (including proximity to populated areas), drainage,
provision of adequate sanitary facilities, and worker safety. During the
operational phase, improper disposal of medical waste poses risks to the
- 5-



environment and human health. Handling and disposal of medical wastes
(hospital wastes) need to be covered under a special environmental
management plan.
Education support programs. Potential issues during the construction
phase involve siting of educational facilities, including drainage,
erosion, provision of adequate water and sanitation facilities, and worker
safety. During the operational phase an important social issue is to
ensure through health education that water and sanitation facilities are
maintained and properly used. Properly designing and constructing latrine
systems will help ensure that facilities are simple to maintain and that
potential environmental health problems are minimized.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are anticipated at this time. The full SEA and
subproject EAs will provide further information on this issue, and it is
marked as "to be determined."
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Improvements in roads and other transport infrastructure may lead to
increased poaching of wild animals for meat, increased logging of tropical
hardwood, and increased clearance of forest land for agriculture and human
settlements. Improvements in roads, resulting in higher traffic speeds
and volumes, may also lead to degradation of sensitive biological systems
or protected areas, spread of HIV/AIDS, and increased injuries, deaths,
and property damage due to road accidents. Improvements in hydropower may
permanently change flows of rivers and streams, affecting downstream water
users and aquatic life.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The full SEA and subproject EAs, and RAPs where relevant, will identify
potential environmental and social impacts and measures to mitigate them,
including subproject alternatives.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Because the project is multisectoral, and not all the subprojects are
known at this time, a programmatic process for environmental and social
assessment (including screening and categorization), review, approval, and
monitoring will be put in place and implemented over the three year life
of the project. Given uncertainties regarding the location of many
subprojects, and the complexity of DRC's environmental and social
situation, this approach is designed to ensure that the selection, design
and implementation of all subprojects comply with World Bank Safeguard
Policies.
Because local capacity for environmental and social management is
currently weak,an environmental consulting firmand social consultants will
be engaged for a period of three years to manage and oversee the
Environmental and Social Management Process, while providing on-the-job
training and institutional strengthening services throughout the project
period. These This firmconsultants will work closely with the project
management firm and with BCECO, the Bank, and the implementing agencies to
- 6 -



develop procedures that will improve subproject quality and sustainability
through compliance with Safeguards, while at the same time being time and
cost-efficient.
The establishment of this process will be implemented in three broad
time-phased activities:
Activity 1: Establishment of Environmental and Social Management Process
Framework. This is a strategic or programmatic environmental
assessmentEnvironmental and Social Management Process Framework (ESMPF) is
the same as the SEA described above under which all project-related EAs
and RAPs are carried out during project implementation. The first
activity will be carried out prior to credit effectiveness and will
involve (a) public consultation on the terms of reference for the
Environmental and Social Management Process Framework (ESMPF);ESMPF; (b) a
summary review of environmental and social issues related to the concerned
sectors; (c) the formulation of standard methods and procedures specifying
how all subprojects will systematically address environmental and social
issues in the screening, siting, design, implementation, and operational
phases of the subproject lifecycle; (d) the development of an
implementation plan, including capacity building, to support the
environmental and social management activities at each stage in the
subproject cycle; (e) consultation on the draft ESMPF; (f) approval of the
ESMPF by the borrower and the Bank; (g) disclosure of the ESMPF in country
and in the Bank's InfoShop in Washington, DC. The standard procedures
will take account of the particular characteristics of each of the sectors
involved and will be embodieddescribed in the Operations Manual. The
basic principles and processes enunciated in the Operational Manual will
also be summarized in the Environmental and SocialESMPF Management Process
Framework Agreement, in which the DRC and the Bank agree to basic
environmental and social safeguard principles and procedures, and the DRC
affirms its agreement to carry out all subproject activities in accordance
with these procedures. The requirements for the implementation of the
ESMPF will be covenanted in the Development Credit Agreement.
The environmental consulting firmand social consultants will work closely
with the project management firm and with BCECO and local stakeholders to
draft the Framework Agreement. During the preparation of the ESMPF
Agreement, the firmconsultants will also work closely with the project
management firm and with BCECO to develop a preliminary calendar for
annual subproject screening and categorization, assessments,
implementation and monitoring, based on an initial estimate of subproject
flow.
Activity 2: Ongoing Subproject Assessment and Implementation. This
activity includes the carrying out of subproject EAs, which will be
carried out under the umbrella of the ESMPF. Once the Operational Manual
and ESMPF Agreement are adopted, the environmental consulting firmand
social consultants will work hand-in-hand with local counterparts to plan
and implement the Environmental and Social Management Process for the
overall project. The process will include assessing subprojects
(including screening, categorizing, and undertaking required studies),
preparing documentation, carrying out public consultation and disclosing
information, and obtaining the necessary approvals from the borrower and
the Bank depending on the category of each subproject. The programming of
- 7 -



these activities will be summarized in annual work plan reports and
updated quarterly.
For subprojects which are being designed and implemented before the ESMPF
has been finalized, a normal project EA, and RAPs where needed, will be
prepared, which will follow standard Bank Safeguard Policy procedures,
including public consultation and disclosure. These EAs and RAPs must be
approved by the borrower and the Bank.
Activity 3: Institutional Capacity Building. An important aspect of the
Environmental and Social Management Process involves institutionalizing
the procedures laid out in the Operational Manual and Framework Agreement,
and building local capacity to carry them out. To this end, the
environmental consulting firm will workconsultants closely with the
project management firm and BCECO and implementing agencies to propose
appropriate and efficient institutional arrangements for management of
environmental and social issues. In support of these efforts, and in
conjunction with the program of consultation and participation, the
firmconsultants will provide on-the-job training and conduct in-country
workshops for staff of the project management firm and BCECO and
implementing agencies, members of local communities, and others.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include government officials at the national, provincial,
and local levels; NGOs; civil society groups; communities; and bilateral
and multilateral donors. All these groups have been consulted during
preparation of the project to ensure that potential concerns are
identified and addressed prior to the start of implementation.
During the first year of project implementation, the government with the
assistance of the environmental consulting firm will conduct a series of
public consultations and meetings in Kinshasa and other parts of the
country on (a) the terms of reference and draft reports for the ESMPF (the
ESMPF is the most important part of the full EA) and EAssame as the SEA
mentioned above) and EAs and RAPs of subprojects classified as
environmental category A; and on (b) draft EAs for subprojects classified
as environmental category B. These meetings will include representatives
of implementing agencies, local communities, NGOs, affected groups, and
other stakeholders to assure a wide range of views is heard.
The minutes of the public meetings will be included in the EA reports.
Following approval by the borrower and the Bank, the full EASEA or ESMPF,
and associated resettlement documents, will be disclosed to the public in
the DRC and submitted to the Bank's InfoShop in Washington, DC. It will
be made available in the Bank's InfoShop no later than one year after
credit effectiveness.
In addition, the consulting firmenvironmental and social consultants will
work with the project managers to design a communications and
participation plan for the overall project. The plan will lay out the
subproject scoping and consultation process to be followed throughout the
period the project is being implemented. It will include information on
the broad approach; the substantive issues to be discussed with elected
- 8-



officials, NGOs, community groups, and other stakeholders; and the
frequency of discussions.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[XI S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      5/1/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure 6/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop   7/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        7/1/2003
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. Not applicable.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Abdelmoula M. Ghzala     04/04/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank      04/10/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank
04/10/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     04/10/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard      04/04/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-9-



