                           Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                            Report No: AC43
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF                   Project ID: P081850
Project: Emergency Economic and Social Reunification     Task Team Leader: Xavier Devictor
Suport Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 2, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 7, 2003                           IDA Amount ($m): 148.00
Managing Unit: AFC09                                     Sector: General education sector (20%); General
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL)        energy sector (20%); Health (20%); General
Status: Lending                                          transportation sector (20%); General water,
                                                         sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
                                                         Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
                                                         reconstruction (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):


The ultimate aim of the Emergency Economic and Social Reunification Support Project
(Emergency Reunification Project) is to assist the Government in facing some of the key
challenges associated with the process of economic and social reunification. Such support is
critical to help mitigate the ongoing social and humanitarian crisis and to facilitate the continued
implementation of the economic reform program ­ and hence to contribute to the stabilization of
DRC.

In view of the Government's response to the reunification challenge, of the joint donor approach,
and as part of the overall Bank strategy in DRC, the specific objectives of the Emergency
Reunification Project are three-fold:

·       Help restore a sound economic governance system throughout the country, by providing
the type of expertise and financial resources needed to ensure a satisfactory reunification of key
institutions and the implementation of key economic reforms throughout the country;

·       Complement actions currently underway to address urgent needs, alleviate the suffering
of Congolese people, and generate quick "peace dividends" which could contribute to the
stabilization of the country, by financing rehabilitation activities in those parts of the country
where no major economic assistance program is under implementation yet; and

·       Prepare for the rapid extension of the Emergency Multi-sector Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Program to all parts of the country, in particular by piloting implementation
solutions designed to deliver results with efficiency and transparency in areas administered by
rebel movements and overcome the existing capacity constraints.

The design of the Project builds on, and reflects lessons learned from, similar activities

                                                     2
                                                                                                    ISDS

undertaken over the last two years in Government-controlled areas (through the Emergency Early
Recovery Project, EERP, and the Emergency Multi-sector Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
Project, EMRRP).

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):


The Project will include five components:

·       Two components directly aimed at supporting implementation of economic reforms
throughout the country ­ a Balance of Payment Support Component and an Institutional
Strengthening Component; these components are expected to be complementary to each other,
and to be implemented in close coordination with other activities aimed at supporting the
country-wide economic reform process.

·       Three components aimed at both addressing urgent needs and activating
implementation mechanisms for rehabilitation activities in areas administered by rebel
movements ­ to prepare for the eventual extension of the EMRRP; these components will aim to
meet a large variety of needs and will in particular distinguish between three different to types of
activities: (i) rehabilitation of large infrastructure, in particular transport infrastructure; (ii)
rehabilitation of urban infrastructure in selected cities; and (iii) provision of assistance to isolated
rural communities, where no service provider has been active in years or decades.

Component 1: Balance of Payment Support. Under Component A, the Emergency
Reunification Project will provide the Government with balance of payments support to finance
the short-term gap associated with reunification. The design of this support will aim to support
the extension of key structural reforms to the newly-reunified territories ­ e.g., by taking steps to
ensure that implementation of the investment, mining, and forestry codes in newly-reunified
areas catches up with implementation in Government-controlled regions. It is expected that
support will be disbursed in one tranche.

Component 2: Technical expertise and capacity building. Building on the successful
experience of the EERP, currently under implementation in DRC, the Project will finance the
provision of technical assistance and capacity building to facilitate the economic and social
reunification of the country and the pursuit of economic reforms. Specific areas will include: (i)
strengthening capacity in key institutions, in particular at the provincial and local levels
(including utilities, and institutions dealing with health care, roads, urban development, and
community driven development); (ii) assisting the Government in revenue mobilization and
public expenditure management, in particular in those areas affected by the reunification process;
(iii) ensuring implementation of forestry reforms throughout the country; and (iv) carrying out
engineering studies to prepare for the extension of the priority EMRRP to the entire country.

Component 3: Infrastructure rehabilitation. This component will finance one or two
rehabilitation projects for the rehabilitation of selected key infrastructure. Projects will be
selected on the basis of several criteria: (i) have a substantial impact on reunification (e.g., by
re-linking provinces); (ii) consist in repairs and rehabilitation, and not include new construction;

                                                    3
                                                                                                ISDS

(iii) be simple so that they can be implemented within a relatively short period of time; and (iv)
ensure a satisfactory cost-benefit ratio. This will typically correspond to a major road connecting
urban centers within rebel-held areas or across former frontlines.

Component 4: Urban rehabilitation. This component will finance small-scale infrastructure
repair and economic revitalization activities with a particular focus on labor-intensive activities.
It will build on the experience acquired through implementation of the EERP and the EMRRP,
and in particular be based on existing mechanisms and procedures for similar activities
implemented in Government-controlled areas under the Bureau Central de Coordination
(BceCo). The strategy is to select modest investments, including in the transport, utilities, and
social service sectors, which can be effectively implemented within a relative short period of
time, and are expected to have a quick and high impact, and include a substantial labor
component.

Component 5: Community empowerment. This component will finance block grants to villages
of US$2,000 to US$5,000 to finance priorities identified through a consultative process by the
community. It will build on lessons learned through the successful implementation of similar
activities in other post-conflict countries, in particular East Timor and Afghanistan. Any activity
identified as a priority (but for a negative list) will be eligible for financing, and no mandatory
counterpart will be required from the community. Funds will be held in collective accounts, and
disbursed on the basis of contracts or purchases ­ they will be managed directly by the
community. The component will be facilitated by an NGO, to help villages prepare and manage
these activities. It aims to both ensure that resources flow directly to communities and to build
some capacity at local level to prepare for an eventual decentralization process, in line with the
work currently underway under the Public Expenditure Review. The component will initially be
implemented in selected pilot areas, representing a diversity of situations, with a focus on rural
areas in the provinces most affected by the conflict.

Table: Emergency Economic and Social Reunification Support Project Costs

                                                                   IDA         Percent of
                                                                   (US$           total
                                                                 million)
 A. Supporting implementation of economic reforms
 throughout the country
- Balance of Payment Support                                        40                19.6
- Technical expertise and capacity building                         15                 7.4
B. Addressing urgent needs and piloting
implementation solutions
- Infrastructure rehabilitation                                      90               44.1
- Employment generation                                              30               14.7
- Community empowerment                                             10                 4.9
- Implementation costs                                               5                 2.4
 - Contingencies                                                    14               6.9
TOTAL PROJECT COSTS                                                 204              100.0

                                                        4
                                                                                                     ISDS




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Components 1 and 2 are not expected to be geographically localized.

Component 3 is expected to finance the de-bottlenecking (through minimal rehabilitation and no
realignment) of the existing (non-covered) road Kisangani - Beni and the existing (non-covered) Bukavu -
Mbuji Mayi road in order to make them passable. It will also provide resources for a supplemental to the
existing contract for the rehabilitation of the Matadi - Kinshasa road, to complete works already launched;

Component 4 will be implemented in selected cities, which are expected to include Bukavu, Goma, Kindu,
and Kisangani (with an expected focus on urban streets, drainage, and education / health facilities
rehabilitation);

Component 5 will be implemented in pilot areas, which are expected to include the districts of Gemena,
Isiro, and Masisi.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:

The Emergency Reunification Project is classified as environmental category B because activities financed
under the Project are not expected to have significant negative environmental impacts. No new major
construction is envisaged (rather, the Project will support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
deteriorated infrastructure).

The Emergency Reunification Project is an emergency recovery operation, processed under OP 8.50. A full
environmental assessment will be completed within one year of effectiveness.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management

                                                      5
                                                                                                      ISDS

D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01). Activities financed under Components 3, 4, and
   5 are expected to include some rehabilitation activities, in particular infrastructure repairs. These
   activities, however, are expected to remain limited in nature and scope, with a screening out of all
   activities with a potential negative impact and no adequate mitigation measures. Activities financed
   under Components 1 and 2 are not expected to have any significant environmental impact (see below for
   forestry). Safeguard policy 4.01 on environmental assessment safeguards is triggered.

Natural Habitats (OP4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04). Activities in natural habitats will be screened out from
   Components 4 and 5. Activities under Component 3 are not expected to have an impact on natural
   habitats.

Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36). The support to implementation of economic reforms will include assistance in
   implementing forestry reforms throughout the country. These reforms, which have been developed with
   the assistance of the Bank, are already implemented in Government-held territories - with significant
   achievements (including a provision for re-distribution of 40% of forest fees to local communities, and
   the effective cancellation of 24 millions hectares of invalid concessions). The Project aims to extend the
   implementation of such measures to the rest of the country. It is not aimed at changing forestry policies,
   but rather at implementing changes already supported through earlier operations (in particular the
   Economic Recovery Credit). The safeguard on forestry is triggered.

Pest Management (OP 4.09). The Project is not expected to finance pesticides or activities which could
   have affect agricultural or public health.

Cultural Property (OPN 11.03). The Project is not expected to affect any cultural property. Activities
   under Components 4 and 5 which could have a negative impact on cultural property will be screened out
   during the selection process.

Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.20). The Project is not expected to include activities in areas inhabited by indi-
   genous peoples.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Some activities financed under Components 3 and 4 may require
   the resettlement of limited groups of people. Involuntary resettlement safeguard is therefore triggered.

Safety of Dams (OP4.37, BP 4.37). The Project does not include the financing of dams, or dam-related
   activities.

Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50). No activity financed under the Project is
   expected to be located in international waters.

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60). No activity financed under the Project is expected
   to be located in disputed areas.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or

                                                      6
                                                                                                      ISDS

due to multiple project component.

Project components are implemented in distinct areas and there is therefore no expected cumulative impact.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

The long term environmental impact of the rehabilitation of infrastructure and the revival of economic
activity on the environment is not expected to be significant. In addition, the Project will contribute to
stabilizing the situation after a conflict which has caused large population movements, with significant
environmental consequences.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

Compliance with safeguards for activities financed under Component 3 will require that a Social and
Environmental Assessment be carried out early on, so that, to the extent possible, its recommendations
can be incorporated in the design of the civil works contract(s). The Social and Environmental
Assessment may result in identifying affected people - and if that is the case a Resettlement Action Plan
will be prepared. Ideally, the assessment teams would work in parallel with the team responsible for
technical design.

Compliance with safeguards for activities financed under Components 4 and 5 will require: (i) a
screening out of proposed activities which would not be consistent with Bank policies; and (ii) a
definition of adequate processes and procedures to design and implement sound environmental and social
mitigation measures for environmental and involuntary resettlement issues. This is expected to be
achieved through the preparation of en Environmental and Social Management Framework and a
Resettlement Policy Framework, which will define both screening criteria and mechanisms for
mitigation. The Frameworks will be reflected in the Operational Manual (which will be based on
Operational Manuals currently used under the EERP and EMRRP) as soon as available.

Compliance with safeguards for activities financed under Components 1 and 2 will not require any
specific action.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders will be the communities living in pilot areas and in areas along the infrastructure to be
rehabilitated under Component 3. Consultation and disclosure mechanisms are expected to be part of the
recommendations under the Social and Environmental Assessments for Component 3, and of the
Operational Manuals to be prepared by the respective implementation agencies for Components 4 and 5.
Disclosure of an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy
Framework will be in-country and in the Bank's InfoShop in Washington, DC as soon as available and at
the latest, within a year of effectiveness.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

                                                    7
                                                                                                      ISDS


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              8/31/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/30/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              8/31/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/30/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                                 Date
Task Team Leader:                    Xavier Devictor                                      04/22/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank            04/22/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank                  04/22/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                                 Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                                     04/22/2003
Sector Manager                       Cadman Atta Mills                                    04/22/2003

