24961
Draft Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet               August 6, 2002
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 6, 2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
COUNTRY: Costa Rica                             PROJECT ID: 76421
PROJECT: PCF Umbrella Project                   TTL: Guillermo Ruan
APPRAISAL DATE: June 3, 2002                    IBRD AMOUNT ($m): [2.5 from PCF]
BOARD DATE: n/a                                IDA AMOUNT ($m):
MANAGING UNIT: LCSFP                            SECTOR:
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: PCF                        STATUS:
Project Objectives (From PDS)
The objective of the Umbrella Project is to support development of the international market mechanism for
the new commodity known as "Emission Reductions" (ER), developed in the framework of the Kyoto
Protocol. In this particular case, the project will function as an umbrella to facilitate the implementation of
several subprojects in Costa Rica of which three (two?) are presented for approval at this time. The
subprojects produce reductions of C02 emissions through substituting electricity produced by thermal
plants with electricity from renewable sources.



Project Description (From PDS)
The proposed Umbrella Project will allow the PCF to provide funding for renewable energy sub-projects..
The following paragraphs contain are short descriptions of the initial sub-projects that will be included in
the approval of the umbrella project.
Cote Hydroelectric Project
The Cote Hydroelectric Project (CHP) will generate 6.3 MW using water from the Cote Lake. It was
developed by CNFL,;as part of an overall development plan to increase its installed generation capacity to a
total of 140 MW over 10 years. CHP will be constructed for CNFL by a group of private firms, the
Consorcio Brasilefio-Colombiano HidroCote, under a supervised turn-key contract. Consorcio HidroCote is
a consortium of the Colombian firm, Gomez Cajiao y Asociados S.A. (design), and by the Brazilian firms
Toshiba Do Brasil S.A. (electrical-mechanical equipment) and Termotecnica Coindustrial S.A.
(construction).
The CHP takes advantage of the infrastructure already installed to divert water from Cote Lake to the ICE
Arenal Reserv6ir. In 1982, ICE constructed a dam on the Cote River (the natural drain from the lake)
converting the lake into a regulation reservoir. The existing water intake structure, tunnel and dam will be
used by the project, although some modifications will be undertaken. New structures include a cap on the
dam to increase its height by I m, an open canal, an additional tunnel, a pressure pipe, a forebay, a
powerhouse containing a 6.3 MW Francis turbine, a substation located next to the powerhouse and sluice
leading to the Rugama Creek. The powerhouse and substation will occupy an area of 18.5 ha. on land
already highly altered from the Arenal Hydroelectric project. Water from the power house will be returned
to the Rugama Creek for its ultimate discharge into the Arenal Reservoir.
The total emission reductions from Cote subproject for the maximum allowed crediting period of 21 years
are estimated at 182,300 mtCO2e.
Vara Blanca Wind Power Project
The Vara Blanca Eolic Project (VBEP) is an initiative of ESPH and the Belgian company Turbowinds,
which jointly will develop the project. The project includes within its scheme the construction of 16 aerial
generators of Turbowinds technology T-600-48 of 600 KW for a total of 9.6 MW (between 20 ahd 22 GWh
per year), with an area of influence of about 10 ha. A transmission line located along an existing public
road which runs parallel to the existent distribution line, will allow the dispatch of the energy produced to
the sub-station of ESPH in the center of the City of Heredia.
The technical studies have been completed. The studies indicate that the average wind speed at the site is
approximately 7.14 m/s; and that there are no seismic or geologic problems.
The total emission reductions from Vara Blanca subproject for the maximum allowed crediting period of 21
years are estimated at 328,800 mtCO2e.
Chorotega Wind Power Project
The Chorotega Eolic Project (CHEP) is an initiative of Coopeguanacaste and the Belgian company
Turbowinds, which jointly will develop the project in order to supply the increasing demand of
Coopeguanacaste's zone. The project includes within its scheme the construction of 14 aerial generators of
Turbowinds technology T 600-48 of 600 KW for a total of 8.4 MW. Its area of influence is approximately
35 hectares, to be accessed by 2.5 km of road.
The construction of 3 km of transmission line will enable linking-the site to the a substation at Santa Cruz.
The location was chosen after careful consideration of the economic, geophysical, environmental and
settlement characteristics of the area. The 2-year mean wind speed is 6 m/s. The land owners (Finca
Chorotega) will transfer the land to the project and the area will be put under a forestry management
program.
The total emission reductions from Chorotega subproject for the maximum allowed crediting period of 21
years are estimated at 303,000 mtCO2e.



Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of the
area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The subprojects will be located all over Costa Rica. Details of their environmental and social characteristics will be
described in the environmental summary reports for each subproject, to be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.
B. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [ x], C [ ], Fl [ ], TBD [ ]
Comments: Whereas the environmental impacts of wind energy projects are expected to be minimal (e.g.,
utilizing existing access roads, transmission lines, intervened lands), to address some of the environmental
issues potentially associated with any potential sub-projects, especially run-of-river or hourly storage small
hydropower, the following determinations were agreed with OCIC:
(i) the project will not purchase ERs from renewable energy sub-projects located within national parks nor
biological reserves; (ii) the project will not purchase ERs from renewable energy subprojects located within
an indigenous reserve or from any renewable energy subprojects that adversely affect indigenous
communities or their territories; (iii) given the potential impacts and special design complexities of dams
that are 10 meters or more in height, the project will not purchase ERs from hydropower projects of this
size; and (iv) the project will not purchase ERs from small hydropower projects which are between 5-10
meters and have a reservoir volume of more than 3 million cubic meters. Consideri'ng that involuntary
resettlement may cause severe long-term hardship, impoverishment, and environmental damage, any
proposed project which involves involuntary resettlement as defined by World Bank Operational Policy
4.12, will not be considered. Given these screening criteria, only category B subprojects will be
considered.
C. Applicability of Safeguard Policies (from PDS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
Yes     No      TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                        [x]     [] [I    I
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                           []      [x] [I   I
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   [x     I[      [1 I
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                     [       [x ]   [I 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       [ ]   L[x I    [ I
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                            [I]      [x I    [ I
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                    [       [x1]   I] 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                   [        XI [x]  [ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                     []      [x I    [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                     [x ]   [ ]
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, describe
steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
In relation to the environmental issues associated with renewable energy sub-projects in Costa Rica,
particularly small hydropower, the SEA has determined that: (i) MINAE, and in particularly the National
Environmental Technical Secretariat (SETENA) has had difficulty to evaluate and monitor the
implementation of hydropower projects, due to inadequate staffing and technical and financial capacity to
properly analyze the Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) submitted for such projects, and to carry
out field supervisions of project implementation after the license is given; (ii) there are currently no clear
guidelines that could be used by private developers regarding the potential environmental impacts of such
projects, especially small hydropower, both during construction and operation phases; and, (iii) the public
consultation process in the context of preparation of EIAs is frequently not implemented nor enforced as
established by Costa Rican EIA legislation.
2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Describe any
potential cumulative or long term impacts.
None are expected.
3. In light of I and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a
4. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The ElAs for hydropower must address the most pertinent issues as enumerated in the SEA, including
impacts due to design, construction and operation: i) on river basin management, including impacts on
hydrology, water rights, possible international water issues; ii) on aquatic vegetation; iii) on terrestrial
ecosystems; and iv) cultural heritage. Further, the EIA should include: i) a vulnerability assessment
(seismic and volcanic activity, landslides, soil liquification, earthquakes, etc.); ii) a description of public
consultation and development of adequate compensation measures; and, iii) an Indigenous People's
Development Plan, where appropriate.
Each individual subproject has undertaken an environmental assessment, following both national guidelines
and the above-outlined Bank-specific framework. The ElAs were submitted both to SETENA in order to
get the environmental license, and to the Bank. Both SETENA and the Bank reviewed the ElAs and EMPs
and made recommendations for inclusion in the final version. Future subprojects will follow a similar EIA
approach.
Each subproject has developed or will develop an EMP, addressing all environmental and social issues that
came out of the SEA, SA and EIA processes. The activities in the EMP include design recommendations,
mitigation and prevention activities during construction and operation, and roles, responsibilities and
budget for monitoring.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The overall project has been discussed with the government (MINAE, ICE) and well as NGOs (Center for
Tropical Studies, Grupo Yiski) and local stakeholder groups in each project area. The stakeholder
consultations for each subproject are described in the EIA summaries.
E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis
of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggeied the provisions of
that policy apply.
[ ] S,. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[x I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.



F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   10/31/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure               different for each subproject
Date of submission to InfoShop                5/15/2002
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by:                                      -2
Task Team Leader:                             Eduardo Zolezz        ate: September 13, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:              Kirsten Oleson        ate: August 6, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:              Name          7        Date:
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:              Name                   Date:
Approved by:                                                                 - 3_
Regional Safeguards Coordinator               Juan Quintero'&        Date
Sector Manager                                Danny Leipziger        Date O -      6 ' 



