Report No. 23983
Report No: I037583 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: COTE D'IVOIRE Project ID: P037583
Project: NATIONAL PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PROGRAM       Task Team Leader:
Jean-Michel G. Pavy
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 4, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 14, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 10.00
Managing Unit: AFTES     Sector: VI - Environmental Institutions; VM - Natural
Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)          Status: 2Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The first phase Project Development Objective (PDO) is that the new
management framework has improved conservation and use of national parks
and reserves. The Project Global Objective (PGO) is that Biodiversity
trends are reversed in priority protected areas.
In order to reach the PDO and PGO, four main Outputs have been defined:
A Output 1: The national legal, institutional, technical and awareness
framework is strengthened
A Output 2: The National Office of Parks & Reserves possess a skilled and
motivated staff in     sufficient number
A Output 3:    The Foundation is able to contribute sustainably to
financing of priority protected      areas (6 years GEF)
A Output 4: Priority protected areas are better managed.
For the first phase, the GEF addresses the biodiversity threat in priority
protected areas most important for global biodiversity that do not already
receive assistance from other donors: Mont Nimba Nature Reserve, Mont Peko
National Park and, within the Comoe ecosystem, Comoe National Parks,
Warigue Partial Reserve and Mont Tingui Partial Reserve.
I.A.3. Project Description:
In support to implementation of the overall PCGAP, phase one of the
PCGAP/BM seeks to reach the proposed outputs within 5 years. The project
is organized in four main components:
Cl. Strengthening of the national legal, institutional and technical
framework
C2. Building of human resources capacity
C3. Support to establishment and operation of the Foundation
C4. Management and promotion of priority protected areas
The IDA/GEF project in support to PCGAP is directly cofinanced by the
French Service de Cooperation and Action Cultural (for component 2) and by



the NGOs World Wide Fund for Nature and Conservation International as well
as peripheral communities (for component 4).
Cl. Strengthening of the national legal, institutional and technical
framework: This component build and strengthen capacity of ONAP
headquarter for coordination of protected area management as well as for
their promotion and valorization. Component 1 will finance: (1)
Coordination, implementation monitoring and financial management including
(a) project coordination, (b) financial management, accounting,
disbursement and procurement, (c) independent financial & implementation
control, (c) annual audit; (2) Legal & strategic framework including (a)
draft and adopt regulations for the new park law, (b) update the law on
nature protection, (c) improve the strategic framework for community
involvement in protected areas; (3) Institutional framework and capacity
including (a) organize management of ONAP, (b) support to the ONAP Board,
(c) support to the National Scientific Council, (d) incremental support to
DPN ; (4) Tourism development including coordination and promotion of
tourism activities with the private sector; (5) Environmental awareness of
decision makers and donors including awareness building for leveraging
funds ; (6) ONAP's system for communication and information management
including (a) a documentation center, (b) a Web portal and CD ROMs, (c) a
national Geographic Information System.
C2. Building of human resources capacity: This component builds and
strengthens capacity of the Office staff and of its key partners.
Component 1 will finance: (1) Steering of training committee, (2)
Organization of a human resources management system including (a) support
to a Human Resources Unit, (b) technical assistance, (c) Recruitment of
the Office's staff; (3) Training of the Office staff & partners
including (a) rehabilitate and improve training centers, (b) in country
training, (c) overseas' training, (d) monitoring of training results.
C3. Support to establishment and operation of the Foundation: The
objective at term is to finance, with adequate efficiency and increased
oversight from the civil society, part of the protected area recurrent
costs. This component would finance (1) Organization of the Foundation
for the Parks & reserves of RCI including (a) Support to the Foundation
Board, (b) coordination and Foundation management, (c) financial
management, accounting and disbursement, (d) annual audit, (e) capacity
building, (f) and communication; (2) Capitalization and operation of a
Sinking Fund including (a) establishment & capitalization of a sinking
fund, (b) financing incremental cost of protected areas; and (3) Fund
raising and capitalization of an endowment including (a) fund raising, and
(b) GEF endowment.
C4. Management and promotion of priority national parks & reserves:
Component 4 focuses on strengthening the conservation and management of
several focal parks and reserves as well as, and to a lesser extents, in
non-focal parks and reserves. IDA will generally target focal parks and
reserves but will also provide some investments to the non-focal parks and
reserves. Using GEF funds invested in a sinking fund, the Foundation will
finance awareness building and recurrent expenditures exclusively in focal
park and reserves. IDA will finance no operating cost of Component 4
after year 2. For each park or reserve, Component 4 finances: (1)
Management, administration, and activity monitoring including (a) activity
- 2 -



planning and management, (b) support to park or reserve steering
committee, (c) financial and administrative management, (d) technical
assistance; (2) Equipment, surveillance and use including (a)
infrastructure, (b) equipment, (c) surveillance, (d) tourism development;
(3) Community support and awareness building including (a) NGO assistance
in the periphery, (b) conservation awareness, (c) land management
contracts, (d) capacity building of AGEREF and community groups, (e)
community participation in management and use, (f) alternative activities
and local development, (f) management of infiltrated agriculture; (4)
Research and impact monitoring including (a) applied research, (b)
ecological monitoring, (c) transborder coordination and corridor studies,
(d) updating management plan.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The PCGAP is a Government program which will impact the entire park and
reserve system of Cote d'Ivoire. These are scattered in all parts of the
country and cover about 2,2 million ha or 6.5w of the territory.
The PCGAP as a program is supported by various projects financed by
several donors. One of these projects, called PCGAP/BM, is cofinanced by
IDA/GEF as well as the French SCAC (for training), WWF and Conservation
International for technical assistance to the focal parks and reserves.
IDA and GEF funds will concentrate on the Comoe ecosystem in the
north-east of Cote d'Ivoire (the Comoe National Park, the Mont Tingui
Partial Reserve and the Warigue Partial Reserve), and for the Western
mountain ecosystem in the center-west of Cote d'Ivoire (the Mont Peko
National Park and the Mount Nimba Nature Reserve.). Peripheral
populations around the Comoe are in the order of 65,000 for the two
reserves (dioula, senoufo, lobi) and another 200,000 for the park (lobi
and koulango). Around the Mount Nimba people are largely yacouba (4
villages estimated at 3,500 people) and around Mount Peko populations are
largely guere (20 villages estimated at about 30,000 people).
Other donors under the overall program will finance other projects: The
EU will finance two projects (1) Support to Marahoue and Mont Sangbe,
which is cofinanced by Conservation International and (2) Support to Banco
National Park. France's project, cofinanced by AFD and FFEM, will focus
on Azagny and Aboukouamekro, but it's preparation is yet to start. The
German cooperation will continue its current project in support to Tay
National Park
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
-3-



Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
OP4.01. Little environmental damage is foreseen; any negative impacts
would be related to the construction and/or rehabilitation of protected
area infrastructures, increased tourism or the magnet effect of
development activities attracting increased settlement around protected
areas.
OP4.04. The project seeks to enhance the protection of natural habitat.
Still, the issue of modification of park limits in cases of agriculture
encroachment triggers OP4.04 on Natural Habitat.
OP4.12. This OP is triggered because the PCGAP intends to enforce the
park laws, which do not permit hunting and agriculture. This, in turn,
has the potential to negatively affect the population who have carried out
in the past these illegal activities. It is worth noting that according
to a study by WWF, protected area encroachment has overall been marginal
compared to gazetted forests. However, cultivations have penetrated some
parks with variable degrees. In the past, involuntary resettlement was
carried out more or less successfully in Azagny (Bank projects in the
80's) and Mont Sangbe (EU project in the 90's). Today, the Marahoue
national park is the only one seriously encroached by cultivation.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
OP4.04 and OP4.12 have the risk of contradicting each other. The
necessity to modify protected area limits to account for the most
difficult cases of agriculture encroachment was resolved by ensuring that
areas of similar ecological value would be gazetted. Already with GEPRENAF
200 000 ha of partial reserve containing most Ivorian habitat is in the
process of being gazetted.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
All long term impact foreseen are both for environmentally and socially
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
OP4.01. An Environmental and Social Analysis satisfies OP4.01
requirement. It was prepared on the basis of TORs cleared by the Bank and
-4 -



assistance from Bank staff and consultants. A first assessment was
carried out by two national consultant (a sociologist and an ecologist)
supervised by an international consultant versed in Word Bank guidelines.
In parallel, communities in the periphery of five parks were consulted and
social assessments were prepared in several parks as part of different
ongoing projects. Finally, another international consultant was recruited
to consolidate all information and early drafts of the ESA into a final
ESA. The ESA includes and Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
The ESA demonstrates that PCGAP by strengthening the conservation and
management of the country's biodiversity is likely to have an overall
positive environmental impact. It would improve the training and
education of Ivorian in matters concerning biological resource management,
thereby increasing the public and Government's awareness of environmental
problems, as well as in-country capacity to manage biological resources.
The EMP was designed by analysis all activities planned in the detailed
project log frame and checking whether another activity was likely to
moderate its environmental risk. If such activity was not planned, the
consultant requested that it was added to the project list of activities.
By proceeding that way, the ESA was able to influence the design of the
project rather than propose a parallel process such a separately financed
and implemented EMP. The mitigation activities in the EMP are listed in a
separate matrix for ease of identification. TORs of environmental
assessment to be carried out as part of infrastructure design and
procurement are joined to the EMP.
OP4.04. The issue of modification of park limits has been mitigated
upstream by ensuring that the new park law provides that no delimitation
work can be carried without an environmental impact assessment. In
addition, any modification of protected area limits will require the
gazetment of an ecologically equivalent area. These issues are registered
in the EMP.
OP4.12. A Process framework was prepared in accordance of OP4.12 on
involuntary resettlement. To address this issue of agriculture
encroachment the Government has drafted a Strategy for management of
infiltrated populations. This strategy has been used as the basis of the
Process framework to be implemented under PCGAP. Already, at Marahoue,
the NGO Conservation International has initiated a dialog with the
infiltrated cultivators; a relocation plan is slowly being prepared using
the guidance of the new Strategy for management of infiltrated
populations. Once completed, it will be submitted to donors, including
the Bank, for approval and implemented with EU financing. In Mont Peko
the 1996 social assessment identified potential problems with agriculture
encroachment. This has since then been resolve when it was shown that the
legal limits were different than thought and excluded agriculture areas.
As far as the team knows, there is no encroachment currently in Mont Peko
and Mont Nimba. In Comoe, the village of Gorowi has established several
hectares of cashew nuts in the park. This area will be degazetted and an
ecologically comparable area will be gazetted as part of one of the
reserves created by GEPRENAF.
The Framework process will be used when necessary; most likely when
protected areas are delineated and unexpected encroachment is identified.
- 5 -



In such case, two studies will be triggered (1) a participatory
diagnostic, (2) a survey of families, cultivation, income etc. to be
registered in a database. Following this, a family-by-family process will
be undertaken to examine all alternatives before preparing a resettlement
plan.   It will have to be gradual and follow the Strategy for management
of infiltrated populations. In particular, it will have to demonstrate
that the cultivators' family income will be maintained throughout the
process. Once completed, it will have to be approved by both the National
Office for Environmental Assessment and by the Bank and the donor that
intends to finance its implementation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
During preparation, a formal consultation was carried out in five of the
eight country national parks. In addition, with the social assessments
prepared by other projects, and as part of drafting management plans, the
communities have had extensive discussions with the protected area
management authorities, NGOs serving as technical assistant and/or
consultant sociologists. The information they provided has been used to
draft the recently approved new park law, design the project and draft the
ESA. The new draft will be disclosed to the general public at the central
office, at the Office of Environmental Assessment as well as in all parks
and "prefecture" as soon as it is cleared by the Bank. NGOs currently
providing support to some of these parks will initiate the discussion with
some of the communities.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/12/2002        2/19/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/4/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/11/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/12/2002        2/19/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/4/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/11/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
- 6 -



Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Jean-Michel G. Pavy      04/03/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank       04/04/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank
04/04/2002
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     04/04/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Richard G. Scobey        04/03/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



