Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC114
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/10/2003
A. Basic Project Data (firom PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: CROATIA                                 Project ID P080258
Project: Croatia Science & Technology Project   Task Team Leader: Albert Martinez
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 17, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 45.00
Bank Approval: January 29, 2004                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPF                             Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                 development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The major development objective of the project is to reorient Croatia's science and technology (S&T)
infrastructure, in particular to (i) strengthen and restructure research and development institutions (RDIs)
and promote commercialization of the research outputs; and (ii) upgrade technological capabilities of
enterprises. The reorientation of S&T towards the industry needs would contribute to improving the
competitiveness of the Croatian industry both in the domestic and foreign markets. The creation of a
sound business environment conducive to growth, increased technological base, and encouragement of
practical application of technical skills will help companies compete more effectively and facilitate the
Croatian economy's integration with the global markets. In particular, upgrading firms' technological
capabilities would be an important step for the Croatian industry's access to the European Union (EU).
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project would comprise three main components: (i) Restructuring R&D Institutions (RDI
Component); (ii) Developing Technology Financing Programs (BICRO Component); and (iii)
Strengthening Technology Research and Policy Programs (ITP Component). The project would also
fund implementation costs, including audit, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation
(M&E).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key envirorinental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The proposed project would mainly operate at advisory/capacity building/financing level in existing
premises in main cities of Croatia: Zagreb, Osijek, Rijeka, Split, and Dubrovnik
Some of the activities financed by the project, like the commercial exploitation of technological
innovation by new or existing companies in Croatia, and the opening of new technology parks/incubators
within the technology centers (component B), could ultimately have some not significant environmental
effect through the final beneficiaries. However, the World Bank would not provide direct funding to the
beneficianes, but will support the business infrastructure for their development (i.e., setting up Venture
Capital Funds, Technology Centers and Technoparks). The support of the firms beneficiaries would be
done mostly by the private sector and government funds. In any event, the policies and procedures would
be in place for the operation of these components. These policies would be assessed for possible
environmental impact and, if necessary, revised accordingly to be in line with the Bank principles.



2
ISDS
It has to be pointed out that, among the objectives of the project, is in fact the upgrading of current
processes and productions by Croatian companies that might indeed now include low energy efficiency,
low quality levels, and damaging environmental practices The project final impact would very likely
include a mitigation of such risk factors for the Croatian population and the environment.
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments In accordance with the Bank's Operational Directive on Environmental Assessment (OD 4.01
Annex E), the proposed project is placed in Category "C" The project will not finance civil works.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on i for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)       * Yes (9 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               ( ) Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                ( Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  ( Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              ( Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               (9 )Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      (_) Ycs 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          ()Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  Ycs * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*    ( Yes * No
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Suonmary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If inform77ation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessazy data.
I1.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
There are no direct environmental concerns; as pointed out above, among the objectives of the project, is
the upgrading of current processes and productions by Croatian companies that might indeed now include
low energy efficiency, low quality levels, and damaging environmental practices. The project final
impact would very likely include a mitigation of such risk factors for the Croatian population and the
environment.
TI D lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable
11 D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable
I1 D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable



3
ISDS
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the bolTower to address safeguard issues
NA
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project is being prepared using bottom-up approach and was initiated by the beneficiaries. Project
design would be adjusted as needed to ensure best practice output. Private sector companies would be
consulted on current technological services available and related constraints facing their growth and
expansion. Business associations, patent offices, and universities would also be consulted to understand
the nature of services currently offered. Input and involvement from such organizations would continue
to be obtained during project implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts, or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/A nalysils/Management Plan-        E.pected      Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indcgenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework               Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan                                        Expected      Actital
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safely Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable



4
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:             Albert Martinez                            06/04/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator Jane E. Holt                             06/04/2003
Sector Manager                Yasuo Izumi                                 12/05/2002
Comments
The current Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet has been reviewed and cleared.



