ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 A World Frt:c f Pov(rrY
* _-                         II_ __     _     __       _    __       _     __      _     _
-IrifoShop
Report No AC14
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country CROATIA                                   Project ID P043195
Project. RIJEKA GATEWAY PROJECT                  Task Team Leader Michel Audige
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 7, 2003       IBRD Amounlt ($m): 155 00
Bank Approval. June 24, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSIE                              Sector. Roads and highways (45%); Ports; waterways
Lending Instrumenit: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  and shippinig (45%); Central government
Status: Lendinig                                 administration (10%)
-I'heme: Export development and competitiveness
(P); Infrastructure services for private sector
development (P); Social risk reduction (S), Other
public sector governance (S)
1.A.2. Project Objectives.
The overall objective of the project is to increase Croatia's trade competitiveness by improving the
international transport chaini through the Rijeka Gateway for both freight and passengers traffics through
modernizing the port and road network connectionis, and privatizing port operations. Specific objectives
include: (i) increasing efficiency and improving finanicial, social and environmenital conditions at Rijeka
Port, rehabilitating infrastructire and replacing equipment, (ni) preparing to redevelop part of Rijeka Port
for urban purposes; and (ii) improving internationial road connectionis linked to the Rijeka gateway, and
the administration of the road sector.
I A.3. Project Description:
The project includes three componenits: (a) port restructiring aiid modernization, (b) port/city interface
redevelopment; and (c) internationial road improvements.
A - Port Restructuring and Modernization (US$75.1 million including contingencies)
To allow smooth transfer of the operations related to the handling of woods and timber this component
will include (i)nfrastructure rehabilitation worksat the Western port area: demolition of outdated
multi-storied warelhouses that restrict open storage space and port performance, witli the exception of two
which will be rehabilitated for their historical value; Siiperstructure works wvould be designed to
facilitate terminal leases/concessionis; (iii) rehabilitation of Vienna berth and repaving and rehabilitation



2
ISDS
of utility networks, and (iv)restoration and protection along the Zagreb berth (includes construction of a
berthing capacity of a minimum 250 m length to allow vessels of 15 m draft and more to service the port
of Rijeka), and backlog rehabilitationi works needs to be undertaken in various part of the port to
complement the above works.
As a contribution to th&nowledge economy and to help develop traffic and improve safety, a Vessel
Traffic Management System (VTMS) or a radar-based system coupled with a database and identifying
and monitoring ship movements has been identified as an immediate need under the project Enviroiinment
protection equipmenti las also been identified and included under the project. LR operates old and
outdated yardequipment purchased by the former State Owned Enterprise (SOE) and that need to be
replaced  Also, most quay cranes they rent from PRA are old, slow and have a low capacity (5 tons or
less). New heavy mobile cranes and equipment would be procured by PRA ulider the project
A privatization advisor would help prepare a business plan for LR covering: (i) organization of
operations, (ii) creation of profit and cost centers for each terminal operations and other activities, (iii)
further transformation into daughter companies, (iv) privatization of the mother company and / or
independent (sets of) subsidiaries, (v) human resource strategy, (vi) analysis of the status of the
accumulated debt, and (vii) concession of terminals to private operators He would also consult issues
connected with the priority concession (i) review of general objectives and of contractual targets (traffic
levels, performiances, quality etc. as detailed in Aniex I l), (ii) respective responsibilities and
commitments of the port authority and of the concessionaires regarding maintenance and development of
infra- and superstructire, (iii) equipment, (iv) extension of the concessions to allow new investment
plans, (v) port tariffs, light dues, and (vi) periodic review of performance. The project would also
finance maniagemenit moderinizationi consultantsanld consultants to prepare designs cfml works
contracts, to assist in preparing a BOT contract for further expansioni of Zagrebacko berth and for
construction of D 403 connector road, and to supervise civil works under the projec&nace PRA PIU is
not very experienced in implementation of Bank-finianiced projects, training in accounting, financial
management and procurement will be required
An Electronic Data lnterchanige (EDI) systetonniectinig the port administrationi and port users will
facilitate trade througlh improved efficiency and safety of the port operations. Based on LR 's Social Plan
proposal, a severance program would be also financed ulider the project
The project would also finanice provision of a suitablefinianlcial management systenm and traiiing for it's
use. In addition, the borrower requested that arauditing firm is hired to audit the project as well as the
entity financial statements.
B - Port/City Interface Redevelopment (US$43.2 million)
The modernization of the passenger termiinal represents a promisinlg activity for the port of Rijeka. This
component aims at the development of a waterfront area open to business and commercial activities The
project will finance preparation works at the Delta and Porto Barros areas as well as the construction of
a passenger termiinal along the breakwater.
The 4 km lonnE?raga-Braidica (D404) connector roadvould link the Bypass to the port of Rijeka
reducing heavy truck traffic throughi the congested center of the city.
C - International Road Improvements (US$144.8 million)



3
ISDS
The project would finanice FiGanagement capaci!' improvemenits such as TA and training and
supervision services for civil works and equipment installationi for both HC and HAC road/bridge works
components. Implementation of the pavement and bridge management systems (PMS/BMS) Nvas initially
supported tinder the Bank's Highlway Sector ProjectSmall equipment. PMS/BMS software upgrade.
and technical assistance/traininiiwould be finanlced under the project, inclCiding software to improve
HC's ability to administer the road network. Preparation of aaxle load stud_yto develop a strategy for
enforcemenit and eventual adoption of the EU standard, and preventioni of excessive damage to the
national roads network throughi pilot fixed scale installation will be also included under the project. The
project would also provide technical assistance in obtainingc an ISO 9002 certificate for HAC
The proposed Western section of tlbieka Bypass (Orehovica - Sv. Kuzam, 6 5 km, 4 lanes) is
expected to relieve traffic in a higilly congested city which is squeezed between the mountainis and sea
It would also provide a through link for tourist traffic traveling from Italy/Slovemia/Central Europe to
Dalmatian coast. Road accident rates are higil in Croatia (about 7 fatalities/l0,000 vehicles compared to
2 fatalities/10,000 vehicles in Western Europe). As a folloW-up on the recommendations of the Road
Safety Study prepared under the Highway Sector Project, the proposed loan would finance the
improvement of 30 black spots' in the road network where there is a high incidence of traffic accidents
Krk bridge provides the only road, electricity, water and oil (pipeline) connectioni from the mainland to
the island of Krk where the Rijeka Airport and Omisalj Oil Terminal are located. The project would
finance rehabilitation of the first section of this bridge.
Project preparation facility reimbursement (US$1.5 million)
Five preparatory studies for the port component have been financed Linder the PPF. (i) preparation of
detailed engineerinig and project design, (ii) study on port/urban redevelopment; (iii) environimental
assessment suimmary (for the entire project); (iv) businiess plan for LR, and (v) preparation of social plan
for LR. Training of the PRA PIU staff has been financed tinder the PPF.
An indicative project cost estimate (mcl. physical and price contingenlcies) based on a tentative US$155
million Bank loan is showvn below.
lndicativ             Bank-      % of
Component                          e        % of    financing    Bank-
Costs     Total     (US$M)     financin
(US$M)                            9
A - Port RestructLirinig and Modernization            75 10      28.4      50 20      32 4
B - Port/city lnterface Redevelopment                 43.20       16.3     24 60      15 9
C - International Road lImprovemenits                144.80      54.7      78.70      50 8
D - Project Preparation Facility                       1 50        0.6      1 50        1 0
Total Project Costs  264.60    100.0    155.00      100.0
Front-enld fee   0 00       0 0       0.00       0.0
Total Financing Required   264.60     100.0     155.00     100 0
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infornationi aboLIt the key environilimenital and social
characteristics of the area and popLIlationl likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other cultLirally or socially sensitive areas.)



4
ISDS
Rijeka Port's protected position and natural depth of 60 in makes it the only port in the northern
Adriatic capable of handling the largest vessels. The Port of Rijeka is an old industrial facility whiich
stretches for several kilometers along the waterfront in the middle of the city, creating a barrier to the
Adriatic  Rijeka is also constrained on the inland side by mountains. Port traffic passes througil city
streets, contributing to traffic congestion and increasinig the cost of ul-bani transport. Urban planninig
is also more difficult because port property is maritime domain, i.e administered by the central
Government. Much of this prime potential waterfront area is currenitly occupied by dilapidated
multi-story warehouses which are not suitable for port operations, and PRA desires to locate some
bulk operations to other locations, e.g. Bakar Bay
B. Clheck Environmetatal Classification: A (Full Assessment)
CotnleneWs. An Environmental Assessment was carried out during October - December 2002, focusing on
the planned activities in the Rijeka Port, but also reviewed previously prepared EIAs for the road
components.
The modernization of the Rijeka Port includinig preparation for urban redevelopment would not lead to
any dredging or major works in the water. The only activities whichi raise environmental concern are. (a)
the demolition of old ware houses, which has used asbestos in the roofing and side wall material, and
possibly also asbestos as an insulationl material aroulid pipes and inside ventilationi ducts; (b) the use of
PCB (Poly Chlorilnated Bi-phenols) in a transforner withiin the Zagrebacko berth area; and (c)
reclamation of land along the Zagrebacko berth for creation of larger area for handling of cargo and
bulky goods. PCB as well as PCB contaminiiiated soil around the transforner will be separated and
hanidled as hazardous waste and transported to a certain facility collecting and storing the PCB
contaminiated material for furthier management in accordance withi the Croatian legislation. The debris
from the demolition activity, after separation of the asbestos material, asphalt, and oil contaminiiated soil,
will be dumped along the Zagrebacko berth area for land reclaimationi purpose under the Project, if the
analysis of the debris (see below) would show an acceptable level of potential contaminanits Analysis of
soil was carried out around all the warehouses to be demolisied, and the results show that only a limited
amoulit of soil would be regarded as contaminiated with oil and heavy metals, particularly chrome (Cr)
and lead (Pb). The concenitration of hydro carbons (oil) and heavy metals in the material to be used for
land reclamation is one the same level as material and soil used for agricultural puiposes or below or on
the same level as background values for soil and rocks. This amount regarded as contaminated will be
separated from the soil and debris to be disposed in the sea, and it will be handled as hazardous waste
and be disposed in accordanice with Croatiant regulations. The asbestos material will likewise be
disposed at a safe place in accordance withi Croatian regulations. In order to make sure that no
contaminated material by accident would be included in the material Lised for land reclaimationi,
additional analysis will be carried out by the contractor, which activity is regulated In the Environmental
Managemenit Plan (EMP).
Some of the warehouses within the area of Zagrebacko berth  were originally given a temporary
protection by the local branch of Ministry of Culture (MOC) on May 5, 2002 On November 25, 2002,
MOC decided to lift the protection for four out of six old warelhouses due to their poor conditioni. The
remaining two warehouses will be protected for the future, and will be rehabilitated under thc Project
Environimenital Assessments (EAs) for the Rijeka Bypass road (part of road D-8) and the port connector
road (road D-404) were prepared in 1996 and are in conformity with the Croatian legislation.  These
ElAs were reviewed once more, as part of the overall EA for the Project, and the consultanits confirnm that
proposed mitigation measures are adequate to secure that the planned road constructions would not lead



5
ISDS
to any adverse impacts oni water resources, and people's standard of living, and that no additional
mitigation measures are required  Along the roads separate and closed systems for collection of run-off
water and eventual spillages due to accidents will be constructed  Collected water will be diverted to a
treatment plant before its discharge to the sea. Reductioll of increased noise levels, wlhere found
necessary, will be mitigated by constructioni of barriers and planting of green screens
It should be mentioned that both the Rijeka Bypass and the port coniector road (road D-404) will result
in considerable environmental benefits for Rijeka inhabitanits. A large part of the current traffic through
Rijeka will be diverted to the bypass/coninector road, while heavy trucks to/from the containier terminal to
the Bypass road will to a large extent go undergroulid in a tunnel, instead of through already congested
streets in the Rijeka City center, which is currently is the only way for the heavy traffic from the port
These changes will result in a large reduction of the air pollution from exhaust gases from specific all
diesel driven vehicles, and a reduced noise level. In addition it is also expected that the number of
accidents and injures will be reduced The Executive Sumimiary of the EA and the EMP will be inserted in
the PAD as annex 12 Land needed for the constructioni of the roads is acquired for the western part of the
road D-8 (betxveen Orehovica and Draga), while the land acquisition for the western part of road D-8
(between Draga and Sv. Kuzam) is ongoing In accordance with the stringent procedures described in the
Croatian legislation, and expected to be finished before end of Julle 2003
In addition, the implemenitation of the Project requires the resettlement of 10 families within the port
area, where the road D-404 starts, and of two families at the Sv. Kuzam junction. The negotiations with
the 10 families living in two buildings within the port area is ongoing, and the families will be provided
similar or better apartments In Rijeka, and agreements to resettle the two families at the Sv Kuzam
junction is already reached
Aniex 13 to the PAD (Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan) outlines in more detail all Issues related
to land acquisitioni and resettlement.
The project will also include the elimination of 30 "black spots", in order to improve road safety  This
result will be achieved through managerial measures, such as improving visibility, imposing speed
reductionis, and setting up traffic light for regulation of traffic in some intersections  These activities
would not lead to any environmental issues or need for land acquisition
Finally, the project will include the rehabilitation of the Krk bridge  In this case tilere are no
disturbances for the waterway, as all bridge foulidationis are located on land, and there are no bridge
support in the water.
C. Safeguiard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessmenit (OP/BP/GP 4 01)                     * Yes IC No
Natural HIabitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4 09)                                     0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                 * Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4 20)                                  C; Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         * Yes C No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4 37)                                   O Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           C Yes * No
Projects In Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7 60)*                   C Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' clainms
on the disputed areas



6
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Suinmary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant questions If inforniation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. I a Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project would not result in any large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts. The issues are
defined in section B above
[I.D I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component
OP 4.01, OP 4.12, and OPN 11.03 are applicable to the project The components do not create any
cumulative impacts.
Questions have been raised concerning the possibility that archeological items could be founld duriig
construction of the roads, and when demolishing the warehouses within the port area. In order to make
sure that chance finds will be observed and handled correctly, the Operational Manual for the contractors
will include separate provisions in that respect. It should be mentioned that both the Law on
Constructioni as well as the contract form to be used (FIDIC) include provisions for the contractors,
necessary to observe in case of chance finds.
A separate Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan has been prepared to assure that all requirements for
acquiring land and resettlement of residents (14 famillies) in accordance with OP 4 12 have beeii properly
addressed, (see Aniex 13 to the PAD).
II D. Ic Describe any potential long tern impacts due to anticipated future activities In the project area
No long term impact is foreseen due to future activities.
IT D.2 In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The EA clearly documents that the Government has appropriate legislation and staff to address
the applicable safeguard issues.
1I.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanlisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As mentioned above, the ElAs for the Road Components were prepared in the mid 90's, and at that time
public consultationis were not required by law. However, the public was actually invited to comment on
the plans for the proposed road constructions related to the Road Componenlts D-8 and D-404  In
addition an extensive exhibition of the plan including the road components D-8 and D-404 took place
during November 11, 1998 - January 31, 1999, when the public could review the plans including all
documents, and also meet with team and authorities responsible for the plan



7
ISDS
Concerining the Port Componenit, a public consultation was held in December 2002.
The result of the overall environmental assessment was made public in its draft forn in accordance with
Croatian and Bank requirements, and a public hearing and workshop for the whole Project took place on
January 15, 2003, to which all active NGOs in Rijeka as well as different authorities and agencies with
an interest in the project were invited, and the EA, EA-Summary, and the EMP were made available to
the public for comments. The documenits were then made available for further comments during an
additional seven days. However, no comments were received during this time  Minutes from the
meeting as well as the lists of invitees and participants in the hearing are attached to the final EMP
E. Safeguardls Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts, or significant techinical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF - Fiancial intermediary projects, social development funds, commurnity driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessm7?en7t/A nalysis/Managem?en?t Plan    EYpected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10/15/2002    12/10/2002
Date of "in-counitry" disclosure                           11/15/2002     1/15/2003
Date of subimiissioni to lnfoShop                          2/20/2003     2/21/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  2/20/2003    2/21/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framewlork                        Expected       Acmnial
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/25/2003     3/25/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            3/3 1/2003    4/2/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/31/2003     4/3/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framewo7rk             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShlop
Pest Managemenl Plan                                        Expected      Actial
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Damn Safety Managenment Plan                                Expected      Actiual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



8
ISDS
If in-counltry disclosure of any of the above documelIts is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                          Date
Task Team LeaderN Michel Audige                                              April 3, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Anders 0. Halldin                         March 25, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2
Project Safeguards Specialists 3
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator. Jane E FloIt                                April 3. 2003
Sector Manager/Director:       Eva Molnar                                    March 27, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
'vEARCH        FEEDBACK     . SItE MAP   -      1A4A     



