ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld froe of Povorty
; - InfoShop                                                           24628
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/31/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CROATIA                                Project ID: P076730
Project: Croatia Social and Economic Recovery Project  Task Team Leader: Gloria La Cava
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 5, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: July 1, 2004                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                             Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (25%); Central government administration
Status: Lending                                 (25%); Other social services (25%); General industry
and trade sector (25%)
Theme: Decentralization (S); Conflict prevention &
post-conflict reconstruction (P); Rural non-farm
income generation (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The CSERP is a multisectoral project addressing the post conflict reconstruction and sustainable
development of Croatia's war-affected and disadvantaged areas. The main development objective is to
increase social cohesion and sustainable economic opportunitiermong different war-affected and
marginalized groups within the different ethnic commnunities living in the project areas. To achieve this,
the project will adopt a social fund type approach to fund community-selected subproject activities. It
will include two major components: an investment program and a local level institutional development
program.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has two main components: (i) Community Investment; and (ii) Local Level Institutional
Development. A third component, project management, will support the implementation of the main
components through the establishment of a Social and Economic Recovery Fund (SERF).
1) Community Investment Component
The Community Investment Program will include three main subcomponents: Social Inclusion,
Economic Revitalization, and Small Community Infrastructure. Subprojects under these subcomponents
will be selected on the basis of criteria to be developed prior to appraisal that will focus on adequacy of
subproject identification and needs, institutional and technical requirements, sustainability, and quality of
services. The subprojects will be implemented with local institutional capacity, either existing or to be
created. A fourth subcomponent, demining, will intervene as required in support of the projects under
the other subcomponents, based on a surveying and mapping exercise to be carried out in the early stages



2
ISDS
of project implementation. These subcomponents are described below.
1.1) Social Inclusion Subcomponent (SI) - (US$8m)
The objective of this subcomponent is to improve access by war-affected persons in the Areas of Special
State Concern (ASSCs) to community-based social development programs and to promote new initiatives
in community-based activities.
In order to achieve the objective, this subcomponent will:
*   increase involvement of beneficiaries in design and implementation of the above programs
through consultation and citizens fora;
*   increase involvement of civil society (NGOs and community-based organizations- CBOs) in
social inclusion service delivery programs;
*   improve partnerships between local government, civil society and community; and
* strengthen the capacity of local government in promoting social development programs
according to a system of priorities and a better and more efficient allocation of resources.
The design of the Social Inclusion subcomponent will build upon several integrated social development
approaches to help the Government of Croatia deal with issues of social development, social cohesion
and community reconciliation. This component will complement rather than overlap with the efforts
under the framework of the overall social protection national and local strategy and the social services
delivery program under the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare.
Possible subprojects and activities to be implemented under this subcomponent may include support to:
(i) youth centers and extracurricular educational programs through activities that promote reconciliation,
cultural revitalization, and social and economic initiatives at the community level; (ii) psycho-social
support to vulnerable groups, especially for families of ex-combatants; displaced people, women and
children suffering domestic violence, women's self-support groups in rural areas, legal counseling, etc.;
(iii) multimedia, communication and cultural centers; (iv) parent-school association programs in
ethnically divided communities, training to teachers on issues of post-conflict and reconciliation; (v)
programs to support the disabled; and (vi) capacity building and institutional development for: (a) local
government (at both county and municipal levels); ancl (b) civil society organizations and their personnel
responsible for delivery of social integration services.
Overall sustainability should be fostered by the greater technical and institutional capacity gained at
county. municipal and community levels.
*   For local governments, capacity building activities will mainly focus on areas such as: (a)
strengthening the institutional capacity for the formulation of a community-based social
development strategy and the development of a sustainability plan, both based on the rationale of
ranking social priorities and prioritizing needs for the most vulnerable and youth; (b) design and
implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system (through contracting out of NGOS and
civil society groups), including impact assessments, periodic needs assessments, and social
analysis of vulnerable population groups; and. (c) management skills to improve fund-raising and
coordination between the social departments at both municipal and county levels;



3
ISDS
* For the personnel in civil society organizations responsible for delivery of social inclusion and
social development services (psychologists, social workers, pedagogists, etc.), technical
assistance will focus on providing up-to-date training approaches and a systematic response to
needs of communities and groups.
The demining sub-component under the infrastructure component can be mobilized in social inclusion
subprojects when required. For example, when safe access to some social services-such as sports fields
for children or youth -cannot be guaranteed, demining can be programmed as part of the particular
social inclusion subproject.
Subprojects will be selected on a demand driven basis. All of the subprojects will operate using local
institutional capacity, either existing ones or to be created. Eligibility and selection criteria will be
developed to ensure the need for, sustainability and quality of the services.
1.2) Economic Revitalization Subcomponent (ER) (US$15m)
The main objectives of this subcomponent are to support the development of income generation activities
in the local communities. The project will contribute to increased opportunities for small businesses and
incentives for different war affected groups. This will enhance social cohesion by creating a more secure
base for community revitalization.
This component, through the implementing of subprojects, will support:
*   producers' groups with grants to help them regain assets lost during the war and/or initiate new
economic activities;
*   income-generating activities in rural and urban areas promoted by producers' associations,
cooperatives, and/or individual farmers;
*   capacity-building, preparation of business plans, and advice to farmers and other small business
ventures; (high demand for advice and training, especially among younger farmers who could
then provide leadership in cooperatives);
*   capacity building for producers' associations and cooperative consortia or networks that can
sustain rural development initiatives and support public-private cooperation;
*   improved access to credit for small farmners and producers by assisting them in meeting banks'
requirements and through assisting the banks in outreach to these groups.
The results of the pilot also show that improving agricultural production is a priority area. A rapid social
assessment carried out in Sibenik-Knin and Zadar counties found support for cooperatives and
capacity-building activities, as respondents identified the lack of these as obstacles to further
development.
Subprojects will include grant assistance to producers' groups and cooperatives, to private farmers and
businesses, as well as the business advisory and loan application services. All of the subprojects will
operate with local institutional capacity, either existing or to be created. Market based principles will
guide the definition of the eligibility and selection criteria. Prioritization of grant funding will be based
on social cohesion criteria, including mixed ethnic membership, gender composition, vulnerable group
targeting, etc.
The project will also identify grant funding for some technical assistance to commercial banks working
on new products and new technologies to better serve smaller clients in rural areas. Indeed, commercial
banks have usually not developed appropriate lending technology for their smaller loans.  This



4
ISDS
technology should be relatively cheap and should take into consideration the client's capacity to repay
loans, and not simply the presence of a fixed asset collateral.
Capacity building within this subcomponent could occur as a separate subproject, or within a subproject
to enhance its potential. Specifically, as stand-alone subprojects, institutional and capacity building
support could be provided through the creation of several types of business development services
(accounting, business planning, marketing, agricultural, or other types of technical advisory services).
Training or advisory services would then be made,available to (a) producers' groups, (b) individual
clients, (c) co-operative networks and consortia, and (d) individual banks, and could be integrated into
other subprojects.
The demining subcomponent under the small community infrastructure component could be applied in
economic revitalization subprojects when required., For example, when agricultural land cannot be
accessed and is essential to business development, demining could be programmed as part of the
particular economic revitalization subproject.
The following subcomponents will be financed mainly by the Council of Europe Development Bank.
1.3) Small Community Infrastructure Subcomponent (SCI) (US$40m)
The objective of this subcomponent is to improve the living conditions of communities by providing
increased access to services and public utilities through the development of local infrastructure. It will
contribute to the overall objective of social cohesion and economic revitalization by involving
communities in the process of identifying local priorities and implementing rehabilitation of small
community and economic infrastructure. The SC[ aims to facilitate cooperation between local
governments, civil society and end beneficiaries, and the private sector.
Infrastructure in the Areas of Special State Concern has been severely affected by the war, and the
housing rehabilitation being carried out will have a limited impact on return if the infrastructure
bottlenecks remain at the municipal level. Possible social and economic infrastructure for rehabilitation
under this component include: primary schools, health and cultural facilities, market places, feeder roads,
small bridges, water supply, irrigation and drainage systems, reforestation, rubble clearing, and solid and
liquid waste treatment.
The subprojects will therefore be identified in a collaborative effort between the municipal authorities
and the target beneficiaries with inputs from line ministries when applicable.  Subproject design,
procurement and implementation, as well as management of operations and maintenance, will be
undertaken by a subproject committee comprising both the municipal technical units and representatives
of the constituents.  Subprojects will be implemented through private contractors selected on a
competitive basis according to procurement procedures acceptable to the Bank. Subproject eligibility
and selection criteria will be developed to ensure that need is established, the potential of service
provision is adequate, the subproject is technically feasible, legal requirements are fulfilled, social
considerations are adequate, and the project is sustainable.
The SCI subcomponent will also include capacity building aspects, which may include training on
participatory mechanisms, project design, dossier preparation, procurement, and concepts of
sustainability as well as business training for small contractors if required.
1.4) Demining Subcomponent (DM) (US$22m)



5
ISDS
The presence of land mines is still a serious issue in parts of the Areas of Special State Concern (ASSC).
According to the latest estimates, mine-contaminated and suspected mined areas in Croatia cover
approximately 1,700 square kilometers, all within the ASSC. This represents a tremendous obstacle to
the normal functioning of life in those counties and to any form of social or economic recovery. This
subcomponent will assist with demining activities when the presence of landmines directly affects the
implementation of the social inclusion, economic revitalization, and small infrastructure components of
the project. It could therefore become part of an infrastructure, a social inclusion or an economic
revitalization subproject.
The Government of Croatia has developed-in part in collaboration with the WB-a very efficient
demining program and implementation mechanism that will be very useful for the CSERP in the ASSC.
Demining activities will be organized in two stages.
(a)  Survey and mapping of the mine-fields in the CSERP target areas (inside the ASSC) to reduce
the risk of accide.ntThis activity, called area reduction, could-based on available
implementation capacity-decrease suspected mined areas by approximately 15 square
kilometers a year. In 2000, 9,800,000 square meters were demined in the country and
23,200,000 square meters were returned to users as mine-free areas through surveying.
Countrywide, the mine suspected areas were reduced from 13,000 square kilometers to 1,700
square kilometers between 1997 and 2001; and
(b)   Responding to demining requests from selected subprojects where lands required for the
good-functioning of th subprojects are in mine-field mapped areas.
The first stage should be organized in the very early stages of the CSERP. The second stage of the
demining exercise will respond to subproject demand. Mobilization of this type of demining work
requires at least 12 weeks from the competent contractors and therefore needs to be built into the
implementation schedule of the subproject. Demining activities are being handled very efficiently by the
Croatian Mine Action Center (CROMAC), which is the civilian authority responsible for the
implementation of the National Mine Action Plan (NMAP). The CSERP will use CROMAC as an
implementing partner for all demining activities. CROMAC is the structure in charge of mine action in
the country, and it has already provided support to a World Bank-financed project (reconstruction of
water canals and facilities in Eastern Slavonia). The Bank was pleased with this arrangement. CROMAC
will be responsible for the procurement of survey and demining works and will supervise the activities
of the contractors and consultants.
The main objective of this subcomponent is to ensure that social cohesion, economic revitalization and
small community infrastructure subprojects can achieve their intended potential without mine accident
risks.
2) Local Level Institutional Development Component (US$6m)
The objective of this component is to establish participatory and technically sound practices in county
and municipal government planning, decision-making, and implementation. This component will address
local level institutional development through enhancing both horizontal and vertical linkages among
stakeholders.
The project's local level institutional development will focus on counties and larger municipalities to
enhance the capacity for inter-county and inter-municipality (intra-county) cooperation. By focusing on
this level, the project will avoid creating incentives for further fragmentation (or reinforcing of existing



6
ISDS
patterns) and will support greater connectivity between communities. While not directly addressing
decentralization as a project objective, the project will reinforce the Croatian Government's strategy in
this area. This component will also develop the capacity to engage in spatial and territorial planning on a
regional level, a requirement for Croatia's accession, to the EU. Selection criteria will be established
through the institutional element of the planned Territorial, Socioeconomic, and Institutional Assessment.
This component will also build on the Framework for a Regional Development Vision and Action Plans
(described under preparatiory activities), which will foster inter-county and inter-municipal linkages
through planning workshops.
This component will also incorporate the ideas on Island Development already developed for the PHRD
Grant, and will. focus on three main areas: (i) capacity building in the Department for Islands and
Regional Development (DIRD) to design, integrate, and co-implement a variety of sustainable
development projects (via training, TA, workshops, seminars, demonstration projects, etc.); (ii)
development of a regional development strategy and action plan that includes and integrates the
participation process, collective capacity building, and local initiatives for sustainable development of
island communities; and (iii) enhancing DIRD's interface with local communities so that planning is a
participatory and inclusive process.
This component will:
*   facilitate the process of building capacity to create linkages and horizontal institutional cohesion
among counties and among municipalities;
*   facilitate information-sharing among key stakeholders, government, the private sector, and civil
society at local, county and central levels;
*   create incentives to promote shared initiatives and problem-solving;
*   strengthen the capacity of local level organizations to handle project implementation in an
efficient and transparent manner;
*   aid in the establishment of an implementation structure for the CSERP (staff training,
management information, forms and manual for implementation);
*   help establish the interface with local communities and government.
Potential activities/areas covered by this component include: software and hardware, information
technology and systems, enhancement of communication skills, training, participatory workshops, and
study tours.
3. Project Management (US$9 mil)
This component will involve the establishment of an, autonomous and decentralized body which will be
in charge of implementing the CSERP. In particular, project rtianagement functions include: project
financial management system set-up, procurement, necessary beneficiary outreach, and monitoring and
evaluation.
Components:
1. Community Investment



7
ISDS
1.1 Social Inclusion
1.2 Economic Revitalization
1.3 Small Community Infrastructure
1.4 Demining
2. Local Level Institutional Development
3. Project Management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will target Areas of Special State Concern and disadvantaged islands. The Areas of Special
State Concern were initially defined by law in 1996, as an effort to address damage and stimulate
economic development in areas that were war-damaged. The initial law focused on areas that had been
occupied, but it has been modified several times, and currently modifications and amendments are under
discussion in Parliament. The current version will include criteria to establish economically
underdeveloped areas for inclusion, rather than limiting it to war-affected.
The ASSC are located in 13 of the 21 counties. The counties include a range of environmental
characteristics and habitats, the most sensitive of which are designated protected areas. All counties have
physical plans, approved by the government, that cover land use planning and management in the county.
All protected areas have physical plans, either completed or in progress, that also regulate land use and
activities within the protected areas. All subprojects will be consistent with the county physical plans
and protected area management plans. The environmental review of the subprojects will include
assessments of subprojects' consistency with county level plans and environmental regulations.
Disadvantaged islands in the Zadar Archipelago which stretches between two counties (Sibenik-Knin
county and Zadar county) will be eligible for inclusion in subprojects.  The Archipelago includes two
protected areas: the Kornati National Park and Telascica Bay Nature Park. Subprojects on the islands
will require, as described above, environmental screening and review according to Croatian
environmental laws and protected area management plans. The project will work closely with the World
Bank GEF biodiversity project - Karst Ecosystem Conservation Project - and will encourage cooperative
endeavors which both conserve natural resources while revitalizing the local economies.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments. The Financial Intermediary (FI) environmental classification for the project as a whole results
from the fact that most components finance demand-driven activities that are not known in advance.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                  0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                     0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                             O Yes * No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                               0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                 0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                              O Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                              0 Yes 0 No    ' TBD



8
ISDS
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           C -Yes * No  C' TBD |
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No   C, TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project triggers OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.  Two of the Community Investment
subcomponents, Economic Revitalization and Small Community Infrastructure, could have potential
environmental impacts related to construction for rehabilitating community infrastructure, and to
individual income-generating subprojects, particularly those in agriculture.
The Community Infrastructure Subcomponent could possibly finance rehabilitation of primary schools,
health and cultural facilities, market places, feeder roads, small bridges, water supply, irrigation and
drainage systems, and solid and liquid waste treatment facilities. No new construction would be financed.
Rehabilitation construction, including the use of heavy machinery and the storage of materials, may
contribute to air and water pollution. However, such impacts woukdt be significant, irreversible, or
large in scale.
The Economic Revitalization Subcomponent would support income-generating activities, such as
agricultural production and small rural service-type businesses. Subprojects under this subcomponent
could possibly have environmental impacts, positive or negative, related to pesticide use, water usage,
natural habitat, and sanitation. Negative impacts arenot expected to be significant, irreversible, or large
in scale.
A comprehensive account of the ASSC's environmental characteristics will be prepared as part of the
Territorial, Socio-Economic and Institutional Assessment (TSEIA) to identify any sensitive or protected
areas. No involuntary resettlement or cultural property issues are currently foreseen; however, the
Territorial, Socio-Economic and Institutional Assessment will specifically address any possible issues
related to Safeguard policies OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OPN 11.03 (Cultural Property),
as well as OP 4.09 (Pest Management) and OP/BP/GP 4.04 (Natural Habitats).
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts duie to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts due to the application of more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple
project components are expected at this stage. However, the pre-appraisal mission will identify any
potential cumulative impacts.
II.D.l c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area are expected at this stage.
However, the pre-appraisal mission will identify any potential long-term impacts.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



9
ISDS
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The pre-appraisal mission will review the adequacy of Croatia's environmental legal and regulatory
framework for assessing the environmental impacts of subprojects, including the mechanisms and
responsibilities for environmental screening and review of EA results. If necessary, the project will
provide capacity building for the PIU to ensure that subprojects are properly evaluated and meet the
environmental requirements of appropriate national and local authorities, and are consistent with OP
4.01.
The Territorial, Socio-Economic and Institutional Assessment will also identify any areas within the
ASSCs that could pose safeguard issues.
Between pre-appraisal and appraisal, an approach wiil be developed to address any emerging safeguard
issues. The Operations Manual will describe in detail how subprojects will be evaluated to ensure that
environmental and social safeguards are enforced and World Bank policies are complied with.
Environmental criteria will be included in the selection of subprojects, and adequate mitigation measures
will be incorporated in the contract agreements so that all anticipated environmental impacts will be
avoided or minimized.  Subprojects that actively promote environmental protection will receive
additional consideration.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are war-affected and disadvantaged groups within the different ethnic communities
living in the Areas of Special State Concern. Specifically, stakeholders include small-scale producers,
families of residents and returnees, youth suffering from the consequences of war and displacement,
other vulnerable groups (i.e., disabled, battered women, families of ex-combatants, etc.), and local
govemments. During preparation, stakeholders from the most war affected counties, i.e., Osijek-Baranja
and Vukovar, will participate in a series of workshops building capacity for participatory regional
development   planning. These will include heads and technical staff of county departments,
representatives of key municipalities, senior staff of the County Chambers of Economy, representatives
of NGOs, the private sector, academia, and scientific institutions. Key stakeholders will also be consulted
as part of the TSEIA. During implementation, the demand driven nature of the SI, ER, and SCI
subcomponents necessitate that stakeholders articulate needs for subprojects. The Operational Manual
will specify measures to ensure participation in project operations and maintenance, such as interethnic
subproject approval committees including both government and civil society members. The Operational
Manual will also specify mechanisms to enhance ownership, including beneficiary contributions where
appropriate.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ 3 SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ) S3. -No safeguard issues



10
ISDS
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Manage)nent Plan.         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Gloria La Cava
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Bernard Baratz                           07/31/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Alexandre Marc                              07/31/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
~              L ~ ~ ! sLre1J  -hn  |~j      SHOWCASE ,    H



