Report No. 24138
Report No: i069937 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/06/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: CROATIA         Project ID: P069937
Project: Croatia:   Social Protection Project    Task Team Leader: Mamta Murthi
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 8, 2003     IBRD Amount ($m): 36.00
Bank Approval: July 6, 2004      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD     Sector: SA - Social Assistance; SY - Other Social
Protection
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The main development objective of the project would be to improve the
design and implementation of social welfare policy in Croatia.
Specifically, the project would:
Assist the Government in developing a policy framework which supports
more efficient and effective social welfare services, bearing in mind the
new fiscal realities;
Strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
(MoLSW) as it relates to three areas: the new roles and responsibilities
of the Ministry in the light of the Government's agenda to significantly
decentralize the sector; the use of improved policies, procedures and
practices in the area of both cash benefits and social services; and
fostering and monitoring the provision of community-based social services;
Support the provision of social welfare services through more public/NGO
and public/third sector partnerships;
Increase the use of information technology for assessment, record-keeping,
monitoring, and assistance of social welfare beneficiaries, and for
undertaking social welfare reform analysis; and
Improve the capacity of the Government to monitor changes in poverty.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1: Social welfare sector capacity building support (about US$25
million): Under this component, financing would be provided for capacity
building activities to support the implementation of the social welfare
reform strategy developed as a part of project preparation activities.
This would include the following sub-components:
a. Policy Development and Training (about US$2 million). Training and
technical assistance services would be provided to strengthen the MOLSW
for the implementation of the Social Welfare Reform Strategy. This would
cover the challenges of building capacity in the three key areas
identified:
working in a decentralized environment with changed roles and
responsibilities between central Government staff and local authority



staff, and between the public sector and the private/NGO sector,
updating of staff skills, particularly as they relate to improving the
quality of social services (including family counseling and support,
parental education, fostering services, and special needs of refugees);
fostering, monitoring, and providing quality assurance in the context of
increased partnerships with NGOs in the delivery of social services.
Overall staffing in the sector, the appropriate skills mix, skills
shortages and capacity building/training needs will be explicitly
identified as part of project preparation activity.
b. MIS, Monitoring and Evaluation (about US$15 million): This would
support the adoption of suitable Management Information System to support
both cash benefits and social services. The system should support
information flows that are current, allow for smoother and more efficient
administration, and that are available in a form amenable to use in
policy development and evaluation, and program monitoring and analysis.
As in the case of the capacity building component, information technology
needs will be explicitly identified as a part of project preparation
activities. Identification of needs would be undertaken in close
collaboration with the CES in order to explore cost-effective links
between CSWs and existing communications networks wherever possible.
c. Poverty monitoring and analysis support (about US$1 million): This
component would support the improvements in the two main surveys the
Household Budget survey and the Labor Force Survey. In particular, the
project would support improvements in survey and questionnaire design,
processing and coding of the data, and data storage and data use. The
particular emphasis of the latter two measures would be to make unit
record data from the household survey data and labor force survey
accessible to a wide range of users including government agencies,
academic and research institutes and the wider public. The component
would also support training in poverty and welfare analysis including
benefit incidence analysis, social impact analysis and program
evaluation.
d. Fund for Innovative Public/NGO Partnerships (about US$5 million, still
under discussion with GOC): This would provide a small fund for
encouraging public/NGO partnerships in the delivery of social services
(apart from support in the context of deinstitutionalization which is
covered separately below). The idea would be to encourage applications
from NGOs and select the most innovative ones on a competitive basis.
This component may also attract co-financing from other donors.
e. Project Management (about US$2 million): This component would cover the
costs of a project implementation unit, in accordance with the overall
arrangement between the GOC and the Bank on project management issues.
The PIU would be responsible for project implementation and management in
the areas of (i) procurement, (ii) financial management, (iii) public
awareness and communications, and (iv) donor coordination.
Component 2: Deinstitutionalization support (about US$15 million): This
component would provide support for the efforts of the GOC for improving
the welfare of institutionalized populations by providing care for them in
- 2 -



alternative settings, and for dealing with potential staff redundancies.
This component would provide support in the following areas:
Day-care centers and respite centers, for children, the disabled and the
elderly
Training and other support services for local communities, third sector
groups and NGOs to provide care in the community
Limited investments in the physical infrastructure of existing
institutions to (i) improve the welfare of those individuals who will
continue to reside in them, and (ii) to allow selected institutions to
support the development of community based services by, for example,
providing day or respite care. Investments will be made only in those
institutions whose existence is found to be justified by the Social
Welfare Reform Strategy formulated under the project preparation process
Support for training and re-allocation of staff to other duties in
connection with potential redundancies. It is currently not envisaged
that the project will pay for severance for any laid-off staff. However,
this is likely to be the subject of further discussion during project
preparation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is not expected to have any significant
environmental impact. There is limited physical rehabilitation (of
existing social welfare institutions) and no civil works.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
-3-



At this stage it is not expected that the project will have any negative
impact on environment since it will mostly finance capacity building and
training. However, some financial resources will be provided for
restructuring institutions and building day-care centers and the impact of
this work is now known at this stage of preparation. Therefore, the
project has been rated a Category B given that some of the work may
require that an environmental review be conducted and an Environmental
Management Plan prepared. The rating will be reviewed again at a later
stage in project preparation once the specific activities in this area
have been defined.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Project preparation will involve all the following groups:
1. MOLSW
2. Via the steering group: the Deputy Prime Minister's Office, MOF, CES,
CBS, Government Office for NGOs, and Ministry of Justice, Administration
and Local Government
3. local authorities (the four pilot sites)
4. NGOs (via the Government Office for NGOs)
5. DFID, UK
There will be extensive consultations within Government and with
clients/beneficiaries during project preparation. For key Government
agencies and actors, there will be two stakeholder workshops during
project preparation to both present drafts of the social welfare reform
strategy and obtain feedback. Client/beneficiary consultation will take
place in the context of site/field visits which will not be confined to
the pilot sites.
Project preparation will also emphasize developing a public information
campaigm on the reforms, in particular as they may related to difficult
social issues such as redundancy.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
- 4 -



in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      5/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure 9/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop   10/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Mamta Murthi
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Rita Klees       04/23/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         MichalRutkowski 04/23/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



