Report No. 23831
Report No: I071062 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: DJIBOUTI        Project ID: P071062
Project: Health Sector Development Project       Task Team Leader: Qaiser M. Khan
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 4, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 4, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 15.00
Managing Unit: MNSHD     Sector: HC - Primary Health; Including Reproductive
Health; Chi; HO - Hospitals; Secondary & Tertiary; HR - Reform and
Financing
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)          Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project objective is to improve the quality of health services through
(a) improvement of maternal and child health services; (b) improved
availability of para-medical personnel; (c) better availbility of
medicines in health facilities; and (d) increased capacity of the
Government to implement and execute reforms.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Phase I consists of four components:
Component A. Improve Health Services:
(i) Improve the Physical and Human Capacity of Health Facilities. This
sub-component would contribute to rehabilitating the maternity, emergency
services and pediatric services at the Peltier hospital. In addition,
technical capacity would be strengthened for urban dispensaries to better
attract patients who would otherwise go to the Peltier hospital
(ii) Safe-motherhood programs. Strengthen the Safe Motherhood Initiative,
principally by improving the management of obstetrical complications and
emergencies in health facilities that can be managed by both surgical and
non-surgical interventions through better training, increased availability
of medications, and infrastructure improvements. The training will be
organized in short programs at CFPS bringing in national and international
experts. The project will also reinforce and expand some promising
initiatives to better educate the population about women's health issues
(through community health workers), mobilize resources to promote positive
health outcomes (through non-governmental organizations), and better
monitor births being attended by traditional birth attendants TBAs in the
community. The project intends to strengthen community participation
throughout its implementation. First, outreach activities led by community
health workers will promote positive health practices and promote dialogue
between service providers and recipients. Second, the project will
support capacity building activities for community based organizations,
associations and NGOs involved in health related activities. Third,
representatives of local communities and/or NGOs will be members of
technical committees such as the IMCI Family and Community Practices
Technical sub-group. Fourth, the project will maintain ongoing dialogue



with the community in order to understand and take into account the
community's priorities and to build consensus around care related issues,
such as cost sharing for drugs. Such dialogue and capacity building during
the first phase of the APL will lay the ground work for establishing
viable community based pharmacies in later phases.
(iii) Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) Apply the
Djiboutian Safe Motherhood model (sound central management, human capacity
building at all levels, and strengthening of selective system supports) ,
and extend the cross-institutional collaborations that have been developed
by the Safe-Motherhood Initiative at all levels (CNFPS, local NGOs,
Community Health Workers, mass media, etc.) to advance child health aims.
The Project will both support the WHO-endorsed initiative of early
implementation of IMCI in 4 urban health facilities (Engueila, Arhiba,
Farahad and Ambouli) and extend this support to 4 additional urban health
facilities and the 4 district hospitals to achieve national coverage. The
standard WHO approach of strengthening health worker skills, improving
health system supports, and improving family and community practices that
has been followed in other WHO/EMRO and WHO/AFRO countries will be adopted.
(iv) Reinforce Malaria Control Efforts. Targeted communicable disease
activities intended to improve malaria control and routine immunization
services in Djibouti can enhance the efforts of IMCI and Safe-motherhood
to improve child and maternal health. In addition to improving the case
management of fever and the promotion of bednet use through IMCI, the
Project will support complementary efforts by the Division of Hygiene and
Epidemiology to reduce malaria-related mortality and morbidity. The
Project will support a variety of malaria control strategies, including
plans to improve the diagnostic capacity of lab technicians, to promote
the adoption of personal protection measures in communities not
immediately served by health facilities, to extend selected vector control
activities, and to institute sentinel surveillance.
(v) Support Immunization Efforts: IMCI's policy of vaccinating every sick
child in need will be complemented by efforts to strengthen routine
immunization services for well children. Particular emphasis will be
given to better training of health personnel, with particular emphasis on
improving health workers' interpersonal and patient education skills;
organizational improvements to reduce waiting time and improve cold chain
management; ensuring routine availability of all antigens; and ensuring
completion of the multi-dose series of DPT for all children.
Component B: Improve Availability and Quality of Human Resources: This is
one of the biggest problems facing Djibouti - the overall shortage of
qualified personnel is reinforced by disincentives for them to work
because of poor service conditions.
(i) Expand Capacity of Centre de Formation pour le Personnel de la Sante
(CFPS). The physical capacity of the CFPS will be expanded to produce
more paramedics both for the three year course and the two year course.
The enhanced capacity will also help CFPS organize continuing education
programs in its facilities.   In addition, internet access to health
information will be made available in the CFPS library for use by all
personnel working in the sector.
(ii) Short Term Courses.  The project will finance short-term courses at
the CFPS as needed. The courses which will be made available first is
likely to include training for health workers on managing drug supply and
helping to set-up community pharmacies, training in IMCI and
safe-motherhood.  Training courses will be offered as needed bringing in
-2 -



expertise from inside and outside the country. The project will finance
external trainers, development of training modules and other direct costs
of short-term training.
(iii) Improve Service Conditions for Paramedical Workers. Loan covenants
to move will include improvement in the job conditions offered to fully
trained para-medics (those with Diplomes d'Etat) bringing them to a
similar level as the Instituteurs with civil service status in the
Ministry of Education. This will reduce the drop-out rate of trained
people from paramedical jobs to other jobs. In addition, to attract
qualified paramedics to remoter locations and replace the untrained
personnel there, a premium will need to be paid similar to that for
teachers in remote areas. This will also be a loan covenant.
Component C: Improve Drug Supply:
(i) Emergency Supply of Medicines and other Medical Consumables. Given the
acute shortage of drugs and consumables in health facilities, the project
will finance an initial stock of essential drugs for health facilities.
The amount and type of drugs will be based on the national list which has
been established by type of facility. A pilot program for cost-sharing
through community pharmacies will tried along with the emergency stock.
(ii) Train MOH Personnel in Drug Stock Management and helping to set up
Community Pharmacies. The MOH personnel need training in managing drug
supplies and eventually in setting up community pharmacies which would
provide low cost generic drugs acquired from the drug fund. The training
will be based on existing modules prepared by UNICEF for the Initiative du
Bamako and will be offered through CFPS.
(iii) Support the Establishment of a Drug Fund (CAMME). The project will
finance the setting up of a Centrale d'Achats de Medicaments et Materiels
Essentiels (CAMME). CAMME will be set up as an NGO recognised officially
as a public service organisation (association a but non lucratif reconnue
d'utilite publique) and able to receive and manage public funds. CAMME
will operate under special arrnagement with the Government which will
include an operations manual approved by both sides. CAMME will buy drugs
from the cheapest quality sources and sell them to public and non-profit
health establishments with a small mark-up to finance its operating
costs. A Business Plan been prepared and financial simulations carried
out which show that CAMME will be able to become financially sustainable
in a reasonable period of time. The public health establishments will
sell the drugs through a community pharmacy or directly (in case they are
legally autonomous) and the proceeds of the sales will be used to
restock. The prices will be agreed by the MOH before hand and
prescription protocoles established to assure that there is no tendency to
over prescribe to increase revenues. The public budget will also finance
drugs and is expected to cover the difference between cost sharing
revenues and needs. The difference is expected to be significant as there
will be drugs which have public good elements and may need subsidies.
The project will finance the initial stock of drugs and technical
assistance and training necessary for a drug fund. Physical
rehabilitation of facilities and equipment has already been financed by
another donor.
Component D: Improve Sector Management: This will be supported in four
ways.
(i) Support Administrative Autonomy for Hopital Peltier: Technical
-3 -



assistance and training will be provided to support the autonomy of this
hospital. The support provided to improve the facilities under component
A will also contribute to making the autonomy viable.
(ii) Support the Capacity of new Directorate of Planning, Health
Information and Donor Coordination (DEPCI). This will done through the
provision of training, international technical assistance, national
technical assistance and direct support to carry out surveys. DEPCI will
take the lead in monitoring impact and the surveys will be major part of
the work. Surveys to be financed during Phase I include PAPFAM (Pan Arab
Population and Family Health Survey) as two rounds of quality of service
surveys at health facilities. In addition, equipment and other help need
to revitalize the health information system will be provided. DEPCI will
be coordinate the impact assessment which will include surveys assessing
the quality of care from the users perspective will be conducted every two
years during the life of the project in order to monitor the project's
impact. In addition, focus group interviews with users of health services
will provide a better understanding of the knowledge, attitudes and
expectations of people with regard to healthcare. It will also assess
people's willingness to share costs for tangible health related inputs
such as drugs and under what circumstances in order to design effective
community pharmacy initiatives.
(iii) Support the Capacity of other Technical Directorates of the
Ministry. The new reorganization implies need for training and TA to help
the new structure work. Specific support will be necessary for newly
created Directorate of Basic Care to outline and defines its functions and
the service role of each type of facility. The Ministry staff will be
trained in environmental safeguards. Resources for short-term training
and consultants will be made available to meet needs as they arise.
(iv) Support Capacity building for Operations and Maintenance. While the
instituion of cost sharing will provide resources for better O&M, it will
be necessary provide technical capacity so that the maintenance may be
carried out. The project will support contruction and equiping of a
maintenance workshop to be located at Hopital Peltier but with service
responsibilities across the country.
(iv) Support the Credit Administration Unit (CAU) ): The CAU as part of
the Ministry's new structure, reports directly to the Secretary General.
Its main role will be carry out the procurement, financial management and
reporting needs for donor funded projects, which will be executed by the
Technical Directorates. The project will provide the support necessary to
the CAU to manage the credit.
Components:
Improve Health Services
Improve Availability and Quality of Trained Personnel;
Improve Drug Supply
Improve Sector Management
-4-



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in Djibouti. The country is semi-arid,
and its population numbers fluctuate according to the flow of refugees
from Erytrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. The project will not affect any
protected areas or sites.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project will not induce direct impacts on the environment
and its very object is to improve the health care services provided to the
population. However, some rehabilitation/construction work within Peltier
Central Hospital will need to comply and be monitored according to
appropriate environmental procedures aimed at mitigating the nuisance that
will be generated by the works in an hospital environment. Moreover, the
hospital waste manangement capabilities in Hospital Peltier in particular
will be improved and serve as a pilot for the other regioanl health care
facilities.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The main environmental issues entailed by the project identified to date
are related to concerns with the management of medical solid and liquid
waste whose discharge in the environment without proper care or treatment
can cause outbreaks of infections as well as various types of other
morbidities. Moreover, the issue of risks of infection inside the hospital
(so-called nosocomial infections) is also a major concern that should be
dealt with as part of this project.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Improper application of policy could lead or contribute to hightened risks
of infection from improper health care waste management and improper
health care practices.
-5-



II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Control spreading infection risks.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
TBD
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The EMP and the social assessment contained in the PAD have identified a
set of stakeholders from government representatives, health care managers
and practioners to NGOs who have been consulted and informed on the issues
to be addressed through the EMP. The draft EMP has already been discolded
in-country and through the Infoshop and the final version will also be
disclosed in country and through the Infoshop during the month of March
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/25/2002       2/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/15/2002         1/17/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/15/2002        1/25/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
- 6 -



Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. The above "Resettlement action plan/framework";
"Indigenous people"; "Pest management"; "Dam Safety", are not applicable
to this project.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Qaiser M. Khan
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        John Bryant Collier
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        John Keith Rennie
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     03/06/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Jacques Baudouy 03/05/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-7 -



