Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC308 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 4, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: East Asia and Pacific 
Project ID: P079610 
Project Name: Livestock Waste 
Management in East Asia 
Task Team Leader: Achim Fock 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): -- 
Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: GEF Grant 
Sector: Animal production (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P); 
Rural policies and institutions (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Chongwu Sun (environmental safeguards); TBD 
(social safeguards) 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
7 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
.5 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
The project’s development objective is to demonstrate replicable and sustainable livestock waste 
management approaches that will protect and improve the local and global environment while 
enhancing livelihoods, particularly in public health. The environmental benefits of the project 
would be most immediate for the local environment in the demonstration watersheds of the 
Livestock Waste Environmental Impact Mitigation Component. In addition, through replication 
of these demonstration sites as well as through the Institutional Development Component and 
Project Monitoring the project would lead to positive environmental impacts both at the local 
levels and for the South China Sea. While the main environmental benefit of the project would 
come from reduced pollution of surface water draining into the South China Sea, other local and 
global benefits would occur in the areas of biodiversity, land degradation, and climate change. 
 
C.  Project Description 
The proposed project would be implemented through separate arrangements in each of the three 
Participating Countries, thus ensuring strong country ownership under very different institutional 
settings and livestock-based pollution problems. In order to make full use of international and 
regional knowledge and experience, to exploit cross-country learning experiences and other 
synergies such as cost-savings for the development of policy tools a fourth, regional coordination 
and support part would be established. The proposed project consists of the following 
components: 
Page  2
 
 
The outcome of the 
Institutional Development Component
 would be a conducive policy 
framework for livestock waste management with strengthened and better-enforced regulations, 
more effective institutions and financial incentives. The project would finance activities for the 
development of policies and decision-support tools (draft regulations, planning, guidelines, 
standards, use surveys and GIS techniques, etc.) as well as capacity-building, awareness-raising, 
and enforcement of policies and regulations through training of central and local officials and 
farmers, institutional cooperation, and a communication program. 
The 
Livestock Waste Environmental Impact Mitigation Component
 would result in 
demonstration watersheds with improved livestock waste management with improved nutrient-
balances. In each country it would be
 
implemented in one or two watersheds that drain into the 
South China Sea. Sub-components would include area-wide planning with GIS techniques, 
surveys and registration procedures, and the actual physical demonstration sites of improved 
waste management both, for large number of small producers (‘non-point source pollution’) and 
for selected large farms (‘point source pollutions’). 
The outcome of the 
Regional Support and Coordination Component 
would be efficient sharing 
of knowledge and experiences amongst all countries.  The component would develop 
mechanisms for informal collaboration amongst countries and policy and decision tools. Each 
participating country is at a different stage of livestock development, thus sharing of experiences 
can lead to significant mitigation of livestock waste during the development process.  Capacity 
building at the regional level to address this problem and similar problems would be improved 
by this component. This component might be implemented by FAO, which has a comparative 
advantage in its technical expertise and previous work in this area in the region. 
The outcome of the 
Project Management and Monitoring Component
 
would be efficient project 
management and information on livestock-induced environmental changes and their underlying 
causes. This component includes a Project Management Sub-component with work done in the 
project management units and the training and equipment needed for efficient project 
management. A second sub-component includes the monitoring of the project, including 
implementation progress monitoring, monitoring of water pollution and other environmental 
indicators, nutrient-balances and other project aspects, e.g. rate of compliance with 
environmental regulations, and the monitoring and evaluation of the specific demonstration sites. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Investments under Component 1, 3, and 4 of the proposed project would be in terms of staff 
time, workshops, training, office and monitoring equipments, etc. at the regional, national, and 
local level. Possible negative environmental effects from these activities are negligible. The one 
or two demonstration watershed under Component 2 of the proposed project will be decided 
early during the preparation process. The watersheds will have measurable outflow of surface 
water from contiguous area draining into the South China Sea (including Gulf of Thailand); the 
demonstration micro-watersheds are proposed to be part of the Pearl River Basin in China, of the 
Red River and Mekong Delta in Vietnam, and of the Chao Phraya in Thailand. Further criteria 
for the selection of the locations are (i) local willingness to participate and implementation 
capacity; (ii) livestock density; (iii) covering point and non-point source pollution; (iv) covering 
rural and peri-urban areas (preventive vs. curative); and (v) their current pollution impact. 
 
Page  3
 
 
E.  Recipient’s Institutional Capacity 
The institutional capacity between the three participating countries differs considerably and 
project preparation and design will have to reflect these differences in order to ensure efficient 
project implementation, including the effective exploitation of regional synergies through an 
efficient regional coordination and support part of the proposed project. 
 
Page  4
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy
 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
The project is categorized as 
Environmental Category B and the Bank requires environmental assessment (EA) 
of projects proposed for Bank or GEF financing to help ensure that they are 
environmentally sound and sustainable, and thus to improve decision making.
 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04)
 The applicability of this safeguard will be 
assessed during the preparation process. The design of the Institutional 
Development Component should pay attention to the mitigation and prevention of 
pollution of natural habitats from livestock–based sources. Though unlikely, it 
cannot be excluded at this stage that the Project demonstration sites under 
Livestock Waste Environmental Mitigation Component are located in natural 
habitats.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12)
 The need to purchase land for the 
construction of waste storage or treatment facilities might be required for some 
specific demonstration sites.  During preparation, country-specific policy 
frameworks for resettlement action plans will be developed in case of such an 
event; and site-specific resettlement action plans will be developed if such case  is 
already defined at appraisal stage . 
 
 
 
[ TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
The applicability of this safeguard will be 
assessed during the preparation process. Indigenous peoples or national minorities 
may be affected by project activities under the Livestock Waste Environmental 
Mitigation Component.  This possibility will be assessed during project 
preparation, through the social assessment. 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50)
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
   
[ ] A   [x] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
A team of local and international experts will undertake the environmental and social assessment 
of the project during its preparation. An involuntary resettlement framework will be completed 
under the social assessment. The applicability of safeguards that are still to be determined will be 
assessed during preparation. The work will be guided and appraised by Bank’s own 
Environmental Safeguard and Social Safeguard Specialist. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
Consultation and disclosure of project information will be ensured during project preparation and 
implementation in accordance with Bank guidelines and policies as well as with participating 
countries’ national policies. The social assessment process will develop a participatory 
framework for the implementation of the demonstration component of the project 
(Component 2). 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
During the PCN and Safeguard Review, the project was categorized as Environmental Category 
B, and the need for an EA was confirmed. Furthermore, the review confirmed the applicability of 
the safeguard for Involuntary Resettlement. It was decided that the applicability of the safeguards 
on Natural Habitats and Indigenous Peoples would be assessed during the preparation process. 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 May 2004
 
