ISDS
THE VWORLuD BANK GROUP                                                A Wcrild Frgit: ol Povorty
InfoShop
Report No: AC86
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC                    Project ID: P068133
Project: 4E-Marine Electronic Highway            Task Team Leader: Hatim M. Hajj
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 28, 2003     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 18, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASTR                              Sector: Ports; waterways and shipping (100%)
Lending Instrument: UNIDENTIFIED (??)            Theme: Regional integration (P); Pollution
Status: Lending                                  management and environmental health (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
5.     The program's development objectives are to increase the efficiency of marine transport through
the Straits, reduce its negative environmental impacts, and strengthen the conservation and mangement
of neighboring marine and coastal environments. The MEH would achieve these objectives by: (a)
reducing the frequency of ship collisions in the Strait's congested sea lanes and ports; (b) making marine
navigation in the Straits safer and therefore more often feasible in poor weather; (c) tracking and
monitoring vessel operations, such as illegal bilge water releases, in the Straits, with benefits for the
management and protection of marine and coastal resources; and (d) testing the feasibility of a MEH fund
to co-finance the system and to support coastal and marine resource conservation and management in the
Straits area. The program will thus generate coastal development and environmental benefits for the
littoral states; global environment benefits by reducing the pollution of shared marine water bodies; and
economic benefits for the international shipping industry and their billions of customers.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Essentially, the MEH Demonstration Project has 7 strategic components aimed at addressing the
aforementioned issues:
Component 1   Establish the Marine Electronic Highway and demonstrate its technical functionalities on
navigation safety and marine environment protection for the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore;
Component 2   Facilitate the integration of marine environment systems and data flow and information
exchange through the MEH system;
Component 3   Develop the operational and administrative mechanisms for the sustainable management
of the MEH system;
Component 4   Evaluate the financial, social and economic benefits and legal issues of the MEH system;
Component 5 Promote awareness and participation of relevant stakeholders to support the MEH



2
ISDS
system;
Component 6 Strengthen national and regional capacity in maritime safety and marine environment
protection for the sustainable management of the MEH system; and
Component 7   Implement transitional activities to develop the first phase MEH Full-scale Development
Project and assess the feasibility of establishing the second phase MEH system extending
to other sea areas in the East and West of the Straits.
The logical framework matrix in Annex 1 provides a summary of analysis on the outputs, methodology,
verifiable indicators to measure impacts and the assumptions made to implement the MEH
Demonstration Project.
Components:
Component 1 - Establishment of MEH System
Component 2 - Integration of Marine Environment Protection System
Component 3 - Development of Operational and Administrative Mechanisms
Component 4 - Evaluation of Financial, Social and Economic Benefits and Legal Issues
Component 5 - Promoting Participation of Relevant Stakeholders
Component 6 - Capacity Building, Evaluation and Project Management
Component 7 - Implement Transition to Full-scale MEH Development and Feasibility of Second Phase
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Sumatra and Malacca Straits. There are no protected areas, sites or critical natural habitats or any other
culturally or socially sensitive areas affected by the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes *No     O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claim,
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



3
ISDS
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will affect the routing and loading of shipping in the international waters of the
Malacca and Singapore Straits and provide an improved ship management system. There are no
territorial issues involved in the parts of the Straits that will be affected by the Project and the
three riparian states (Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore) will sign letters of commitment to the
Project and will take part in its implementation.
II.D. l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N.A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
No alternatives considered.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Relevant stakeholders of the MEH Project are the national and local governments in the three
participating countries of Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, partners in the shipping and the maritime
communities and user States, the private sector (technology providers and users), the scientific
community, nongovernment organizations and other users of the Straits. Part of the assessment of the
technical functionalities of the MEH system will involve ship-based and offshore linkups, for example, the
ECDIS-AIS-telemetry/buoy systems. Also, the evaluation of the ENC-ECDIS for navigation in critical
areas of the Straits and the influx and exchange of information will require land- and ship-based
interactions (e.g., ship to ship, ship to shore and offshore facilities to shore or ship). Thus, the
participation of the shipping sector and the maritime community in general will be crucial in
demonstrating the effectiveness, viability and value-added contribution of the MEH system to maritime
safety and marine environment protection. In this demonstration stage of the MEH Project, additional
land-based and offshore facilities and equipment need to be installed or upgraded. For ship-based
facilities and equipment, the project will take into account the mandatory requirements under the revised
SOLAS Chapter V, such as the installation of AIS and the need for ships, particularly new or refurbished
ships to be fitted with improved Integrated Bridge System. Thus, the participation of the shipping sector
in the demonstration project will take into consideration their plans and activities to install AIS and
ECDIS onboard their fleets, which will be their co-financing contribution to the project should they agree
to become partners.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S I. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are



4
ISDS
technically and institutionally manageable
[  S3. - No safeguard issues
,   SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                           Expected       4ctual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Hatim M. Hajj                                 4/1/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Glenn S. Morgan/Person/World Bank       4/16/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Cyprian F. Fisiy/Person/World Bank       4/16/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                           4/16/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Jitendra N. Bajpai                           4/1/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
$EARCH         FEEDBACK        Te MAP        SIHOWCASE     lo



5
ISDS



