                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                           Report No: AC175
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/29/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: ECUADOR                                          Project ID: P007077
Project: EC RURAL ROADS & DEV                             Task Team Leader: Emmanuel A. James
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 20, 2003              IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: February 11, 2004                          IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFT                                      Sector: Roads and highways (90%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        government administration (10%)
Status: Lending                                           Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Rural
                                                          policies and institutions (S); Environmental policies
                                                          and institutions (S); Civic engagement, participation
                                                          and community driven development (S); Small and
                                                          medium enterprise support (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main objectives of the project are to strengthen the capacity of provinces, municipalities and
other local agencies, referred to collectively in Ecuador as the Sectional Governments (SG), to
manage the rural road network, and to provide improved access to markets and social services for
residents of poor rural areas.       More specifically, the project would improve access and
connectivity to the main economic centers for the agriculture dependent and other populations of
the mainly rural cantons of the project provinces by: (i) improving the systems and procedures
for road maintenance and ensuring that the maintainable network in all project assisted provinces
is maintained satisfactorily; (ii) rehabilitation/improvement of selected rural roads and track s ; (iii)
improving the quality and capability of staff involved in the rural transport subsector;            (iv)
strengthening institutional arrangements and improving the procedures for planning,
programming and budgeting (PPB); (v) developing appropriate environmental and social
assessment techniques for application by the SG; and (vi) fostering the adoption and dissemination
of more appropriate technologies for improving rural roads.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
There are several justifiable transport improvement options for all aspects of SG transport
infrastructure planning, design, implementation and management. This project will be ambitious
in that it intends to address rural road improvement needs in a comprehensive way and at
probably the weakest institutional levels. It will in particular accord a high priority to
maintenance as this can be seen as both a provider of employment and as a way to keep the 40%
of the network that is maintainable (in good or fair condition) from falling into further disrepair.
The proposed project would assist the GOE and the SG in achieving their objectives by
financing:

        Institutional Strengthening, with the goals of: (i) increasing the administrative capacity of
municipal and provincial governments as well as national government entities involved in the
administration of rural roads; (ii) supporting the formation and training of microenterprises to

                                                 2
                                                                                               ISDS



undertake routine road maintenance; (iii) promoting increased road safety; and (iv) incorporating
a participatory approach to social and environmental issues in the planning and implementation
of road works. Targeted technical assistance in these areas would improve the sustainability of
road improvements and possibly other SG investments. In addition, the            formation of the
microenterprises for road maintenance is in line with recent Bank poverty assessments for
Ecuador, which highlighted the role of      labor-intensive programs as an important contributing
factor to poverty reduction;

        Non-motorized access. This project component would expand the network of tracks and
footpaths so as to improve access to markets and other important local facilities for the most
isolated rural communities that are not reachable by motorized means of transport. Rural
residents would have better access to village centers of activity (e.g. markets, hospitals, schools,
etc) and improved standards of living due to their reduced sense of isolation. In addition, this
component would assist local governments and communities in developing coherent programs
for managing and maintaining tracks and footpaths; and

          Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance , through a program aimed at linking rural
communities, especially in underserved areas, to the main and secondary road networks. Many
rural population centers are viewed currently as being virtually incapable of bringing their
agricultural production to the market in an efficient and competitive manner, especially during
the rainy season. Provision of road access is the one of the key inputs required to help these
communities become more self reliant, and for the delivery of social services. Through the
preparation of participatory provincial road improvement plans (PVP) the project would finance
the rehabilitation, and put in place arrangements for the continuous maintenance, of about 3500
km of roads in rural areas. Rehabilitation works would consist inter alia of the introduction of
more durable road surfaces, landslide removal, and building drainage and erosion control
structures.

In order to participate in the project, provinces and municipalities will have to complete their
PVP and agree to fund its routine maintenance needs, as well as to put in place adequate
program management arrangements at the provincial level (UGVP), which really represents a
pooling of resources for management and implementation purposes. To date, the preparation of
the PVP, which is derived from a comprehensive series of bottom-up planning workshops held
throughout a province, has been completed substantially in Imbabura province and is well
advanced in six others. In the case of Imbabura, the PVP process resulted in a comprehensive
plan for the rehabilitation and maintenance of about 1800 km of secondary and rural roads. Most
of the rural road rehabilitation works will consist of low cost approaches, spot improvements
etc, that will bring the typically narrow (3-5m) roads to maintainable condition. Out of the PVP
total roads for Imbabura, three strategic rural axes totalling 458 km have been proposed for
project support of their rehabilitation and maintenance needs. Subsequently, economic analyses
were completed using both cost effectiveness and cost benefit approaches (via the RED model)
and further detailed preparation activities, including the environmental and social aspects, of
components that are to be appraised by the Bank/IDB for their eligibility for inclusion in the
project's first year program, have been started. This process will be repeated as appropriate for
each province that wishes to obtain project financing for road rehabilitation components.

                                                        3
                                                                                                        ISDS



However, the project will always support justifiable institutional strengthening programs for any
province as well as the preparation of its PVP.



Components:



Road Rehabilitation
It includes the improvement of about 3500 km of roads that have been accorded high priority in
the SGs road improvement plans(Plan Vial Participativo -PVP). This component will include the
improvement of tracks and footpaths
Road Maintenance
Design and implementation of a program of routine and periodic maintenance for all rural roads
in a province
Institution Building
Training, Studies, consulting services, Institutional Strengthening

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Most of the project improvement will be carried out in rural areas of provinces in the sierras. However all
provinces except the Galapagos are in theory elegible. Since no new roads will be built and project
investments consist mainly of spot improvements and minor rehabilitation no significant adverse
environment or social impacts are expected.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,

                                                      4
                                                                                                         ISDS



describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project consists of minor, small scale road improvement works to be carried out at dispersed sites.
   Given the limited scope of project financed improvement, no significant irreversable impacts are
   expected.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There is little or not potential for such impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None have been identified so far. However, the sectoral assessment will provide further information in
this regard.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Basic procedures will be stipulated in each civil work contract to ensure that adequate mitigatory action,
   typically related to the treatment of borrow pits and embankment protection, will be taken if needed.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
These will include specific clauses in the Project's operational manual that are designed to help SGs
identify safeguard issues and to design the appropriate clauses for inclusion in civil works contracts.
Work is still ongoing in this area.

TORs have been finalized for a sectoral environmental approach (EAS) for the identification and
application of safeguard policies.Although the EAS results are not yet available, it is expected that the
OP/BP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), will not be triggered. On the other hand, in cases where the
beneficiaries are expected to be mostly indigenous peoples, OD4.20 may need to be applied.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The model used for the selection of the programs that form the provincial road plan (Plan Vial
Particpativo) is based on bottom-up, participatory planning workshops that start from the parroquial or
base levels and move up through the entire functional organization of the province. The methodologies
proposed by the UCV guarantee the availability of adequate opportunities for dialogue, so that the
selection and composing of the projects reflect the wishes of the beneficiary population, through the
canton governments, the parroquial boards and the social and private organizations active in the local
area. Project improvements include the implementation of a routine maintenance plan for rehabilitated
roads that will be designed to be executed with microenterprises that use labor-intensive approaches,
thereby further increasing benefits to local residents.
Considering the presence of different native ethnic groups from the regions, the project will require
strategies and procedures that guarantee, besides their participation, respect for the culture, traditions and
physical heritage of beneficiaries. This issue will be better defined under the sectoral assessment.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks

                                                     5
                                                                                                       ISDS



         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              8/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          8/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              8/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          8/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/15/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                                 Date
Task Team Leader:                    Emmanuel A. James                                    07/24/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Elena Correa/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                                 Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                         07/29/03
Sector Manager/Director              Jose Luis Irigoyen                                   07/29/03

