Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC395 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 11, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ecuador 
Project ID: P083010 
Project Name: Ecuador Urban Poverty 
Reduction  
Task Team Leader: Alexandra Ortiz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: January, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (75%);Solid waste 
management (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Other urban development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Yewande Aramide (to be confirmed) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 60 
IBRD: 60 
Other financing amounts by source:  
MIDUVI 
Municipalities 
Other (contribution by beneficiaries) 
TOTAL 
($m) 
5 
15 
2 
22 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project aims at improving the quality of life of urban Ecuadorians who live presently in marginal 
conditions. Specific objectives are to: (i) increase access to affordable land by poor urban households; (ii) 
increase access to basic urban services by poor urban households; (iii) increase citizen participation in 
urban development processes; (iv) enhance local economic opportunities at neighborhood level; and (v) 
strengthen the country’s territorial planning system. 
 
C.  Project Description  
The project would be a specific investment loan with three components: 
 
(a)  
Urban land management 
This component addresses the objective of increasing access to affordable land by the poor. It would 
finance technical assistance, geographical information systems and technological equipment to: (i) 
develop and implement a geo-referenced land information system to allow MIDUVI and large to medium 
municipalities to monitor key land variables such as prices, uses,  densities, and building permits, among 
others; (ii) strengthen the property rights system by simplifying and streamlining titling, cadastre, and 
registry procedures; and (iii) simplify urban regulations and streamline urban development processes. A 
Page  2
 
 
fourth sub-component, which will include technical assistance and investments will be an innovative pilot 
to develop low cost urban settlements through partnerships among organized communities, MIDUVI, and 
private sector developers. This pilot will cover approximately five large to medium cities. 
 
(b)  
Comprehensive urban upgrading 
This component addresses objectives (ii), (iii), and (iv) through an integrated social and infrastructure 
intervention in which community participation is a key success factor. It would finance comprehensive 
investments in poor urban neighborhoods, including: (i) water and sewer connections; (ii) improvement of 
drainages; (ii) improvement of existing interior roads; (iii) provision of lighting; (iv) construction of 
community centers and public spaces; (v) environmental mitigation measures; (vi) land titling; (vii) 
community strengthening; (viii) resettlement in cases of location in risk-prone areas; and (ix) support to 
local economic development initiatives. This component will complement IDB’s Neighborhood 
Comprehensive Improvement (PROMIB). PROMIB is a $50 million loan to benefit 45,000 families in 
cities with more than 30,000 inhabitants. It is estimated that at least 600,000 families live in marginal 
conditions in urban Ecuador and this component will assist in scaling up MIDUVI’s experience so far. 
The project will work with those municipalities that express interest and fulfill key conditions, including 
assignment of resources for co-financing, and willingness to simplify municipal ordinances. 
 
(c)  
Institutional strengthening  
This component would finance technical assistance, equipment, and capacity building for improved 
territorial planning, at all levels, and assist in the development of a national urban strategy. This includes 
background studies and detailed economic and poverty analyses as well as capacity building for 
municipalities in financial, administrative and planning methods. It will also finance the start-up and 
operational costs of the Project Management Unit. 
 
The responsible agency for the project will be MIDUVI, with municipalities taking an active role in the 
implementation of component (b) and being recipients of technical assistance and capacity building. 
Another institution was considered as a possible implementing agency, but rejected after careful review of 
the facts: the Ecuadorian Development Bank (BEDE). BEDE is in charge of promoting municipal 
development through lending for municipal development projects and technical assistance. BEDE has 
received support from IDB and the World Bank through the Municipal Development Project, which 
closed in 1999. Since then, BEDE has become highly politicized and ineffective, all of which translate in 
low demand of its services by municipalities. Another factor considered in rejecting BEDE as 
implementing agency is the proposal by the GOE to restructure and fusion various public banks, 
including BEDE, in one single entity. 
 
BEDE will receive technical assistance in this project to improve its municipal development role. This 
aspect is crucial for long-term sustainability since it is expected that municipalities will take leadership in 
urban upgrading projects in the future. 
  
D.  Project location  
 
Cities above 30,000 in population for component (b) and cities above 100,000 in population for 
component a-iv. Specific selection criteria will be developed during project preparation. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Borrower is executing two large projects, one from IDB in housing ($62 million) and one from the 
World Bank in water and sanitation ($32 million). Additional needs to increase MIDUVI’s institutional 
capacity to execute the project will be assessed during preparation. 
 
Page  3
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ X] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04), to be determined 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared. 
August/04. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
We will start preparation in February/04 and expect to complete the environmental assessment and the 
resettlement plan by August/04. 
 
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Alexandra Ortiz 
Date 
Nov 11/03 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Juan David Quintero 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Stein 
Date 
Comments 
 
