Report No. 23984
Report No: I066752 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ECUADOR         Project ID: P066752
Project: National System of Protected Areas      Task Team Leader: Gabriela
Arcos
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 18, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSEN     Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's development objective is to ensure the conservation and
management of Ecuador's biodiversity for socially sustainable development
by strengthening the National System of Protected Areas (NSPA) through
improving the legal, institutional and financial foundations and
capacities for the integrated, participatory management of protected areas.
A Strategic Plan for the NSPA (15-year plan) has been developed with the
assistance from the GEF Biodiversity Project (GEF Grant 28700-EC), to
reverse the declining status and sustainability of many protected areas,
and taking into account the structural changes occurring in the country's
public sector. The long-term vision is to ensure that NSPA is
self-sustained, transparent, decentralized, and managed through
partnerships with local communities, government at various levels, NGOs
and the private sector. The strategy has been discussed widely and has
been adopted by the Ministry of the Environment The proposed project, as a
first phase of the Plan's implementation, will specifically: a)
strengthen the institutional and legal framework under a new structure for
the administration of the NPAS; b) promote, develop and implement
innovative financial mechanisms and new participatory management models in
selected protected areas that would generate significant profits and would
be re-invested; c) establish a Protected Areas Trust Fund to cover the
recurrent costs of six priority protected areas. : a) strengthen the legal
and regulatory framework for the co-management of protected areas; b)
design and implement management plans for two priority protected areas
(Machallila and Cotacachi-Cayapas), piloting innovative financial
mechanisms and participatory planning/management models in these areas; c)
consolidate a Protected Areas Trust Fund to cover the recurrent costs of
up to nine priority protected areas; and d) consolidate the monitoring and
information system for the NSPA.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project will include four components: (1) Institutional
Strengthening and Legal Development; (2) Participatory Management of
Priority Protected Areas; (3) Sustainable Financing; and (4) Project
Monitoring and Follow-up.



Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Legal Development (Total
Cost: US $ 648,000, GEF financing: US $ 648,000 )
This component aims to consolidate the Directorate of Biodiversity and
Protected Areas role as the responsible agency for the administration and
supervision of the NSPA, through the strengthening its planning, control
and monitoring capacities to ensure effective management of protected
areas (PAs). It will also develop the regulatory framework to promote
participatory management and co-management of PAs in the country. The
implementation of this component will articulate the long-term strategy
for protected area management with the national policies and strategies
for sustainable development and biodiversity conservation in Ecuador. Main
sub-components include:
1.   Updating the NSPA Strategic Plan to coordinate DBPA long-term actions
within the MoE's new
decentralized institutional framework;
2.   Preparing a financial and managerial system for DBPA and implementing
it in nine protected areas of
the NSPA;
3.   Developing a sustainable financial strategy for the NSPA as well as
for the two protected areas selected by the project. These strategies will
include the identification of mechanisms for generating revenues in PAs,
such as income from the sale of environmental services, tourism patents,
service fees collection, research permits, among others;
4. Implementing pilot concessions of services in the two protected areas
selected by the project. These processes will include: identification of
possible concessions (services and potential concessionaires), design of
legal instruments, develop selection criteria and procedures, preparation
of bidding documents, follow-up of concession contracts/agreements, and
evaluation of implemented concessions;
5.   Designing and implementing a training program for DBPA and PAs
technical staff;
6.   Strengthening mechanisms for institutional coordination,
participation, technical advice, and political
support by civil society to manage and consolidate the NSPA; and
7. Developing legal instruments that will allow the generation of
non-budgetary revenues for self-sustaining management of PAs, and promote
co-management and participation of different stakeholders in
decision-making and PA management.
Component 2: Participatory management of Priority Protected Areas (Total
cost: US $ 17,670,000 GEF financing: US $ 1,557,600 )
This component aims to promote the participatory management of two
priority protected areas (Cotacachi-Cayapas Ecological Reserve and
Machalilla National Park) by developing co-management models according to
the specific social and political conditions of each area. The project
will also support the creation or strengthening of local councils to
-2 -



facilitate the participation of different stakeholders in the management
of PAs. In addition, the project will finance the recurrent costs of the
Cuyabeno Wildlife Production Reserve. These priority areas were selected
by doing a comparative analysis, using biological, economic and social
criteria. GEF support will focus on the following activities on each area:
Cotacachi-Cayapas Ecological Reserve:
1. Developing a Strategic Management Plan (SMP), which will identify the
priority programs and actions, as well as the administrative mechanisms to
implement efficient management in this PA. The SMP will be designed during
the first year of the project based on the results of an ecological and
socioeconomic assessment of the PA and its buffer zone. The project will
provide financial and technical support to carry out this assessment;
2. Creating and strengthening the Participatory Management Committee (PMC)
and the Technical Support Group (TSG) of this protected area, as key
mechanisms for the active participation of different stakeholders related
to PA management;
3.    Operating the Environmental Interpretation Center of Cuicocha, built
in 1999 by the GEF-funded
Biodiversity Protection Project; and
4.    Implementing the control and patrolling program, and other priority
activities that will be identified in
the SMP of this reserve.
Machalilla National Park:
Developing a SMP, which will identify the priority programs and actions,
as well as the administrative mechanisms to implement effective management
in this PA. The SMP will be designed during the first year of the project
based on the current management plan of this area, designed in 1998 with
the support of the GEF-funded Biodiversity Protection Project.
Implementing the SMP through strengthening the technical and operational
capacities of the national park Technical Unit (TU), responsible for the
PA management. Specific activities include: recurrent costs, minimum
infrastructure and equipment to ensure effective management, protection of
critical areas, regulation of compatible production activities (i.e.
sustainable tourism and fishing, and extraction of non-timer forest
products), training of park personnel, and environmental education and
communication in the PA and its surroundings; and
Strengthening the Participatory Management Committee (PMC) and the
Technical Support Group (TSG) of this protected area, as key mechanisms
for the active participation of different stakeholders related to PA
management.
Cuyabeno Wildlife Production Reserve:
Financing the recurrent costs of this area during the first year and a
half of the project. After this period, the recurrent costs will be
covered by the Protected Areas Fund (PAF) described in Component 3; and
- 3 -



Providing basic equipment to support the implementation of the PA control
program.
Component 3: Sustainable Financing (Total cost: US $ 12,930,000; GEF
Financing: US $ 4,325,000)
This component is directed to achieve the consolidation of the Protected
Areas Fund (FAP), that operates within the Environmental Fund of Ecuador.
FAPis a strategic response to the everlasting problem of lack of long-term
funding mechanism to support conservation within the National Patrimony of
Protected Natural Areas. Furthermore, once essential recurrent costs of
PA's have been covered, other resources are more likely to be mobilized to
support biodiversity conservation at PA's.
The involvement of the National Environmental Fund as an independent
autonomous organization, guarantees direct accountability and greater
efficiency in the utilization of resources. To assure adequate and timely
disbursements an Operational Manual, which includes a complete Program
Cycle, has been developed in coordination with the MoE
The Project will help to the consolidation of FAP by allocating $US 4
million towards its endowment; this, through earned interests, will allow
coverage of the essential recurrent costs component of Managerial Plans of
at least eight PA's. Matching resources have already been secured from the
GOE ($US 1 million), and the Government of Germany through the KfW ($US
2.9 million). The funds from the German Government will benefit directly
the Sumaco Napo Galeras National Park. Other protected areas, in addition
to those ones covered by the GEF contribution and the one covered by the
funds from Germany, will become eligible for resources from FAP as the
endowment becomes capitalized. Component three will further support the
consolidation of FAP by allocating additional resources to cover
operational costs and activities planned under the fundraising strategy.
It is expected that by year two of the implementation of the Project, nine
protected areas will be receiving resources from the FAP to cover the
essential recurrent costs component of implementing the PA's Managerial
Plans.
Component 4: Project Monitoring and Follow-up (Total cost: US $ 1,169,400;
GEF financing: US $ 1,169,400 )
This component aims to ensure the proper operation of the project, through
the establishment of a follow-up system to evaluate and monitor the
implementation of planned activities. this system will be based on the
rules and procedures of the world bank, and in the design and
implementation of annual planning and evaluation processes, including the
preparation of operational plans, progress reports (technical and
financial), and external audits. The project will also perform two
management efficiency evaluations and two beneficiary assessments of the
project (mid-term and final). Main tasks include:
- 4 -



* Implementing the NSPA Information and Monitoring System, including its
installation and operation in the 10 Regional Districts of MoE, and a
pilot implementation of this system in nine PAs selected by the project.
* Developing a methodology to evaluate management efficiency in PAs, and
executing two evaluations (initial and final) in nine PAs selected by the
project. GEF funding will allow for: performing two beneficiary
assessments (mid-term and final) as well as designing and implementing a
methodology for biodiversity monitoring in the two priority PAs and their
buffer zones, that are part of Component 2 of this project; and
*      Project coordination to support project activities.
Components:
Componentl: Institutional Strengthening and Legal Development
Component2: Participatory management of Priority Protected Areas
Component 3: Sustainable Financing
Component 4: Project Monitoring and Follow-up Contingencies
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project locations include the following protected areas: Machalilla
National Park, Cotacachi-Cayapas Ecological Reserve and Cuyabeno Wildlife
Reserve.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
- 5-



significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will protect major biodiversity assets of Ecuador, and no
major negative environmental impacts are expected. No physical
displacement of local communities is expected. Social impacts could stem
from potential restrictions of use of natural resources within Protected
Areas, affecting local and indigenous populations. These impacts will be
addressed through the participatory planning and implementation of
management plans involving the local and indigenous communities.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None expected
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Protection of biodiversity within protected areas
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Small construction works will be subjected to environmental analysis
according to the Environmental Analysis adopted by the government. Social
impacts will be addressed according to the government's Process Framework.
Indigenous people's issues will be addressed according to the Indigenous
People's Development Framework
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Ministry of Environment, National Environmetnal Fund, national and
international environmental community (NGOs), local communities
(indigenous and non-indigenous), local administration, tourism operators.
Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure included the creation of
participatory management committees in each protected area and the Parts
Advisory Committee to the Ministry of Environment, which contributed to
the project preparation and will oversee project implementation. The
Environmental Analysis, Process Framework and Indigenous Peoples
Development Framework, have been circulated to key stakeholders and made
available for public consultation at MoE and the World Bank office in
Quito.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
- 6 -



community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/25/2002        1/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     3/25/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/2/2002        4/3/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/25/2002        1/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     3/25/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/2/2002        4/4/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/25/2002        1/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available     3/25/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/2/2002        4/3/2002
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Gabriela Arcos  04/02/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Elizabeth Monosowski     04/02/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Pilar Larreamendy        04/02/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Juan D. Quintero         04/02/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         John Redwood     04/02/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



