25313
October 30, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 30,2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
COUNTRY: Ecuador                              PROJECT ID: P057034
PROJECT: Conservation of Biodiversity in Pastaza  TTL: Gabriela Arcos
APPRAISAL DATE: not applicable                IBRD AMOUNT ($m): 0.76 mnillion
BOARD DATE: not applicable                    IDA AMOUNT ($m):
MANAGING UNIT: LCSEN                          SECTOR: Environment
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: GEF MSP Grant            STATUS: Final Project Brief
Project Objectives (From PDS)
The main objective of the project is to carry out in-situ conservation and management of the ecosystemrs
'and the biodi'er.iry found in the Southeastern Amazon forest of selected indigenous communities of
Pastaza. Specifipclly the project will:
1. Carry out territorial planning, together with the conservation of ecosystems and in-situ biodiversity,
within repreienIiaike areas of the selected indigenous communities of Pastaza anc to encourage the
sustainable use and management of Amazon forest resources, based on applied collective research on
indzienotil; know-how and iheir trrdiiatnal systems of access to, use and manage natural resources.
2. Provide accuraie information for planning and decision-making for the long-term management of the
indiven,¢.u ierrilt ines ot Paslaza.
3. Strenothen the enmironmental administration capacity of indigenous communities by training their
hunan re-ourcei7  in collekiie methodologies of environmental diagnosis, plannimg, administration,
monitoiing and e%alujion. and by providing specialized training to Network specialists at colleges and
higher learning cenier.
Project De>cripiton (From PDS):
In order ic prroduce the above outcomes, the following three project components will be implemented:
1. Design communal rmanagement plans and implement pilot projects
GEF will support the following activities: (a) information gathering and assessments needed to design the
management plans and implement pilot projects; (b) design of the management plans; and (c)
implementation of pilot natural resources management projects.
2. Establishment of a socio-environment information center for the indigenous territories of Pastaza
This components includes the purchase of hardware and software; developing a data base; designing
Geographic Information Systems, GIS; data entering; comprehensively analyzing and managing
geographic, biodiversity and socioeconomic information; applying Geographic Information Systems;j
training human resources in GIS management. The information center is construed as a support mechanism
of the research and planning required for the conservation process of biological diversity and the rational!
use of natural resources in the indigenous territories of Pastaza. With this purpose, GeogiaDhic Information1
Systems (GIS) will be applied to research, administration and monitoring activities of the management|
plans.
3. Training
Comprises high level courses for community technical staff specializing in environmental management and:
resource administration; courses and workshops for local technical staff in collective environmental!
diagnosis, management plan design, administration, monitoring and evaluation methodologies; workshops
at the communities during each stage of the management plan design and application processes, and
materials. Training will stem from a curricular design and training modules based on the combination ot
local indigenous know-how and formal technological science.



Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of the
area and population likely to bc affected, and proximnity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be developed in three selected communities in the Pastaza Province (Yana Yacu, Nina
Amarun and Shiona). Pastaza has a total extension of 29.773,70 km2, it is located at the South Eastern
region of Ecuador and represents 22 percent of the Amazon Region territory. This province has about
56,000 inhabitants, 23,000 living in urban areas and 33,000 at rural areas, including 138 indigenous
communities.
Pastaza has been traditionally inhabited by four indigenous groups: Quichua, Shiwiar-Achuar and Zapara,
who posse legalized land. Between 1964 and 1992, a total of 2,210,887 hectares were legalized,
representing 74 percent of the Province. These territories are distributed as follows: 2,085,985 belong to
indigenous communities and 124,902 to colonists (colonos) . About 500,000 hectares remain without legal
title.
Pastaza lacks of private or government administered protected areas. Even though several local
organizations, including indigenous organizations, have developed some programs aimed at the sustainable
use of natural resources, these efforts have not been enough to ensure a sustained conservation strategy.
Even though thisproject does not entail the formal establishment of protected areas, this initiative will
strategically complement the governtment's and other private efforts to conserve critical ecosytems of
Ecuador's Amazon Region.
,B. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [ }, C [xl, Fl  TBD []
Comments: The proposed project will have a positive impact on conservation of biodiversity in Ecuador as
it would strategically will complement the Government's effort to conserve globally important ecosystems.
C. Applicability of Safeguard Policies (from PDS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
Yes    No      TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    [x]    [ ]      I
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      [1      [xI    [f 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               [ ]    [x]     II
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 [ ]    [x]     I I
PestManagement (OP 4.09)                                    [ 1    [x]     I I
Invbluntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                          [ I    [x]     I I
Iihdigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               [x]    []     [  II
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              [x]     I]       I
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                  [ ]    [xI     t I
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         [ ]    [x]    [I 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, describc
stcps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
The project will seek to harmonize the indigenous traditional practices, biological and social research and
innovative mechanisms for natural resources management with the conservation of globally important
ecosystems.
No involuntary physical displacement is foreseen in the context of this project and will not be part of
management plans designed for each selected community. The project will support activities guaranteeing
the local livelihoods sustainability based upon  the ongoing  customary practices among indigenous
communities.
This project is the result of a wide consultation among indigenous beneficiaries. In this: sense, the project
responds to the beneficiaries identified alternatives on natural resources management. The project is
taking into consideration previous efforts developed to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources in
Pastaza and the characteristics of the Amazon ecosystems of Ecuador. Local indigenous organizations
have envisaged mechanisms that guarantee the compatibility of the biodiversity conservation objectives
with human presence within the Pastaza Province. In doing so, the process of delimitation, zoning and
preparation of management plans for selected indigenous territories is based on. the documented
consultation and decision making with the local population. Such participation ensures the feasibility of
sustainable management in their territories and its social sustainability.
The implementation process will stress a participatory methodology, through  an edarly and ongoing
involvement of the beneficiaries' to assure strict implementation of the communitV's decisions, and
avoiding any imposed alternatives on resources management. This means that no onet (individuals or
communities) will have to participate in the implementation of the proposed managerient plans against
their will, thus no involuntary economic displacement will take place.
2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Describe
any potential cumulative or long term impacts.
The project components are not expected to have any significant negative impacts on the environment.
Limited civil works will be undertaken in specific areas of selected communities consisting of
improvement of existing facilities for local technical staff and for flora and fauna research programs. No
new buildings will be constructed, existing buildings will be rehabilitated or improved and will be usually
located in previously planned, dedicated sites, within already inhabited areas. Consequently, removal of
natural vegetation will not take place at all. Nevertheless adequate construction practices will be followed.
Community-based productive activities will consider the following aspects: a) will be developed on a pilot
basis, comprising small groups of about 10 to 12 families each; b) phytogenetic gardens will be located in
areas already degraded or under agricultural use. No agro-forestry activities are envisaged and therefore
there will be no removal of native forest; and, c) all selected plant species will be organic products, no
pesticides will be used.
3. In light of 1 and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable
4. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A process framework (Annex 2) has been developed to address local peoples livelih6od issues.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders
There are numerous beneficiaries of the project. The mapping survey covering all the indigenous territories
in Pastaza and the information that would be generated by the Socio-environment Information Center will
benefit all 138 communities in Pastaza, and serve as the basis for future strategic planning of the entire
Province of Pastaza. NGOs who are currently financing sustainable development projects at the indigenous
communities of Pastaza will also benefit in terms that project investments will be' done within the
framework of community management plan programs.
In addition, other communities outside Pastaza will benefit from management plan models and
methodologies prepared by the indigenous communities themselves, which may be reproduced by NGOs at
other indigenous communities with whom they work at the Ecuadorian Amazon region and throughout the'
Amazon basin. Similarly, the project's communal 'environmental management plans will also strengthen'
sustainable resource uses and national conservation programs that the Ecuadorian State is implementing
through its various entities, including the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry 6f Agriculture and
Livestock, as well as local non-government organizations who are implementing programs related to
Amazon biodiversity and ecosystem conservation.
Participatory Strategy
Since the original conceptualization of the project, the establishment of the Institutional I4-twork has had as
its main objective to ensure the participation of al the members of the three selected communities and the
strategic integration of all the experiences previously developed by all the member organizations regarding
the sustainable management of natural resources in the region. The organization oti the Institutional
Network, as members of the Pastaza Indigenous Peoples Organization (OPIP), have as a main mandate to
carry out any planning process though direct participation and consultation with indigenouis communities as
direct beneficiaries. This project has had a long period of preparation mainly because it has been developed
in fully consultation with beneficiary indigenous communities and the organization representing them.
During the preparation phase, the IQBSS organized several workshops with members of beneficiary
communities and Network technical staff to establish the project's goal, objectives and a4ctivities. For the
implementation phase, a technical team of three people will be established, who will assist the experts in
performing the studies related to physical, biological and socioeconomic aspects. These teams will also
conduct the activities involved in applying the management plans at their respective communities and will
participate together with the experts in biological monitoring and the assessment of project results.
Community members involved will participate by analyzing, making decisions and performing project
activities, from the study phase of physical, biological and socioeconomic issues to plan design and
implementation. To achieve community involvement, workshops and courses will be organized according 
to planned project activities, thereby ensuring the plans' application and the sustainable management of'
resources within their territories. As for the implementation of the pilot projects for the management of l
selected species of flora and fauna, the communities will be directly responsible for, supervising and I
reporting results.
Information Dissenination
With the aim to promote replication throughout the region of the project activities in the three targeted
communities, the dissemination of inforrnation related to project administration, activity monitoring, results
assessment, Project's goal and objectives will be performed through a) workshops organized during the
Project's implementation, involving Network institutions; the communities participating in the project;
leaders of Ecuadorian indigenous organizations; representatives from the Ministry of the Environment and
project co-financing entities; and b) through the publication of management plans and results of the forest
resource management program.



FROM :,ANO MUNDI       FAX NO. ' 593 2 2220205  Dc. PQ --7m- ORlA  M   F
^rtr~~ ~~~famw or SMmY Cl >b
wof  1sWb*i :l/01/7n02
of          1!    :   $Nitowrlzow6to2
r r g .. ~~~~~NIA
S g X 4 ~~~~~N/A
g   E~~~~~4,        N    !4JA
I>P-m ~ ~ ~ ~~w
WStr~~~~~~~~mni0 A=



