Report No. 23217
Report No: I074311 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/08/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: EGYPT, ARAB REPUBLIC OF         Project ID: P074311
Project: ICT Development Support         Task Team Leader: Mohammad A. Mustafa
Appraisal Date: October 2, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m): 8.00
Board Date: July 25, 2002        IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: CITPO     Sector: CC - Telecommunications & Informatics
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project objective is to facilitate private sector-led growth in the
information and communications technologies (ICT) sector in Egypt by
creating an enabling environment to: (i) improve access to efficient and
affordable communications services; (ii) develop a vibrant ICT sector; and
(iii) enhance the efficiency of the delivery of government services and
increase the competitiveness of national firms. The project will support
the Government of Egypt (GoE)'s program to: (a) strengthen the
telecommunications regulatory framework and build the institutional
capacity of the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA) to undertake
its functions in an independent, competent, and transparent manner; (b)
implement comprehensive postal sector reform including a new legal and
regulatory framework for the sector, modernization of the postal operator,
and development of new postal services including e-commerce activities;
and (c) support the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(MCIT) in promoting the ICT industry, facilitating e-commerce activities,
and establishing the framework for e-government.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
Strengthen telecommunications sector policy and regulation
Define and implement postal sector reform
Support ICT and e-commerce agenda
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
N/A.



B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: N/A.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)        No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
N/A.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
N/A.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
N/A.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
-2-



I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. N/A.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Mohammad A. Mustafa      10/11/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Concepcion Esperanza Del
Castillo/Person/World Bank       10/18/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     10/18/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Pierre A. Guislain       10/11/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 3 -



