                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/16/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: EGYPT, ARAB REPUBLIC OF                              Project ID: P082914
Project: EG-AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT                               Task Team Leader: Michel A. Loir
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 10, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m): 173.00
Bank Approval: March 16, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF                                          Sector: Aviation (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Corporate governance (P); Infrastructure
Status: Lending                                               services for private sector development (P);
                                                              Regulation and competition policy (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The key development objectives of the Airport Development Project (ADP) are to foster more rapid
economic growth, capitalize on Cairo International Airport's (CA) potential as a regional hub for
passengers and freight, and augment Egypt's foreign exchange earning capacity. These objectives, which
are well-aligned with other on-going Bank operations, including the proposed Economic Reform Project
and the Agricultural Export Development Project, would be achieved by:

             eliminating existing capacity constraints at CA, which would permit increased traffic flows,
             contribute to better airport services, lower transaction costs, and more competitive
             operations, and promote tourism and encourage agricultural exports, both of which are
             intensive airport users; and

             addressing airport sector governance issues, including separation of policy, regulatory and
             operational functions, and promotion of policies to strengthen the investment climate, attract
             private investment, and encourage competition by limiting the influence of EgyptAir on
             airport management decisions; also, testing of a simple, albeit significant, formula for a
             private operator to manage CA, and which could serve as a strong demonstration effect to be
             applied to broader private sector involvement for planned improvements at other
             international airports, including at Aswan, Hurghada, Luxor, Abu Simbel and Sharm El
             Sheikh.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
While the scope of the proposed ADP has not yet been finalized, construction of TB3 and a new cargo
village, or CV2, (the existing cargo village is used by EgyptAir; other areas are occupied by foreign
airlines that will move to CV2 when built) would be core components. Other investments contemplated
by the GoE, but which won't form part of the ADP, include a shopping mall and hotels at CA, and the
inclusion of other airport developments at Sharm El Sheikh, Hurghada, Luxor, Aswan or Abu Simbel.
The development of these airports under separate concession arrangements would appear to be a better
proposition.

Project components, as defined hereafter, correspond to a preliminary project concept that would limit
physical investments to CA.       Policy formulation to support private sector participation in airport
infrastructure and services, and related institutional building initiatives would start with the
establishment of an independent regulatory organization. The proposed ADP would consist of:

                                                      2
                                                                                                       ISDS




         (a) civil works (construction of TB3 and CV2);

         (b) equipment (for TB3, as well as transfer and storage equipment for CV2); and

         (c) technical assistance (to prepare an integrated national airport master plan, develop an
             appropriate regulatory framework and establish an independent regulatory authority, assess
             strategic options for private management of and investments in airports, streamline airport
             cross-subsidization, assist in tendering of new airport concessions, and supervise works).

The overall cost of the TB3 Project (civil works and equipment) is estimated to be between US$300
million and US$400 million. When completed, TB3 would have a total capacity of 11.0 million
passengers (5.0 million domestic and 6.0 million international passengers), compared to the current 9.5
million, and would later be integrated with Terminal 2, which is presently used primarily by foreign
airlines. Terminal 1, which has EgyptAir as its main user, would continue to receive domestic and
regional flights. The TB3 would consist of:

         ·   one new terminal building;
         ·   one concourse;
         ·   two fingers;
         ·   three skyways - two connecting the concourse with each finger, and one connecting Terminal
             2 with TB3; and
         ·   electromechanical equipment.

To better accommodate an aggressive construction schedule, two packages of works are planned for TB3.
The first would be an "enabling package," which would proceed in advance of the main contract and
involve a local contractor to prepare the site by putting up fences, moving utility networks providing
temporary access roads and parking facilities, and preparing a laydown area for equipment and supplies.
The enabling package is estimated to have a duration of between eight and nine months, is projected to
cost between US$20 million and US$30 million, would be tendered locally, and financed by the National
Investment Bank of Egypt. The second package or main contract for works and equipment and would be
completed in 30 to 32 months. The main contract would be co-financed by the GoE and the Bank. It is
estimated that the composition of project expenses will be 70 percent in foreign currency and 30 percent
in local currency. Bank financing would only apply to civil works, the preferred option being to let the
TB3 operator share risks by financing some of the equipment, which is estimated to be 25 percent of total
costs.

While existing runway capacity has been deemed sufficient to handle additional traffic generated as a
result of TB3, design work for a third runway at CA is currently being undertaken by Aeroports de Paris.
The runway will be four kilometers in length, 65 meters wide, and will accommodate the future
generation of aircraft that will carry between 600 and 800 passengers. The estimated cost to build the
new runway, which would not be part of the proposed project, is US$50 million.

                                  2                                                                     2
CV2 would provide a 14,000 m covered storage facility during Phase 1, and an additional 8,000 m is
planned during Phase 2, or by 2010. When completed, it would accommodate up to 135,000 tons per
year. A study, currently being updated, estimates the cost of Phase 1 to be some US$25 million, of which
35 percent would be for cooling equipment and refrigeration storage. If CV2 is a necessary complement
to TB3, its construction would best be delegated to private investors, such as to individual or a
consortium of airlines and freight forwarders, to the TB3 operator, or to a combination of both. It is not

                                                        3
                                                                                                         ISDS



planned to use Bank financing to develop the CV2 component.

The selection of a private firm to operate TB3, or CA as a whole, and to (possibly) finance part of the
investment will be key to project success. The selection should be made upstream, and indeed the
Government's objective is to hire an investment bank by mid-2003 and to finalize the scope of the
investment and prepare appropriate tender documents with a view to awarding a contract in early 2004.
Slippages are possible, and project conditionalities would be designed to minimize risks of failure to
select a private firm. Making launch of the tendering process a Condition of Appraisal and contract
signing a Condition of Effectiveness might be envisaged.

PROJECT COMPONENTS


Civil Works (US$ TBD)
Equipment (US$ TBD)
Technical Assistance and Studies (US$ TBD)

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The proposed project is located in Cairo, Egypt, a city of around twelve million inhabitants. Cairo
International Airport is Egypt's main international gateway and receives more than half of all passenger
traffic. The project is not expected to have any adverse environmental or social impacts. The land on which
the project will be developed is fenced, in the public domain, and other than airport activities, is otherwise
unoccupied.


B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)

Comments: The project will require a full environmental assessment (EA). The Client has finalized the
TORs for the EA, and launched the process of selecting a qualified consulting firm to undertake the work.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,

                                                       4
                                                                                                         ISDS



describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
An environmental impact assessment (EIA) will be conducted in accordance with OP/BP 4.01, and will
   address the project's potential impacts, including to noise, air and water quality, cultural and biological
   resources, management of solid and hazardous waste, vehicular access to the airport, and social impacts.
   In addition, a land acquisition assessment will form part of the EIA to help determine whether OP/BP
   4.12 will be triggered. While the proposed ADP would not include financing to build additional runway
   capacity, a third runway will be constructed at some point in the future, and an assessment of its potential
   impacts will form a part of the final EIA.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The project is not anticipated to have any cumulative impacts, nor to trigger more than one safeguard. Since
   the land in question is owned by the Government, resettlement and land acquisition is not expected.
   However, as described above, aland acquisition will be undertaken as part of the EIA.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Noise would likely have the biggest long-term inpact. Other potential impacts, such as waste
management and treatment of any hazardous materials, could more easily be mitigated. The development
of a third terminal would create jobs, and provide a boost to prvate sector development.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
TBD

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Social and environmental specialists are members of the team preparing the ADP. They will supervise
the preparation studies that will carried out by local consultants. They will also participate in the
pre-appraisal mission, advise on formulation of Bank documents and the kind of measures to be taken to
ensure compliance with Bank safeguard policies, and provide assistance during project negotiations.

As part of the EIA, an environmental management plan will be developed. In case issues of resettlement
become necessary, appropriate measures, including a Resetlement Action Plan and resettlement policy
framework, would be undertaken.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EIA will also include social assessments, which will be conducted to identify key stakeholders,
determine the extent of any potential impacts, and verify land ownership.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[X] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable

                                                    5
                                                                                                    ISDS



[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            9/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        9/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         10/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive      10/31/2003
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Michel A. Loir                                     June 10, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Sherif Kamel F. Arif/Person/World Bank             June 16, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    John Keith Rennie-MNS/Person/World Bank            June 13, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif                                   June 16, 2003
Sector Manager/Director              Emmanuel Forestier                                 June 16, 2003

