ISDS
THEWORLD BANKG ROUP                                         AWorld Free of Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/09/2002                          23456
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Pro ect Data
Country: EL SALVADOR                          Project ID: P064919
Project: JUDICIAL MODERNIZATION PROJECT       Task Team Leader: Waleed Haider Malik
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 30, 2002   IBRD Amount ($m): 18.60
Bank Approval: June 27, 2002                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSPS                          Sector: BY - Other Public Sector Management
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
El Salvador is in the process of transforming its judicial system. It has advanced, important sector
improvement activities especially since the signing of the Peace Accords in 1992. These
supported constitutional changes creating new institutions such as human rights bodies,
providing a separate budget for the judiciary branch, and drafting new laws and procedures for
the courts. The changes mainly aimed at facilitating the country's "transition" to peacetime
reconciliation, and democracy strengthening, focused on criminal justice and human rights
reforms, constitutional law enforcement, and juvenile justice and advocacy programs. These
activities stressed the "supply side" of the criminal and juvenile justice systems (by creating new
institutions). They have had mixed results in effectiveness and gaining citizen confidence.
By addressing present social and economic challenges and providing a base for prompt,
accessible justice in an effort to reduce crime and violence and promote good governance and
national competitiveness, the proposed project would continue support for an important objective
of the Peace Accords. It would build on the new appreciation of citizens, the Government and
sector institutions that judicial reform needs to be made more effective, the approach integrated,
lessons incorporated, the process speeded up and the awareness of the efforts to improve the
system increased so as to achieve social and economic development, and in turn peace with
justice.
The underlying premise is that courts need to be made more effective for deterring crime and
violence, improving governance and transparency, promoting national competitiveness and
broadening access to justice by the poor and disadvantaged and leading legal development and



2
ISDS
reform. The development objective is to advance the aims set forth by the Supreme Court to
deliver timely and effective justice that would foster greater public trust and confidence in the
rule of law, and improve legal and judicial services by upgrading judicial systems' performance
from an increased demand-side perspective.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The aim of the project is to advance the objectives set forth by the Supreme Court to deliver
"timely and effective justice" that fosters greater public confidence and access to the poor and
disadvantaged. To meet these objectives, the proposed project is divided intofour
inter-related components:
A.    Strengthen Institutional Capacity of the Judiciary, its Oversight of Professionals
and Knowledge Sharing Capabilities
Institutional capacity and knowledge sharing would be enhanced under the project through
technical assistance, knowledge sharing, coordination and monitoring and evaluation support
for:
(i) strengthened management of the Judiciary by adopting modem management, and
administrative concepts and practices (e.g. e-training, e-budgeting, e-manuals,
e-communication, gender equality) to more effectively and rationally improve their
functioning at the central and de-concentrated locations;
(ii) clearer institutional policy and guidelines by means of the systematization of
decision-making processes and supported by technological tools so policy makers better keep
pace with the needs of the justice system and chart the future direction for the courts;
(iii) strengthened discipline and oversight system ofjudges and lawyers and other who
operate in the court system (e.g. experts) through timely resolution of complaints and
publication of information that promotes transparency but does not compromise judicial
independence and professionalism.
(iv) establishing knowledge sharing programs that harness reform lessons on a on-going
basis, identify good practices, identify frontier training topics (e.g. dollarization and
competitiveness and role of the courts), promote dialogue among key stakeholders (e.g.
senior policy making judges, congressional members responsible for judicial reform
oversight, and civil society and business opinion formers), and guide reform implementation.
(v) in parallel establishing and maintaining a Project Coordination Support Unit (PCU) with
adequate professional and administrative staff and resources to coordinate, monitor, evaluate,
distill lessons, communicate and implement the project.
Bank financing. The component would finance consultant services, reengineering
workshops, training and knowledge activities, partnership assistance for linking with GDLN
(Law and Justice module), other Bank supported networks (e.g. IUDICIS-Latin America
Supreme Court Network) and local government and business network of Info-Centers; ICT
applications software and goods; and administrative, logistical and coordination support for
the PCU operation. It would also finance social communication, publication of knowledge
sharing workshops and the dissemination through their results through print, radio and TV.
The Government would provide space for the project unit, direct the technical assistance,



3
ISDS
project coordination staff and participate in meeting the operational costs.
B.    Modernize the Operation of Courts
Project elements would include technical assistance to upgrade court efficiency and resource
utilization through:
(i) re-mapping court distribution based on more equitable criteria to balance workload and
geographic and other criterion. This would include a review of the existing judicial career and
organic laws.
(ii) Automation of Supreme Court civil andfamily chambers with case management systems,
accompanied by staff training in legal research, ICT applications and dissemination of
decisions.
(iii)    Setting up Integrated Justice Center (with multiple judges) consolidating civil,
family and commercial courts currently operating in dispersed locations in San Salvador, San
Miguel and/or Santa Ana.
Bank financing. The component would finance consultant services, training, computer and
other equipment, space remodeling.
C.    Improved access, transparency and legal culture
Overall, multi-faceted measures would be tested/initiated under this component, through
provision of technical assistance for:
(i) Establishment of Small Claim Courts in San Salvador (and or another city) for civil and
commercial matters and pilot provision of support for their operation. The legal basis for
setting up these courts was approved recently.
(ii) Setting-up User-Information and Family Assistance Centers in three main cities (with
links to Tele-centros in major cities) to familiarize people with their rights and obligations
and to help the disadvantaged access them.
(iii)    Establishment of Community Outreach and Education Programs. These would
help the general public, legislators, opinion leaders-minority indigenous communities,
public officials, educators, advocacy groups, NGOs-law students, lawyers, court personnel
and judges better understand the relevance of courts to law-abiding citizens.
(iv) Development of municipal level violence/crime maps and assessments to guide judicial
policy making and promote dialogue among sector institutions (e.g. justices of the peace) and
community leaders.
Bank financing. The component would finance consultant services, training, workshops,
studies, computer equipment for small claim courts and launching the community and
education outreach program.
D.    Develop professional quality and competence of judicial officers and employees



4
ISDS
Professional quality and competence would be developed through financing technical
assistance and construction:
(i) building an e-learning culture through development/conversion of courses for four types
of training typologies (at entry, continuing education, refonn management and knowledge
development).
(ii) organizing workshops on frontier issues including dollarization and its impact on the
courts, international trade agreements and accords, national competitiveness, small claim
courts, gender equity and justice, crime and violence, and the role of the legal profession in
poverty reduction and economic development; and
(iii) constructing the Judicial School building destroyed by the earthquake early this year.
Bankfinancing. The component would finance consultant services, training, workshops,
software development for Internet applications, distance learning and video conferencing
equipment and computers, and reconstruction of judicial school building and rehabilitation of
training rooms. The govemement will share construction costs.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
San Salvador Metropolitan Area
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                      Yes * No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         Yes * No      TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes *No     .TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         Yes *No       TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                  Yes * No      TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*             Yes * No      TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
We foresee no adverse impacts resulting from this project.



5
ISDS
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N.A.
II.D.Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N.A.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N.A.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental rules for contractors will be followed for the building rehabilitation aspects of this project,
and will be included in the bidding documents and project Operational Manual.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The proposed project is being prepared using a collaborative participatory approach. As part of this
process, extensive consultation meetings are being organized by the Judicial Brach for internal
stakeholders-judges and court administrators, and external stakeholders -agencies and users.
Additionally, private groups (Bar Associations, Universities, the media, etc.) and other public institutions
(justice institutions and government agencies are being consulted to discuss the problems of the judicial
system and priorities of reform.Overall about 300 judges, 200 court administrators and several civil
society groups have been consulted with funding from the PHRD grant. METAPLAN/Option finder
technology and methods have been adopted to maximize participation and promote communication and
feedback. The Working group at the Supreme Court is evaluating the recommendations of different
stakeholder groups on the main problems and solution of administration of justice. A directory of NGOs
has also been prepared to help project preparation process and continue the dialogue and validation of
project activities and proposals. The consultation reports are in project files. Based on these consultations
and sector background information report being drafted an Annex on participatory methodology would
be prepared for before appraisal and added to the PAD as required.
E. Safeguards Classif cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure



6
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Waleed Haider Malik                          12/19/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                           12/18/2001
Sector Manager/Director:      Ronald E. Myers                              12/18/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FfEP8ACK      SrE MAP        SOWCASE       E



