24723
June 26, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
[Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/02
[A. Basic Project Data
|COUNTRY: Ethiopia                            PROJECT ID: IFAD Loan No. 572 -ET
Bank (SAP): P075702
PROJECT: Rural Financial Intermediation Program  TTL: Nwanze Okidegbe
[ (RUFIP)                                    [      N
|APPRAISAL DATE: N/A                        |MIAD ($ 25.7 m):
[BOARD DATE: N/A
[ MANAGING UNIT: IFAD: PF                    [ SECTOR: Institutional Development (Rural
World Bank: AFTFS                         [ Finance)
[LENDING INSTRUMENTS: SIL                    [ STATUS: Pending
Project Objectives
The overall goal of the Rural Financial Intermediation Program (RUFIP) is to alleviate rural poverty
through the sustained increase in the income and assets of poor rural households.
The primary objective of the program will be to enhance the delivery of efficient and sustainable demand-
driven financial services responsive to the needs of the rural poor, including smallholder farmers and
women, through diversified rural financial systems.
Project Description (From PDS)
This project has been prepared and will be financed by the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD), which has requested the Bank to supervise it as the Cooperating Institution (letter of
June 5, 2002). IFAD prepared an Appraisal Report (October 2001), which was approved by its Board
(Dec. 6, 2001). To comply with the Bank's safeguard requirements, the Bank and IFAD have prepared this
review of the program's objectives and likely impact on environmental and other safeguard concerns, and
have agreed to initiate a process that will put in place a screening and training framework to ensure that
funds are used consistent with the Bank's safeguard policies.
To meet the objectives of the program, there are three main components:
* Institutional development within the microfinance and cooperative sub-sectors through
comprehensive training, capacity building and provision of technical assistance; staff and client training
would include sensitization about the potential environmental impact of diverse production inputs and
technologies.
* Improved regulation and supervision of Microfinance Institutions (MFIs)through strengthening
the institutional capacity of the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and the Association of Ethiopian
Microfinance Institutions (AEMFI). This will encourage a dynamic and efficient microfinance industry,
strengthen the confidence of depositors and create an environment conducive to improved MFI links
with the financial markets.
* Funding for growth and to bridge the liquidity gap of MFIs and the Rural Savings and Credit
Cooperative Societies (RUSACCOs).



2
Project Location: (Geographic location. informanon about the key environmental and social characteristics of the
area and population likely to be affected, and proxinmity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas)
Ethiopia enjoys a tropical climate, as it is located between the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer. Its diverse
agro-climates and vast fertile and deep soils provide the country with a great potential for agricultural
development. Much of the country is high plateaus and mountain ranges that rise from I Oim below to a
peak of 4 620 m above sea level. The highlands, which represent 45 % of total landmass, are home to 85 %
of the population and two-thirds of the livestock. The mean annual rainfall ranges from 100 mm to 2 700
mm feeding major rivers such as the Blue Nile. While rainfall is adequate in about 80% of the highlands,
much of the water is lost to run-off caused by low infiltration and deforestation. At least 45 % of Ethiopia's
land area of approximately 113 million ha is arable and a further 7 % has forest or woodland cover.
Ethiopia is the second most populous country in sub-Saharan Africa with approximately 63 million people.
About 85 % of the population live in rural areas. There is a high dependency ratio due to the fact that half
the population is under 15 years of age or elderly, which exacerbates the country's poor state of under-
development, particularly in rural areas. Life expectancy remains low at 44 years and the new scourge of
AIDS threatens to reverse most of the gains made over the last decade. Malnutrition among children under
five is nearly 47 %. Only one in four Ethiopians has access to safe water and about 85 % of the population
have no sanitation facilities.
Estimates based on the Household Income and Expenditure Survey conducted by the Central Statistical
Authority indicate that per capita income is distinctly lower in rural than in urban areas. While the severity
of poverty in rural areas varies depending on the land quality and its productivity, climatic conditions and
production technologies, there is homogeneity in income levels within an agroecological zone. The
majority of rural households however own their land. The quality and size varies across regions, but the
primary source of food security is the food grown on their own land. The major crops grown are maize,
teff, wheat, barley, sorghum and enset. Surplus foodgrains are sold only after meeting consumption needs.
The money earned is invested in cows, oxen, sheep and goats. The cattle fattening, livestock rearing, petty
trading and other supplementary activities support livelihoods.
The average household is of about five members with the husband being the sole breadwinner and women
responsible for household chores, childcare and farming. Nearly 85 % of time is spent on arduous activities
like farming and animal husbandry using low input, low output traditional techniques. They are primarily
responsible for weeding, raking, harvesting, threshing grain and storage. Women-headed households face
difficulties in undertaking certain farming activities due to cultural taboos and lack of oxen and manpower.
Although 50 % of the Ethiopian population is comprised by women, they make up only 23 % of the student
population. In rural areas literacy rates for females is 9 % compared to 29 % for males.
Some coping mechanisms are especially notable for their characteristics of mutual support and self-help for
example, in the form of community-based organisations (CBOs), the primary source of social security for
the poor. Traditional financial organizations include iddirs, which provide support for burial ceremonies,
and iqqubs, which are rotating savings and credit associations. A sense of solidarity and security is created
among members of these CBOs and so despite the volumes of funds being small and operations simple,
some have opened accounts in order to deposit their funds with banks or MFIs.
RUFIP has been designed as a national, sector wide investment. Available data suggests that, apart from the
enset producing Oromia region, poverty is evenly spread across the other three densely populated rural
regions of Amhara, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR) and Tigray, where the
program will initially concentrate its efforts. The access deficit and rural regions of Afar, Ben Shangul-
Gumuz, Gambela and Somali account for less than 10 % of the total population, which include nomadic
pastoralists and agropastoralists living in vast arid and semi-arid areas. The program would support
capacity-building and outreach of microfinance institutions in these regions, based on the outcome of
studies being carried out at the moment with the support of IFAD under the NGO Extended Cooperation
Programme.



3
[B. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [ 1, C [ , Fl [X1, TBD [1
Comments:
The microcredits involved are very small loans expected to average about $100-S200, mainly for short-term
working capital that will support on-going activities of the clients of MFts and RUSACCOs, rather than
establishment of new projects. Typical activities include livestock raising, agriculture, petty trading, craft
production, and food preparation. It is not expected that these activities will entail the use of hazardous
chemicals or will substantially affect the ecosystem. In this context, the program's environmental impact
will be neutral to positive on account of the possible uptake and adoption of improved crop and livestock
production technologies as a result of enhanced access by poor rural households to reliable financial
services.
E C. Applicability of Safeguard Policies (from PDS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
[I______________________________________________ Yes                  No     TBD
[Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     [Xi     []     [1
[Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        11      [X1[    1
[Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                [l      L     _   _ 1
[Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  [      1  [ L      __X_]
[Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    J1     IX1l    i_1
[Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                           r 1     r x ifl  
F[Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                [ ]     [ X ][  .
[Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                [1     IX  lr_1
[Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                   1           f      _ X 1_ 1
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          r 1     r X Jl  I
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'
clainms on the disputed areas



4
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.Plea se fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, describe
steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
In rural Ethiopia, especially in the highlands, land degradation problems include soil nutrient depletion,
soil erosion and deforestation. These problems are contributing to low and declining agricultural
productivity, as well as poverty and food insecurity. The proximate causes of these problems include
declining fallow periods coupled with very low use of inorganic fertilizers, limited use of organic inputs
and limited nutrient recycling. High costs of inorganic fertilizers, limited availability of credit and farmers'
limited knowledge of integrated soil nutrient management practices or cost effective soil conservation
measures all likely to limit the use of inorganic and organic nutrient sources.
As noted in Section l.B, it is not expected that the availability of short-term micro loans through RUFIP
primarily for working capital by small rural households will entail the use of hazardous chemicals or will
substantially affect the ecosystem. The impact, if any, on land degradation is likely to be neutral to positive
on account of the possible improvement in soil fertility status through use of fertilizer.
No land or resettlement issues are expected to be involved, as the very small loans are typically used by the
low-income clients of MFIs and RUSACCOs for their existing activities, and do not involve establishment
of new projects, acquisition of new sites, or displacement of persons from existing sites.
At the same time, the provision of microfinance provides an opportunity raise to awareness and improve
the management of the environment and natural resource base at the community level. The program
intends to help MFIs and communities improve their understanding of potential environmental issues and
to monitor the impact of activities that may raise concerns.
2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Describe any
potential cumulative or long term impacts.
N/A
3. In light of I and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A



5
4. Descnbe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As adverse impacts on the environment are not anticipated from very small loans for on-going activities,
there is no need for an extensive monitoring program or any form of EIA. Rather, screening criteria will be
put in place to exclude potentially hazardous activities, with periodic monitoring of compliance. Further, it
is proposed that environmental awareness be an integral part of the proposed training, capacity building and
provision of technical assistance for the microfinance and cooperative sub-sectors,. The focus would be on
developing processes at the MFI level and awareness-raising at the commu nity level to ensure:
*     A negative list of specific activities or inputs with potential negative environment or social
consequences to be used to screen microcredit loan proposals;
*     The provision of credit institutions, local community groups or CBOs with information on
the relevant pro-poor technologies.
At the naiional level, the National Environmental Protection Authority (NEPA) is charged with
responsibility for co-ordinating the formulation and application of the government's environmental policy,
strategies, legislation and standards, ensuring the integration of environmental concerns in overall national
planning, promoting environmental awareness and reviewing and approving environmental impact
assessments. The NEPA devolves some responsibility to the Regional EPA equivalent as specified by the
Regional Environmental Committee. The existing Environmental Impact Assessment and Management
Guidelines provide clear procedures, operational guidelines and institutional responsibilities for
environmental assessment, analysis and the review process. There are separate requirements detailed for the
agriculture, industry, transport, mining, dams and reservoirs, tannery, textiles and hydropower generation
sectors. These requirements are not expected to bear on the activities of low-income rural households that
would be supported under the RUFIP through microcredits, usually for working capital.
Within this context, RUFIP will work with microfinance practitioners (e.g., through their Association of
Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions, AEMFI) to develop an approach for building the capacity of
participating MFIs, clients and communities to screen and monitor activities for their environmental
soundness and for possible impact on land use (including resettlement of persons). Considering the large
array of activities, as well as the number of proposals, and the decentralized nature of the microfinance
process, screening is likely to be most effective at the community level, based on an appropriate negative
list of environmentally sensitive activities or products. In order to comply with environmental policies of
the Ethiopian Government, IFAD, and the World Bank, it is planned to use the Project Launch Workshop,
scheduled for September 2002, to establish a timetable to put a suitable framework in place, including
development of criteria for a negative list of specific activities or goods that would not be eligible for
financing under the project unless required environmental management or other relevant safeguard
programs are put in place, and periodic monitoring of effectiveness. The steps would include: (i) soon
(e.g., within two months) after Project Launch, preparation of a draft framework for screening/monitoring
loans under the project; (ii) discussion of the draft with MFIs that expect to participate in the program; (iii)
submission of the framework submitted to Government for approval to disclose in-country and through the
InfoShop. At the time of Project Launch Workshop, the Government, IFAD and the World Bank will agree
on a dated covenant for completion of this process within eight months after Project Launch.
Within four to six months after Project Launch, RUFIP will carry out a comprehensive Training Needs
Assessment, which will be designed to include environmental aspects. Together with the negative list, the
TNA results will feed into the overall strategic framework for environmental screening and capacity-
building under RUFIP. This strategy will indicate the procedures to be followed by participating MFIs in
screening proposals and the mechanisms for providing the necessary training. It will also indicate how
environmental awareness and natural resource management will be integrated into the business culture and
functional literacy sub-components of the program in order to reach the clients and communities. And it
will provide mechanisms for periodic monitoring of environmental issues at the levels of participating
MFIs and communities, commensurate with both the likely impacts and the capacities involved. The
overall strategy will be finalized within eight months after Project Launch, following consultations with
stakeholders.



6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders on environmental issues under this program are the microcredit institutions (MFIs
and RUSACCOs), their clients, the communities in which they will be operating, NGOs and CBOs serving
these communities, and the regulatory agencies. AEMFI is a key stakeholder representing the MFIs and
interfacing with the government and other stakeholders, and it is expected to play a key role in developing
an environmental safeguards policy for the industry that implements government policy in a manner
consistent with the methodologies of MFIs and their clients. Under the business culture sub-component of
the program, the clients will be exposed to technical training on their production activities and this will
include awareness of and skills for the sound management of natural resource base. The functional literacy
activities under the program will also assist the communities to be more aware of environmental issues and
be more effective in monitoring environmental effects that may arise from the implementation of the
projects of the clients involved.
The draft strategy for environmental screening and capacity-building will set out the program of
consultation with microcredit institutions, to ensure compatibility with their processes, and with other
stakeholders, to ensure the effectiveness of proposed mechanisms for reaching communities. This will
include workshops with both MFIs and with client communities, in order to explain the screening and
capacity building programs being proposed and obtain their feedback, and to devise a culturally appropriate
appeals process. These consultations and workshops will be carried out within the first eight months after
project launch, for the environmental strategy and screening processes to be finalized and fully integrated
with implementation of the institutional development component.
E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis
of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[ ] Se.- Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[1 S3. - No safeguard issues
[X I SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
See Section II.D.4, third paragraph, for the process to prepare, review, approve and disclose an
environmental screening framework for loans under the program.
Date of receipt by the Bank                  . . .1...1..    N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ...1...1..      N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               . ..1.../...    N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
.../...1...    N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  . . ./. . ./...  N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ...   ...       N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               . . ./. . ./...  N/A
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  . . ./. . ./...  N/A
Date of"in-country" disclosure               ...   ...       N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               . . ./. ./...   N/A



7
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  . .1..          N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              .../ .1         N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               . . . ..        N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  . . ./ ...      N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ... 1...        N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               . . ./. ...     N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                            Name: William Steel        Date: July 24, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:             Name: Serigne Omar Fye     Date:
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:             Name: Roxanne Hakim        Date:
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:             Name                       Date:
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator              Name: Charlotte Bingham    Date
Sector Manager                               Name: Gerard Byam          Date July 24, 2002



