ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Frco ol Povorly
-infoShop
I.c 'i ...1 'IA
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/14/2002                               25123
Section I - Basic Information                                November 14, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ETHIOPIA                                Project ID: P077457
Project: Ethiopia: Social Rehabilitation and Development Task Team Leader: Nadine T. Poupart
Fund I Project - Supplemental
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 20, 2002      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 17, 2002                 IDA Amount ($m): 28.30
Managing Unit: AFTH3                             Sector: Primary education (40%); Health (30%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Water supply (20%); Irrigation & drainage (I 0%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Other social protection and risk management
(P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project objectives of the Ethiopia Social Rehabilitation and Development Fund (ESRDF) I -
Supplemental Credit are to: (i) help alleviate poverty and support community development through
provision of financial and technical resources to support community-initiated projects; and (ii) strengthen
the Borrower's capacity for welfare monitoring and analysis by financing completion of ongoing projects
under the ESRDF I credit. The Supplemental Credit will not be financing any new projects under ESRDF
1.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1: Social and Economic Infrastructure and Services. ESRDF is a demand-based program
which finances sub-projects that are community-initiated and suitable for community management
following appraisal criteria detailed in the Operational Manual. The proposed Supplemental Credit will
finance the completion of about 1700 community sub-projects, all of them initiated under the ESRDF I
Credit and most of them nearing the completion stage. These subprojects are in the fields of education
and health (social infrastructure) rural water supply, small-scale irrigation (including catchment
treatment, soil and water conservation), training and capacity building and agriculture (essentially
nurseries).
Component 2: Welfare Monitoring System. This component would further strengthen the
Borrower's capacity for welfare monitoring and analysis through the completion of ongoing activities,
including: (i) production of a national poverty map (a combined analysis of survey and census data); (ii)
setting up a survey data storage system; and (iii) national and regional workshops to disseminate existing
information on poverty.



2
ISDS
Component 3: Capacity Building, Training and Research. In conjunction with the implementation
of community-initiated activities financed under Component 1, this Component would strengthen the
capacity of (i) local communities to identify and prioritize their own needs, design solutions and
implement small-scale projects to improve their living conditions; and (ii) collaborating agencies such as
the regional bureaus, local government and NGOs to assist communities. The Study Fund established
under this Component would be maintained to further refine operational and technical aspects of ESRDF
interventions, and capture lessons learned during implementation. Furthermore, this component will
provide the necessary resources to carry out a resettlement audit to identify potential areas of concern in
the ESRDF I implementation, and to recommend remedial measures to address these concerns.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Supplemental Credit will finance the completion of subprojects requested by communities dispersed
throughout 10 regions of the country where ESRDF is presently working (Addis Ababa, Oromiya,
Tigray, Amhara, Harai, Southem Nations, Nationalities and People Region or SNNPR, Afar, Benishagul,
Gambella, and Dire Dawa). These projects have been screened using agreed subproject appraisal and
approval procedures contained in the ESRDF's Operational Manual and through sector-specific appraisal
forms used by ESRDF Project Officers to ensure compliance with ESRDF and Bank guidelines.
The subprojects are community initiated and nearly all are out of proximity to any protected areas, sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas that would knowingly violate
the Bank's Safeguard Policies. Moreover, a resettlement audit will be carried out to verify the
subprojects' consistency with the OD 4.30.
B. Chleck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The ESRDF Supplemental Credit is not expected to result in any significant adverse
environmental or social impacts since the credit aims to support the completion of ongoing activities under
ESRDF I, and will not be financing any new projects. Any potential impacts will be addressed through the
application of an Environmental and Social Management Plan to complement existing appraisal and
approval procedures contained in the Operational Manual and sector-specific appraisalforms. In addition,
mitigation measures will be incorporated into the project design and a monitoring plan will be set up to
monitor implementation andperformance of the proposed mitigation. Moreover, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (June 2002) has been prepared to address potential concerns related to resettlement and land
acquisition.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               O Yes * No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 C Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C' Yes * No   O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       G Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes G No    G TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                Ci Yes 0 No   0 TBD



3
ISDS
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           *Yes C; No      TBD|
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         ID Yes * No   C' TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Since this project is in fact a Supplemental Credit to support completion of the ESRDF I subprojects, it is
anticipated to have minimal safeguard impacts.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The Supplemental Credit will finance the completion
of ongoing projects under ESRDF 1. Based on field missions and interviews with the Regional ESRDF
offices in March, May/June 2002, it was determined that all of the sub-projects under ESRDF I have
been screened using the agreed subproject appraisal and approval procedures contained in the ESRDF's
Operational Manual and the sector-specific subproject appraisal forms. No significant impacts have been
reported.
The subprojects to be financed under the Supplemental Credit include the completion of subprojects in
education and health (social infrastructure), rural water supply, small-scale irrigation (including soil
conservation), training and capacity building and agriculture support activities (essentially nurseries).
Small-scale irrigation: Small-scale irrigation subprojects include activities such as the completion of
diversion weirs, canals, pumped irrigation schemes and accompanying irrigation infrastructure (e.g. drop
structures, turnouts, etc.). Most of these small-scale irrigation subprojects involve the upgrading of
existing traditional systems and infrastructure which will reduce significant environmental impacts if the
improved systems are operated according to design and operation specifications. Agricultural support
and management training will be conducted in collaboration with the relevant government agencies (e.g.
Bureau of Agriculture).
Diversion weirs will also be designed in such a way so that the complete diversion of especially the dry
season base flow is not possible. An appropriate environmental flow should be maintained. Downstream
environmental and social impacts of water diversion on communities and on aquatic systems will be
assessed through the EA process. Small-scale irrigators should have access to a predetermined amount of
water during the dry season (water right). The possibility to abstract this amount of water, the water right,
will be build into the design of the diversion weir so that irrigators cannot easily temper with the water
off-take.
One issue of potential concern is the continuing use of irrigation water for domestic and livestock water
supply with the potential for serious health and hygiene implications. Mitigation measures include the
training of subproject participants in the proper use and treatment of this water if no other source of
potable water is readily available. Subprojects will be periodically monitored in collaboration with the
appropriate health authorities for the appearance or increase in the incidence of water borne diseases (e.g.
malaria, schistosomiasis) and practices leading to the development of disease vectors will be avoided
(e.g. stagnant water bodies). Participants who are infected will be treated (e.g. praziquantal for
schistosomiasis and appropriate prophylaxis/treatment for malaria along with health education and



4
ISDS
prevention techniques).
Another area to be supported under the small-scale irrigation subproject component is the continuation of
watershed catchment treatment systems to control soil erosion and restore degraded watersheds. These
subprojects are by nature environmentally beneficial. Care will be taken to use exclusively indigenous
plant species in order not to deplete the watershed of its water resources. Non-indigenous species will not
be used, because almost always these foreign species consume more water than indigenous species and
this could deprive downstream users of their water resources. Thus the ESRDF will not promote the use
of foreign species (exogenous species).
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04) and Forestry (OP/BP/GP 4.36). Under the Supplemental Credit,
none of the ongoing subprojects are anticipated to result in significant conversion (loss) or degradation of
natural habitats, nor do the ongoing subprojects entail activities which could impact forestry or encroach
protected areas. Therefore, these safeguard policies will not be triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09). Under the Supplemental Credit, some of the ongoing subprojects will be
agricultural in nature (e.g. small-scale irrigation, agricultural support) but the procurement and use of
pesticides is not envisioned (either directly through the subprojects or indirectly through other lending).
Hence, in this phase a separate Pest Management Plan will not be needed. The subprojects will not
affect pest management in a way that harm could be done and will not introduce pest management
practices that are unsustainable and/or pose significant health or environmental risks.
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03, now replaced by OP/BP 4.11). There are numerous historical,
religious, archaeological and culturally significant sites in Ethiopia, and many are scattered throughout
the ten regions supported by ESRDF 1. Many of the ongoing projects to receive financing under the
Supplemental Credit are located in regions that are home to cultural heritage. However, through
consultations with ESRDF regional staff and a sample of community beneficiaries in these regions, none
have reported that any of the subprojects which were completed under the ESRDF I credit have had an
impact on cultural property. None of the subprojects, with the exclusion of the small scale dams, have
required large scale excavations, movement of earth or surficial environmental changes.
There are cases, however, where subprojects under ESRDF I are located in proximity to a cultural or
historical site. In SNNP, for example, it was reported that a primary school was built 20m from an
ancient monastery in Gurage. Another primary village school was also proposed and built in Axum town,
an ancient village and historic site in Tigray. In Bale, Oromiya, ESRDF reported that a veterinary clinic
was built in proximity to Sof Umar cave, a unique natural site. However, during appraisal the
communities have agreed on the location of the subprojects, and have taken preventative measures to
ensure that the location and construction of the sub-project does not hinder access to the cultural
resource, nor result in damage or risk to the cultural resource and property. Measures include fencing the
area for construction, and carrying out consultations with the community beneficiaries and the regional
Bureau for Cultural Information about the proposed development to promote awareness about the
cultural resource.
Based on these consultations, it was also determined that none of the ongoing subprojects to receive
financing under the Supplemental Credit are anticipated to have an adverse impact on cultural property or
resources. An audit of land acquisition and displacement will review the situation at the three sites
mentioned above, to ensure consistency with the OPN. As an added prevention, mitigation measures
have also been incorporated into the Environmental and Social Management Plan to address concems of
impacts to cultural property. Hence, under the proposed Supplemental Credit, this safeguard policy will



5
ISDS
not be triggered.
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20). Ethiopia is home to several hundred ethnic groups. Under AFR rulings,
none of these are deemed to be more "indigenous" than others, even if some are smaller than others. The
OD on Indigenous People does not apply. In any case, virtually all groups live in mono-ethnic villages, so
that community driven subprojects by definition serve the interests of the ethnic community.
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30, now replaced by OP 4.12). Consultations with ESRDF regional
staff and a sample of beneficiaries in ESRDF I supported regions (Amhara, Addis Ababa, Oromiya,
Tigray, SNNP) have indicated that there has been land acquisition in almost all the subprojects financed
under social infrastructure (construction of health and education centers), and small scale dams. There
has been minimal displacement of people in subprojects under the rural water supply component and on
other subprojects under the small scale irrigation component. The most significant resettlement was
reported for the Tebi dam in Makdela, Amhara region. A report prepared in May 2002 by ESRDF
indicates that 80 households (320 people) have been impacted by the dam, which has also affected 27
hectares of land. The dam has been completed under the ESRDF I credit, and all the project affected
persons have been compensated as required under Ethiopian Constitution. Resettlement at the dam will
be audited under the resettlement audit for the project, to ensure that the resettlement activities have met
the Bank's requirements.
Under the Supplemental Credit, it is not anticipated that there will be further displacement or land
acquisition since the credit will finance only ongoing projects under the ESRDF I and there are no new
projects proposed under the Supplemental Credit. Moreover, all the small dams have been completed
under ESRDF I credit and will not require additional financing. To ensure that potential resettlement is
addressed under the Supplemental Credit, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared. This
framework will be integrated with the ESRDF's Operational Manual and existing process for appraising
subprojects.
Moreover, during implementation of the Supplemental Program, a resettlement audit will be executed to
verify if resettlement carried out under ESRDF I has been in compliance with the World Bank
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OD 4.30 has been applied under ESRDF 1). A budget and timetable
have been prepared and it is expected that the resettlement audit will take approximately 4 months to
complete, with an anticipated 12 months set aside for remedial measures to be implemented. An
estimated US$.4 million has been to carry out the audit and implement remedial measures.
Timetable for Resettlement Audit
Resettlement Audit Contract Awarded                     April 15, 2003
Draft Resettlement Audit submitted to ASPEN for review  August 15, 2003
Audit to Infoshop                                       September 2003
Audit disclosed in-country                              September 2003
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). While no dams will be funded under the Supplemental Credit,
ESRDF I did fund the construction of a number of small dams under the small-scale irrigation
component. These small dams were developed primarily for irrigation purposes but provided
secondary benefits such as a secure water supply for livestock, natural habitat for migrating birds
and indigenous wildlife, and aquatic habitat for fish and other aquatic species.
A few of the small dams exceeded 15 meters in height. The Bank uses a dam specialist, through
its regular (twice a year) supervision mission for this component, to carefully review the



6
ISDS
technical and safety soundness of these small dams. Moreover, an independent dam safety expert
panel was formed to review and approve all technical specifications throughout preparation,
design, and construction and prior to operation and to conduct periodic safety inspections after
dam completion. All dam safety expert panel recommendations have been implemented and the
majority of the dams are operating in accordance with their intended purposes. The next regular
supervision mission by the dam specialist is scheduled for June 2002. A Resettlement Audit will
also be undertaken to verify this.
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50). A few of the small-scale irrigation
subprojects to be funded under the Supplemental Credit lie within water basins or tributaries that
involves the use of international waterways. These subprojects will conform to procedures and
limitations under the ESRDF I DCA. No small-scale irrigation subprojects will be permitted in
those regions where agreements and arrangements have not been established.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*. Under the Supplemental Credit, none of the
ongoing subprojects are situated in or near disputed areas. Therefore, this safeguard policy will
not be triggered.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are cumulative impacts related to the displacement and resettlement of people under the ESRDF I
credit. ESRDF I has financed thousands of subprojects in the rural water supply and sanitation, social
infrastructure, and small scale irrigation in ten regions in Ethiopia. During project preparation of thle
ESRDF I credit, the OD 4.30 for involuntary resettlement was not triggered. However, based on
consultations with ESRDF regional staff and a sample of beneficiaries in ESRDF regions, it has been
determined that during the implementation of ESRDF I, there was land acquisition in a majority of the
subprojects primarily in social infrastructure and in the construction of small scale dams (particularly the
80 households displaced under the Tebi dam in Makdela). It is not clear how many people have been
resettled, and whether compensation and resettlement has been cleared for all these subprojects and
project affected persons in line with the Bank's safeguard requirements. A resettlement audit will be
undertaken during implementation of the supplemental program to verify these concerns. and to
recommend remedial measures to address them.
Moreover, since the Supplemental Credit will be financing only ongoing projects, it is not anticipated
that implementation of the supplemental program will contribute to the cumulative displacement of
people.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
There are no long-term impacts anticipated related to future activities in the project area. Moreover, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy Framework will providL
the necessary measures to address and mitigate any potential significant impacts related to the
sub-projects being financed under the Supplemental Credit.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable.



7
ISDS
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). As mentioned previously, subprojects to be financed
under the Supplemental Credit include the completion education and health facilities (social
infrastructure), rural water supply, small-scale irrigation (including soil conservation), training and
capacity building and agriculture support activities (essentially nurseries).
The original EA prepared for ESRDF I applied to all subprojects financed under the Supplemental
Credit. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
will complement this EA. All subprojects to be financed by the Supplemental Credit have been subject
to the following process: subproject screening and appraisal; decision on the appropriate level of
environmental and social assessment for the subproject - no review, environmental review, limited
environmental assessment, and environmental assessment; and, decision-making.
The objective of the screening phase is to determine if a proposed subproject has or does not have
significant impacts. If it is determined not to have potential to cause any significant environmental
impacts, it is excluded from further environmental and social impact assessment, and the project is
implemented with appropriate recommendations for sound environmental and social management of the
subproject. When potential negative impacts are identified, ESRDF Project Officers conduct or
commission one of the three remaining options - environmental review, limited environmental
assessment or environmental assessment - of the sub-project in collaboration with the community, and
the local and regional govemment.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). As mentioned previously, it is not anticipated that the
Supplemental Credit will result in further land acquisition through the financing of ongoing projects.
However, there is a chance that compensation has not been thoroughly carried out for projects that were
completed under the ESRDF I credit. To address this issue, a resettlement audit will be undertaken. The
audit will be financed under the Supplemental Credit and carried out during its implementation. A budget
and timetable has been prepared and it is expected that,the resettlement audit will take approximately 4
months to complete, with an anticipated 12 months set aside for remedial measures to be implemented.
An estimated US$.4 million has been allocated for carrying pit the audit and to implement remedial
measures. The Borrower will be requested to prepare the Terms of Reference for the audit as soon as the
Credit has been approved.
To address potential concems of land acquisition and displacement under the Supplemental Credit, a
Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared. The framework provides a background on the
beneficiaries of ongoing subprojects to be financed under the Supplemental Credit, and outlines
institutional framework and operational procedures for screening subprojects for potential displacement
and land acquisition, and provides measures for methods of valuation and compensation.
Since the majority of displacement has occurred in the sectors of social infrastructure and small scale
irrigation, specific procedures for sub-projects will include that: (i) the beneficiary community discusses
problems which may emerge by the construction of the scheme including identifying whether people will
be displaced, farmland or grazing land to be inundated, cultural heritage sites, natural habitat affected (if
any); (ii) the beneficiary community agrees on the terms and framework for compensation if there is any,
loss of farmland, houses, grazing land, livelihoods, etc. The compensation will be in compliance with the
World Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12); and (iii) ESRDF finances schemes only after the
above-mentioned procedures are fulfilled or consensus is reached among the beneficiary communities.
Compensation arrangements will be done by sharing equivalent land or through land redistribution, as is



8
ISDS
the practice in Ethiopia, for loss of farmland and equivalent cash payment for other assets including
houses, crops, trees, etc. Under the RPF to be finalized with the Government, these compensation
arrangements will also meet Bank standards including the payment (in cash or in kind) of full
replacement value for all assets lost involuntarily.
Moreover, the ESRDF regional offices will adhere to the Implementation Manual which states that: "If
the field visits reveals that the sub-project activity would results in the resettlement of individuals,
families or households, the [ESRDF] Project Officer should consider alternative design options to avoid
such resettlement. Where this is not possible the Project Officer should formulate an abbreviated
resettlement plan in consultation with the community.
In addition, the following provision of the ESRDF Project DCA will continue to apply: "Subprojects
involving involuntary resettlement of population shall not be eligible for financing under the Project,
unless an action plan for the resettlement of the affected population, satisfactory to the Association, has
been agreed upon with the concerned population." This means that people who loose land, their houses or
economic assets will be compensated according to current market values in agreement with the World
Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12).
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50). The following provision of the ESRDF I DCA will remain
valid : (i) Subprojects involving water abstractions from the Wabi-Shebele-Genale (Juba) rivers shall not
be eligible for financing under the Project; (ii) The Borrower shall take all necessary measures to ensure
that the aggregate water abstractions from each of the Baro, Abay, Tekeze, Awash, and Omo rivers in
respect of subprojects shall not exceed the agreed limits. These provisions were adequately implemented
under the ESRDF I Project.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
ESRDF has been made aware of the Bank's Safeguard Policies. As ESRDF is classified as an
environmental category B project, the ESRDF Central Office and Regional Offices technical staff will be
responsible for identifying any activities which might violate the Bank's safeguard policies. ESRDF CO
will alert the Office of the Minister of Finance, who will notify the Bank should any issue occur which
might potentially violate the Bank's safeguard policies.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply..
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
- technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



9
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/14/2002     6/17/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            11/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/15/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/14/2002     6/17/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            11/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/15/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                      Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Nadine T. Poupart                           October 29, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank   October 3 1, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Roxanne Hakim/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Dan R. Aronson/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                    October 29, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:     Laura Frigenti                              October 29, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH        L     ____     5M           L: w6w CASE  _



