Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC338 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 7, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P081614 
Project Name: Ethiopia- Civil Society 
Capacity Building (CSCBP) 
Task Team Leader: Maria Correia & Hagos 
Araya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 20 
Estimated Board Date: September, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: SIL 
Sector: AFTS2 
Theme: Civil Society Capacity Building 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
The project aims to provide citizens and CSOs with new mechanisms and capacity to: (a) monitor 
the effectiveness of public services; (b) provide feedback to elected representatives on how to 
improve their effectiveness; and (c) participate in developing/monitoring kebele and woreda 
development plans, and the management of local facilities (e.g. schools, clinics).  In pursuing this 
objective the project will contribute toward better informed decentralization, better delivery of 
public services, and more accountable local governments.  The project will make a particular effort 
to assure that voices of traditionally excluded groups, such as women, youth, pastoralists, and 
farmers are well represented, along with the views of other clients for whom services are delivered.  
While the scope of the project will be national, activities will mainly be implemented at the local 
(Woreda & Kebele ) levels. 
C.  Project Description 
 
Component 1:  Citizens’ Empowerment for Improved Public Policy at the National Level 
(15% of project costs) will institutionalize:  (a) mechanisms to enable citizens and citizen’s groups to 
engage with elected and government officials and participate in policy making and legal reforms (i.e. 
through parliamentary committees); and (b) citizens’ participation in PRSPs and other national level 
social and economic planning processes.  This component will support the longer term agenda of 
civil society in the areas of public education and advocacy. 
Component 2:  Citizens’ Empowerment at the Local Level 
(70% of project costs) will finance: 
(a) the design and implementation of woreda/kabele level social accountability mechanisms (e.g. 
public information systems, public expenditure tracking, citizen report cards, participatory 
Page  2
 
 
budgeting, public expenditure management, social audits), including training of government and 
elected officials, CSOs and citizens on participatory and social accountability approaches; (b) training 
and technical assistance in group formation, dynamics, management and effectiveness (with a focus 
on women in rural areas, youth in urban areas, farmers); (c) training and technical assistance to 
CSOs on improving services to citizens and community-based organizations (e.g. in leadership, 
strategic planning, resource mobilization, financial control, learning and innovation, accountability, 
performance and human resources management, and networking); (d) events, workshops, field 
visits, peer learning and exchanges to promote learning and collaboration among CSOs with similar 
interests and purposes; (e) resources to create an incentive for citizens to participate in accountability 
activities and to work together with local governments in development activities (e.g. for monitoring 
the condition of local infrastructure, for setting-up teacher parent committees); and (f) civic 
education on democratic and legal literacy and constitutionalism. 
Component 3:  Project Management
 (15% of project costs) will finance: project administration 
(incremental operating costs, electronic financial management, management information systems, 
monitoring and learning systems); baseline studies, the mid-term review and end-of-project 
evaluation study; special studies; and contracting of intermediary CSOs to implement project 
activities.  
C 
Project location 
All regions, selected woredas.  
 
 
D.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
It is understood that the capacity of the government  both in planning and implementing this project is 
limited.  To address the capacity problem during project preparation the Bank has hired a  
Project 
Coordinator to assist the government on a day to day basis on the various stage of the project. The 
GOE, through the Bank, has obtained a US$500,000 Japanese project preparation (PHRD) grant 
fund. This would allow the government to fill the capacity gap by employing consultants during 
project  preparation. The GOE is receiving technical assistance from other donors  to enhance its 
capacity, for example the British Council has seconded an expert to work in the Civil Society 
Capacity Building Program Office. Similarly DFID has also financed consultants to assist with 
project preparation.  
During implementation, capacity issues will be addressed by having intermediary CSOs work with 
Government to implement project components.  
Page  3
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[No ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ No] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[No ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ No] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[No ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ No] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ No] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[No ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[No ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[No ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD 
   
 
While unlikely, the only component that may have safeguards implications is 2(e) (“resources to 
create an incentive for citizens to participate in accountability activities and to work together with 
local governments in development activities).  Specifically, it is possible that the activity may finance 
small investments such as the rehabilitation of old civil works.  No new infrastructure is envisioned.  
However, any changes in project design would be reported to ASPEN through an updated ISDS – 
with ample time prior to appraisal to allow for appropriate actions. 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [X] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
See comments above.  
 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them? 
 
It was agreed with the government that Environmental and Social safeguard studies will be 
conducted if there is a need. 
. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Given the aforementioned, no safeguard instruments are likely be required.  In the event that they 
are, however, the instrument (e.g. social and environmental screening framework) would be 
consulted on through the project’s consultation process
1
 and disclosed in accessible public places at 
the community level (e.g. public government buildings).  
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding safeguards during 
project preparation] 
 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
                                                
 
1
 
Consultations on the project concept note will be undertaken after the PCN is finalized and subsequent consultations 
will also  be conducted on issues emerging during the course of project preparation. Key stakeholders to be consulted 
include CSOs, Parliamentarians, NGO Umbrella Organizations, Individual and Influential NGOs, sectoral and cross 
cutting issue forums etc. Special emphasis will also be given to involve Vulnerable groups like Pastoralists, women and 
youth. To facilitate regular consultation during project preparation, implementation and monitoring and evaluation, 
multi-stakeholder committees comprising Government, donors, civil society and the private sector (where it exists) will 
be established  at Federal, Woreda and kebele levels.
 
 
