ISDS
THE WVORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorId Frca of Pov¢rty
*.  .;. ......  ....... ._ _. ..... ..i
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2002                               24178
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ETHIOPIA                                Project ID: P049395
Project: ENERGY ACCESS PROJECT                   Task Team Leader: Joel J. Maweni
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 1, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002                    IDA Amount ($m): 135.20
Managing Unit: AFTEG                             Sector: PP - Electric Power & Other Energy
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Adjustment
Status: Lending                                  Theme: RURAL DEVELOPMENT; POVERTY
REDUCTION; ENERGY; PRIVATE SECTOR
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
1 .1  The project's development objectives are to: (i) establish a sustainable program for expanding
the population's access to electricity and improving the quality and adequacy of electricity supply, thus
supporting broad-based economic development and helping to alleviate poverty; (ii) reduce
environmental degradation and improve energy end-use efficiency; (iii) reduce the barriers to the wide
spread adoption of renewable energy technologies, in particular solar photovoltalic (PV) and micro-hydro
power generation in rural areas, thereby contributing to the reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
via displacement of kerosene and diesel that would otherwise be used for lighting and electricity
generation; and (iv) provide technical support for institutional and capacity building of key sector
agencies, including for regulatory reforms in the mining sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
1.1   The project's five components are: (i) Institutional and Capacity Building; (ii) Urban
Distribution and Load Dispatch; (iii) Rural Electrification; (iv) Biomass; and (v) Environmental
Mitigation.
1.2   Project Component 1-- Institutional and Capacity Building. The project will comprise
consultants services and training to support: (i) preparation of a long-term power sector strategy; (ii)
preparation of an indicative rural electrification master plan and specific studies to build a pipeline of
projects for private sector investment; (iii) preparation of an integrated rural energy strategy comprising
both the biomass sector and the modern forms of energy; (iv) capacity building for private sector
enterprises interested in investing in small-scale renewable energy investments; and (iv) capacity
building for the key sector agencies--EEPCo, EEA and the proposed RES; and (v) regulatory reforms in
the mining sector.



2
ISDS
(a) Long-term Power Sector Strategy. The long-term power sector strategy will examine the
main challenges facing the power sector and develop alternative strategies for addressing the challenges.
The principal challenges are: (i) the low rate of access to electricity and the poor quality of service to
existing consumers; (ii) the need to mobilize substantial financial resources for investment (about US$1.2
billion in the next five years); (iii) the potential for the country's large hydropower resource to be
developed for both the domestic and export markets; and (iv) the need to develop technical and
management skills, improve efficiency and ensure cost effective power supply for economic growth.
(b) Rural Electrification Master Plan and Project Studies. Consultants services will be provided
to assist the RES in carrying oit an indicative rural electrification master plan, specific studies to
determine the viability of sub-projects for implementation under this project, and other studies to build a
pipeline of rural electrification projects to be funded out of the REF.
(c) Integrated Rural Energy Strategy Paper. The EREDPC will prepare a Rural Energy Strategy
Paper which will synthesize the policies for the rural energy sector in line with the Government's Rural
Development Strategy (RDS). The strategy paper will therefore cover both traditional and modern forms
of energy.
(d) Capacity Building for Private Enterprises. The project will provide financing for the RES to
disseminate information on investment opportunities in rural energy as well as to provide technical
know-how to potential private sector investors, NGOs and legally constituted community organizations
(e.g. electricity distribution cooperatives).
(e) Capacity Buildingfor key sector agencies. The key areas for capacity building have been
identified for EEPCo, EEA, the proposed RES the ministry of Mines. For EEPCo, about US$400,000
will be provided to support staff training in the areas of procurement, financial management, and
auditing. This training will complement that already provided for management under the ongoing Energy
II Project and training to be provided to technical staff under components to be implemented by EEPCo
in this project. For EEA, the project will support training and study tours to strengthen its regulatory
capacity for both the NIS and the small-scale isolated electrification systems. The RES will be supported
through consultants services in establishing its accounting and financial management systems, MIS and
its staff will receive training in project evaluation, financing of rural electrification and other relevant
areas.
1.3    Project Component 2--Urban Distribution and Load Dispatch. This component comprises
the following two sub-components: (i) Urban Distribution System Rehabilitation and Expansion; and (ii)
a Load Dispatch Center (LDC). The distribution system is in a severe state of disrepair and needs urgent
attention. The project will support investments to improve the quality of service to existing customers
and to extend service to others, primarily within the 4 largest load centers: Addis Ababa, Nazareth, Dire
Dawa, and Bahir Dar. Preparation of the component is based on studies previously carried out by
independent consultants and updated by others during project preparation. At present EEPCo has neither
a dispatch center nor a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. A feasibility study
for a load dispatch center has recommended a major reinforcement of the telecommunications systems
and installation of SCADA to include an Energy Management System (EMS) and possibly automatic
generation control, in view of the planned interconnection with Sudan and Djibouti. The LDC will be
included under the project, but the EMS and Automatic Generation Control (AGC) modules will be
deferred until such time as the system requires them. Rehabilitation and expansion of the urban system
should enable the connection of about 70,000 new consumers.



3
ISDS
1.4    Project Component 3--Rural Electrification. This component will support the Government
strategy for improving the population's access to electricity through the following two sub-components:
(i) grid-based rural electrification to be undertaken by EEPCo (connection of about 135,000 new
consumers; and (ii) private sector-led rural electrification in isolated systems. The grid-based rural
electrification sub-component has been prepared on the basis of a draft feasibility study prepared by
independent consultants. The private sector-led sub-component will support the identification of the
least cost renewable energy options in the isolated systems. For the solar PV systems, an initial study
had been carried out to identify barriers to the market penetration of this technology, and detailed
preparation will be carried out with Global Environmental Facility (GEF) PDF resources in the next
several months. In parallel with these efforts, the Govemment will establish an institutional and financial
architecture for rural/renewable energy in isolated systems. This will allow some investments to be
provided in the later part of the project implementation period for private sector energy schemes.
1.5    The private sector-led sub-component will therefore include: (i) technical assistance for
developing local capabilities to formulate renewable energy strategies and plans, and for identifying and
developing specific renewable energy projects; and (ii) financing of electrification schemes in isolated
systems and solar PV systems for institutional (health clinics, schools, NGO posts), household and small
commercial consumers. The project's intervention will help to: expand access to rural areas that would
otherwise not be served by the NIS for a long time to come, open up the institutional market for solar PV
systems to local competitive procurement, and establish the financial, technical and business
development intermediation mechanisms for local suppliers. Financial intermediation will be via a REF
for channeling GEF and bilateral grants. Household solar PV systems, provided by private dealers on
commercial terms, will be used for TVs, and lighting to rural households and small commercial users.
IDA financing of the isolated schemes will be contingent on the establishment of the institutional
and financial architecture for RE/renewable energy REF arrangements, which will be undertaken
in the initial phase of project implementation.
1.6    Project Component 4- Biomass. To help reduce environmental degradation and improve
biomass energy end-use efficiency, the following planning, and supply and demand management
activities are to be implemented: (i) development of a national strategic plan and policy framework for
the biomass energy sector; (ii) planning, establishment and monitoring of participatory sustainable
natural forest management systems covering about 255,000 ha in identified woredas in the SNNP,
Oromiya, Gambela, Amhara, and Tigray Regions; (iii) establishment and monitoring of on-farm
agro-forestry schemes, covering about 157,000 ha in the same Regions as in (ii) above, as well as in Dire
Dawa and Harari, and in Beni Shangul Gumuz, Afar and Somali Regions once the regional strategic
plans have been formulated; (iv) formulation and implementation of a rationalization plan for the supply
of fuelwood in Addis Ababa by the Former Women Fuelwood Carriers Association (FWFCA), with
technical assistance and supervision from the Bureau of Agriculture of the Addis Ababa Region and the
Woody Biomass Inventory and Strategic Planning Project (WBISPP); and (v) support for energy end-use
efficiency improvement in the household sector, through the promotion of commercially-based
production and dissemination of approximately 300,000 improved injira baking stoves in peri-urban and
rural areas. All the schemes under (i) and (ii) will be planned at the woreda level and implemented by
individual farmers and Farmers' Associations, and technical assistance will be provided by woredas,
regional bureaus of agriculture, and the Natural Resources Management and Regulatory Department
(NRMRD) of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture. However, procurement and financial management will
initially be handled centrally at the PMU level, but could be devolved to the regions during later stages of
project implementation depending on the result of capacity assessment. The end-use efficiency
improvement sub-component will be implemented by Regional Bureaus of Energy, with technical
assistance from and supervision by the Ethiopian Rural Energy Development and Promotion Center



4
ISDS
(EREDPC).
1.7    Project Component 5. Environmental Mitigation (US$1.0 million). The Project includes
provision for financing the cost of implementing the Environmental Management Plan prepared under the
EIA. The main activities to be funded under this component are: (i) capacity building for the
environmental and social management and monitoring unit to be established by EEPCo for the purpose of
carrying out environmental and social analysis of the various activities to be undertaken under this and
future projects; (ii) implementation of a compensation plan for loss of crops during construction of power
lines under EEPCo's urban distribution and grid based rural electrification components; and (iii) technical
audits to ensure the safe disposal of old transformers containing polychlorinated biphenyls. This
component would be fully funded by EEPCo.
1.8    The project's estimated total costs are US$204.42, including contingencies, of which about
US$135.20 million is estimated for IDA financing.
Components:
1. Institutional Support and Capacity Building
2. Urban Distribution and Load Dispatch
3. Rural Electrification
4. Biomass
5. Environmental Mitigation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project components will be located in various parts of Asmara, Oromia, SNNP and Somali regions.
Apart from the urban centers, where the Urban Rehabilitation and Expansion and some of the Biomass
sub-components will be located, the majority of the locations are within rural communities, with subsistence
farming as the main activity. The distribution lines will be constructed between existing grid substations and
the towns/wereda to be electrified. For easy access and to avoid resettlement and excessive crop damage or
felling of trees, the routes have been selected to follow existing road reserves.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The planned project is not expected to have any significant negative environmental or
social impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas, that cannot be effectively
mitigated. For the electrification component, negative impacts on cultural heritage and natural
resources would be non -existent or avoided through line routing. The impacts of the Biomass
component would be mostly positive. Any project component (mainly the rural electrification
component) that might trespass sacred sites or structures, would re-routed to avoid them (see also
para below and II D 3).
Although the project involves the construction of several overhead lines, all of these are for
distribution of power and not for transmission, and their routes can be easily changed to avoid
sensitive areas. The two locations where grid substations are to be constructed belong to EEPCo and



5
ISDS
no people are living or carrying out economic activities on EEPCo's land. In accordance with
OP4. 12, therefore, resettlement, either in the form of land acquisition or the restriction of access to
legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the
displaced persons, will be avoided.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   0 Yes     No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes *No       TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes * No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               *Yes 3No        TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          3 Yes 0 No       TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
(i) There is likely to be some crop damage during construction, for which appropriate compensation shall be
paid, following the Bank's guidelines. In compliance with OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), a
resettlement policy framework has been prepared which describes the compensation process to be
applied.
(ii) There could be PCB contamination from the old transformers that will be removeed from the system
under the urban distribution component (See II D 3)
(iii) There may be particular areas where there is high bird/power line interactions resulting in a high death
of birds; this will be minimized, however, by using the most appropriate line configuration.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None expected
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None expected
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The following arrangements are planned:
(i) For EEPCo an environmental and social management and monitoring work unit will be established to



6
ISDS
oversee the implementation of the EMP. The unit will include a social development officer and an
environmental specialist among its staff.
(ii) For the biomass component the PMU will include a social forester and community development
adviser. The PMU will also provide training to communities on sustainable harvesting of resources. In
addition it will consult the communities before commencing implementation of specific activities.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Electrification. The communities to be electrified will be involved through direct consultation during
preparation. Community participation is one of the key features of the project for extending access.
Communities will influence the project at all stages of preparation, implementation and operation. In the
case of the community-based schemes, ownership will be with the communities.
Biomass. Rural dwellers will be involved through preparation and implementation of the participatory
forest management approach, and through training in use and manufacture of improved cookstoves.
Federal and local government (i.e. Regional Energy Bureaus), entrepreneurs and private sector, donor
community will be involved through workshops that will help to explain the project concept and solicit
feedback on project design and implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



7
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                4/26/2002      4/26/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            5/9/2002       5/9/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             5/6/2002       5/10/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                4/26/2002      4/26/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            5/9/2002       5/9/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             5/6/2002       5/10/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Joel J. Maweni                              May 10, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                    May 10, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      M. Ananda Covindassamy                     Mayl 10, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
5EARCH NEEDSACK             SfE MSA       SHOWCASE       P



