Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: AC435 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 23, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P078544 
Project Name: RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
PROJECT - GE 
Task Team Leader: Rapeepun Jaisaard 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 16 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (50%);Agricultural 
marketing and trade (25%);Agro-industry 
(25%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Rita Cesti 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
The objective of the project is to develop the private commercial agriculture sector by facilitating 
the access of Georgia’s mainly small farmers to supply chains, and improving the 
competitiveness of the supply chains in response to demand from domestic and international 
markets. This would increase
 
incomes and employment and reduce poverty in rural areas. 
 
C.  Project Description
 
The project would support clusters of agro-processors, traders, packers, graders, farmer and 
traders associations, and commercial farmers producing specific commodities to develop the 
supply chains for selected commodities. These commodities would already have established 
demand from both domestic and international markets for which Georgia has a demonstrated 
comparative advantage. The integrated supply chain approach links market demand backward to 
production by transmitting market requirements to producers and enabling them to respond 
Page  2
 
 
effectively to buyers by bringing competitive products to market. During project preparation, 
commodity studies would be carried out to assess major constraints at all stages of the supply 
chain, including those involving production, policies and regulation, institutions and 
infrastructure. These studies will be done in cooperation with government, donors, private sector 
and stakeholders. Each study would identify project interventions, e.g.,  private- and public-
sector roles, assess commercial quality and food safety requirements, evaluate risk and identify 
market opportunities and requirements. 
 
The commodities supported could be classified into two groups; high value horticulture and 
livestock products; and bulk commodities such as wheat, corn and other grains. The major 
difference between the two groups lies in the extent of government involvement in marketing; 
while for the first group of commodities, market activities include mainly private farms and 
businesses and public-sector services to these farms and businesses; for bulk commodities,  
market activities include partially privatized public enterprises and potentially sensitive political 
issues. Government willingness to undertake policy reform identified in commodity studies 
would be an essential element in determining whether any commodities in the second group 
would be supported in the project.  
 
The project will focus on a few commodities which have clear market demand to reduce 
commercial risk. For the first group of commodities (high value crops and livestock) the project 
would use a competitive approach in selecting a commodity and its supply chain. Rural 
communities that form the base of an existing priority commodity supply chain or have the 
potential for development of such a supply chain would be encouraged to submit a proposal for 
evaluation by a screening committee. During project preparation, a public awareness program 
would be used to inform the public about the project and a local preparation team would assist 
communities in preparing proposals. Criteria for screening would be developed. After passing 
the first round, TA would be used to evaluate the desirability of assisting candidate programs. 
 
The preparation team will investigate whether to support the implementation of land registration 
and cadastre programs invested in by the ADP under the project in order to secure sustainability 
of the programs and continued progress in developing an effective land market and the ability of 
agricultural borrowers to use land as collateral. 
 
Description of Components
: The project would support activities under three main components 
plus a project management and M&E component:  
 
Policy and Institution Development
. Commodity analysis would outline recommended changes 
in policy and regulatory frameworks, restructuring and strengthening of public services, and 
building of public and private participation, which will be necessary to support increased 
competitiveness and an improved environment for private sector development. The policy 
frameworks could be in trade, tax, legal and regulatory policies; food safety and standards; land 
markets; credit policies; and policies concerning farmer groups and cooperatives. Institutional 
development would be limited to strengthening the quality and efficiency of the core public 
services necessary to support commercial agriculture. These are seed and seedling regulation, 
veterinary services, technology extension services, and input supply. During project preparation, 
other services will be evaluated as to whether to include them in project activities, including 
Page  3
 
 
animal breeding, quarantine, food safety and border services. Core and other services will be 
analyzed with respect to public or private provision. Cost-recovery mechanisms would be 
designed as appropriate.  
Development of Supply Chains
. This component would strengthen all links in project-assisted 
supply chains. The commodity studies will identify weak links in technology, institutions, 
market information, transportation and market infrastructure. Project interventions would 
probably involve (a) provision of TA and training to individual, firms and professional 
associations in development of their capacity to satisfy supply chain commercial requirements, 
(b) support the start-up of marketing and other commercial agriculture associations including 
farmer associations, (c) support pilot programs to develop private-sector input supply, and (e) 
finance essential commercial public sector infrastructure, such as feeder roads, storage facilities, 
collection points and wholesale markets. The project would seek assistance from the Social 
Investment Fund Project for other needed community-based social programs. 
Access to Credit
. The project would provide (a) two credit lines; one through commercial banks 
for investment and working capital for large loans, which would typically be needed for 
upgrading agro-processing. Existing agro-business firms typically need investment to upgrade 
their technology, improve product quality and expand their market reach. Additional loans may 
be required by agro-processors who may want to extend supplier credit to primary producers in 
the context of supply chain development. The second credit line would be the provision of small 
working capital loans for small farmers and traders through existing credit unions or micro 
finance organizations. (b) The project would assist participating commercial banks in improving 
their capacity to lend to agro-business borrowers, in developing loan products suitable for the 
rural sector and in exploring alternatives to collateral such as warehouse receipts. TA would also 
be financed to assist the participating credit unions in strengthening their management capacity. 
 
Project Technical Unit
. The project would also strengthen the capacity of the project technical 
unit and project coordination unit to manage day-to-day project activities and coordinate work 
with governmental departments. It would support activities related to project’s monitoring and 
evaluation. 
Project Costs
: Estimated project costs would be about US$20million. This would include a loan 
amount of approximately US$16 million. Efforts are being made to obtain co-financing from 
other donors, including IFAD, KfW and DFID. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would support selected rural communities with potential for development of 
commercial, demand driven agriculture. Project  locations would be selected during project 
preparation. 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
The borrower has set up an experienced well functioning project coordination center which 
currently is implementing the ADP, ARET and the Irrigation project. The RDP would be 
managed by the same upgraded PCC and would therefore make use of the experienced staff. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[yes] 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
 
[no ] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
[no ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
[ no] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
[ no] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
 
[ no] 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
[ no] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
[no ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
[no ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ no] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
Environmental-, Social- and Economic Assessments will be carried out during project 
preparation.  After project sites have been identified, the preparation team will evaluate in which 
of the safeguard policies the project falls into. Environmental studies will be carried out 
according to each Operational Directive. If there is no specific category, the Environmental 
Assessment will be carried out according to the Bank’s guidelines, and will contain a first draft 
Environmental Management Plan.  
The Social Assessment will be done using a participatory process to identify the priority needs of 
the poor rural population and their views on how their needs can best be addressed.   
An Economic Analysis would be carried out to assess the expected medium and long term 
economic costs and benefits of the project to the government, as well as potential economic 
benefits to beneficiaries. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
The project team will work very closely with authorities in Georgia, including government 
officials, NGOs and the private sector.  To assist in fulfilling the Bank’s requirements for the 
dissemination of the draft assessments and project preparation reports, it is planed to hold two 
workshops.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 
