ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWTBrId Frea of Povorty
InfoShop                                                              23574
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/17/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GEORGIA                                 Project ID: P040555
Project: Primary Health Care Development Project  Task Team Leader: Sarbani Chakraborty
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 10, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 13, 2002                     IDA Amount ($m): 20.34
Managing Unit: ECSHD                             Sector: HB - Basic Health; HR - Reform and
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Financing
Status: Lending                                  Theme: HEALTH/NUTRITION/POPULATION
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The main project development objective is to improve the coverage and utilization of quality primary
health care (PHC) based on the model of family medicine/general practice, with an emphasis on reaching
the poor and disadvantaged. In the long run, strengthening PHC services is expected to have a beneficial
impact on the health status of the Georgian population through prevention, early detection and the
treatment of diseases responsible for a high burden of disease in the population (e.g., cardiovascular
diseases, tuberculosis, and acute respiratory infections). Implementation of PHC is also expected to have
a positive impact on the quality, cost-effectiveness and efficiency of health service delivery in Georgia.
The project is an integral part of the Govemment of Georgia's (GoG) health sector strategy and builds
upon the investments in preventive health care supported through the Bank-funded Health I Project.
Health I supported the development of a Basic Benefits Package (BBP) for better targeting of public
expenditures on cost-effective preventive and primary health care services, began the process of training
health personnel in family medicine, established a Public Health Department within the Ministry of
Labor, Health and Social Affairs (MoLHSA) and developed a basic health information system with an
emphasis on disease surveillance.
I.A.3. Project Description:
As noted above, the investments supported through the proposed Project will be part of an overall
primary health care reform program expected to be implemented over 5-10 years and in partnerships with
other key donors such as DFID and EU. The proposed Project consists of three components: (i) PHC
service delivery; (ii) institutional development; and (iii) project management. The Project will be
implemented in two phases, with Phase I consisting of three years and Phase II consisting of two years.
The description of each project component (below) clearly identifies the investments to be supported
under each phase.
COMPONENT 1: PHC SERVICE DELIVERY (Estimated Costs: US$16.2 million total, including



2
ISDS
contingencies)
The objective of this component is to support the phased development of PHC services in urban and rural
areas of Georgia through rehabilitation of facilities and provision of basic medical and office equipment.
It will be implemented in two Phases. During Phase I, the proposed Project will support development of
PHC clinics in up to 74 rural and high mountain areas of Imereti Region. The identification of health
facilities to be developed under Phase II is dependent on the accomplishments under Phase I and the
lessons leamed from the urban pilots. In addition, GoG will have to successfully demonstrate to IDA
adequate progress on health care financing reforms and facility and health personnel rationalization. If
these conditions are met, during Phase II, the proposed project would support expansion of PHC services
in urban and other rural areas of Georgia. If that is not the case, then the proposed project will only
support expansion of PHC services in other rural and high mountain areas. Component 1 consists of three
sub-components:
Sub-Component 1.1: Establishing PHC Clinics and Referral Laboratories. The purpose of this
sub-component is to develop PHC services in urban and rural areas. The Project will support: (i) civil
works for rehabilitating PHC clinics and referral laboratories; (ii) basic office, diagnostic, therapeutic
and laboratory equipment for all PHC clinics and referral laboratories ; (iii) vehicles in areas where the
terrain is rough; and (iv) packet radio communication in selected locales.
Sub-Component 1.2: PHC Referral Pilot. The objective of this sub-component is to test how the referral
mechanism will work for maternal and child health services from PHC clinics in rural and high mountain
areas to the Regional Hospital level. This pilot will be carried out in the Imereti Region, and will link
PHC clinics to the Kutaisi MCH Center. The Project will support: (i) partial rehabilitation of a hospital
at the regional level to establish the perinatal center; (ii) office, diagnostic, therapeutic and laboratory
equipment for the center; (iii) training workshops for the staff and PHC teams in the latest international
protocols for MCH; and (iv) local technical assistance for monitoring and evaluation of the pilot.
Sub-Component 1.3: Community-based Information, Education and Communication (IEC): The
objective of this sub-component is (i) to increase community and consumer awareness and understanding
of family medicine/general practice as a distinct concept; and (ii) inform communities about the roles and
responsibilities of PHC providers in the community and the benefits that consumers can expect from the
Basic Benefits Package (BBP) funded by the State Government. The project will support the
development, pilot testing, and implementation of a communications campaign throughout the life of the
project using local TV, radio and news papers, hosting community workshops and seminars, and IEC
materials such as posters, banners and pamphlets.
COMPONENT 2 - INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT (Estimated Costs: US$ 7.1 million total,
including contingencies)
The overall objective of this component is to support capacity-building and institutional development in
training, policy framework and regulatory environment of PHC, and the management of PHC services,
especially through an integrated health management information system (HMIS). Key government
institutions to be involved in this component include: the Public Health Department of the MoLHSA, and
the Family Medicine Faculty in the State Medical Academy, The National Health Management Center
(NHMC) and The Center for Medical Statistics and Information (CMSI). This component consists of
four sub-components:
Sub-Component 2.1 - Capacity-buildingfor PHC Training. The purpose of this sub-component is to
support training capacity in PHC. The proposed project will support: (i) civil works for rehabilitation of



3
ISDS
up to five Regional Family Medicine Training Centers (RFMTC) and selected office space for the Family
Medicine Faculty and Health Management Department; (ii) basic office, diagnostics, therapeutic and
laboratory equipment for the RFMTC and office equipment for the Postgraduate Faculty; (iii) stipends
for doctors and nurses undergoing the training of trainers (TOT) and for trainees undergoing retraining in
family medicine/general practice; (iv) international and local technical assistance for developing a family
medicine residency program curriculum and a business plan for the Family Medicine Faculty; and (v)
workshops and study tours for staff of the Family Medicine Faculty to help build capacity in the
management of family medicine residency programs, continuing education for family doctors and
accreditation and licensing of family doctors. During Phase I, two RFMTCs will be developed in Kutaisi
and Batumi for Western Georgia. In addition, office space for the Post-Graduate Medical Faculty in
Family Medicine will be rehabilitated and equipped, faculty will be identified and the curriculum will be
developed. During Phase II, the remaining RFMTCs will be developed since the master planning
exercise for PHC will include a family medicine retraining and training needs analysis for the country.
Phase II implementation will be based on the achievement of specific milestones under Phase I - namely,
the completion of a PHC training capacity needs assessment, and the development of a business plan for
the Family Medicine Faculty.
Sub-Component 2.2 - Capacity-building in the Management of PHC Services: The objective of this
sub-component is to build the capacity of the Public Health Department within the MoLHSA for
policy-making, planning and regulation of PHC services. Health I supported the development of this
Department and has begun the process of capacity-building in the areas of preventive and primary health
care services. The proposed Project will further build these capacities with an emphasis on primary care.
The Project will support the Department in: (a) the development and introduction of a new legal and
regulatory environment for PHC; (b) development of a PHC master plan; and (c) strengthening of the
management information systems to improve management, policy-making and planning for PHC. The
Project will support: (i) training workshops and study tours for the staff of the Department; and (ii) local
and international technical assistance in the development of laws and regulations, the PHC master plan
and health information systems. There is no phasing of activities for this sub-component.
Sub-Component 2.3: Strengthening Healthi Management Information Systems for PHC: The objective
of this sub-component is to strengthen the design and implementation of a health management
information system (HMIS) for primary health care. This sub-component will build upon the investments
in HMIS supported under Health I. The HMIS network supported through the proposed project will be
designed to link the MoLHSA, public purchasers (SMIC, MHF, PHD) and providers. The project will
support: (i) the design of the HMIS system; (ii) staff training in the collection, analysis and dissemination
of data; and (iii) implementation of HMIS in pilot sites before replication throughout the country.
Sub-Component 2. 4: Supportfor PHC Health Care Financing Reforms: The objective of this
sub-component is to build health care financing policy-making capacity in Georgia. To assist in this goal,
the Project will support the development of a Health Policy Unit (HPU) within the National Health
Management Center that will be responsible for providing information and analytical support to the
MoLHSA in implementing its Health Care Financing Strategy. During the life of the project, the HPU
will focus on the topic of sustainable financing for PHC including the mobilization, management and
allocation of public/private funds for PHC, monitoring and evaluation of PHC pilots including those in
health care financing (e.g., pooling municipal funds, community health insurance) and the development
of national health accounts. The Project will support: (i) civil works for the rehabilitation of office space
for the HPU; (ii) necessary office equipment for the HPU including a computer server, workstations,
printers, copiers and communication equipment; (iii) training for HPU staff in health economics, provider
payment systems, national health accounts (iv) participation in international technical conferences,
workshops and study tours; and (v) local and international technical assistance. The majority of



4
ISDS
investments for the HPU will be completed during Phase I.
COMPONENT 3 - PROJECT MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (Estimated cost US$ 1.5 million total,
including contingencies):
The objective of this component is to support project implementation by ensuring that: (i) project
activities are well-coordinated; (ii) issues affecting or potentially affecting project implementation are
identified in a timely manner; (iii) there is a sound technical basis for project activities, developed in
accordance with requirements of the project beneficiaries; (iv) necessary project inputs are provided in a
timely and cost efficient manner; (v) project resources are appropriately managed in accordance with
Bank requirements for procurement and financial management; (vi) effective project monitoring and
progress reporting is carried out; and (vii) there is systematic outreach to various stakeholders to promote
the transparency of project activities and achievement of project objectives. To achieve this objective the
component will support the development and functioning of the Health and Social Project
Implementation Center (HSPIC). The project will support: (i) intemational and local technical assistance
in project management and MIS design and maintenance; (ii) training in procurement, financial
management; (iii) participation in technical conferences and project component study tours; (iv) salaries
of the consultant staff that work full- or part-time on the project in the Health and Social Project
Implementation Center (HSPIC); (v) office equipment for the additional staff, including a computer
server, workstations, printers, copier, and communication equipment; (vi) rehabilitation of new,
expanded office space; and (vii) incremental operating expenses of the HSPIC including communication
costs, banking fees, transportation costs, office supplies, office security systems, equipment maintenance,
tender and other advertisements, in-country travel of the HSPIC staff for the purposes of carrying out
project monitoring and audit fees.
Components:
1.0 Primary Health Care Service Delivery
2.0 Institutional Development
3.0 Project Management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The rural and mountain PHC clinics will be rehabilitated under the project. These clinics are located
throughout the country in the high, mountainous districts. These clinics are not close to any protected
areas and will not have a negative effect on the environment. The Kutaisi Hospital is located in the



5
ISDS
Imereti Region and will not have a negative effect on the environment.
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The proposed Project includes rehabilitation of health facilities and partial rehabilitation of the
Kutaisi hospital. Therefore, according to the current guidelines, the proposed project is a category "B" and
an environmental assessment/environmental action plan is required. This has been completed and is
attached.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes S No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                     ^Yes * No                        CTBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                ^Yes * No     C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    Yes * No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   ^Yes * No                        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          Yes * No       TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                   Yes * No    C' TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                    Yes * No    C^ TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            ^ Yes * No    C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)    ^        Yes * No   C' TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The proposed Project will rehabilitate health facilities and carry-out partial rehabilitation of Kutaisi
Perinatal Referral Center. There are environmental concerns related to rehabilitation and management
of clinical waste. These issues have been addressed by the GoG through the development of a
comprehensive "Environmental Management Plan."
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



6
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
E. Safeguards Classif7cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 1/15/2002     1/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si_ned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Sarbani Chakraborty                         01/17/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Helen Shahriari/Person/World Bank      01/17/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:



7
ISDS
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Johnson Appavoo                            01/23/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Annette Dixon                               01/23/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDHACK       SITE MAP      . ShOCAmE



