Report No. 23899
Report No: I077368 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/25/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GEORGIA         Project ID: P077368
Project: Municipal Development and Decentralization Project II Task Team
Leader: Jean-Jacques Soulacroup
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 1, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 20, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 16.40
Managing Unit: ECSIE     Sector: BD - Decentralization; UY - Other Urban
Development
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the proposed Second Municipal Development Project (MDDP
II) - which will build up on the successful experience of the Municipal
Development and Decentralization Project (MDDP)- is to improve the
provision of basic local services to the population by (a) further
developing the institutional and financial capacity of local government
units and local utility enterprises, and (b) increasing the availability
to local government units and local utility enterprises of financing for
investments in local infrastructure and service equipment.
I.A.3. Project Description:
As was the case with MDDP, the proposed MDDP II project would consist of
two mutually reinforcing components: (i) institutional development, and
(ii) capital resources to Municipal Development Fund (MDF) for physical
investments at the local level. Both components would be implemented by
the MDF.
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening. The main thrust of the MDDP II
program of Technical Assistance (TA) would be to expand on the ongoing
MDDP program for TA and training and focus, in particular, on helping
lower-level Local Governments Units (LGUs) and Local Utility Enterprises
(LUEs) develop the technical and financial capacity required for
discharging their responsibilities. In parallel, the TA program would
focus on assisting GOG in the preparation of the measures necessary to
ensure that (i) LGUs have the appropriate legal framework to operate and
fulfill their responsibilities, and (ii) LUEs will be given the conditions
required for a continuing technical, economical and financial viability of
their operations. A key development goal is to create the conditions
under which LGUs and LUEs, in the medium- and long-term, would become able
to satisfy their investment needs through borrowing from MDF. In that
effect, this component will target specific groups of entities with an
appropriate combination of institutional strengthening activities and
adequate TA at the national level when needed: the Ministry of Finance,
the LGUs, the LUEs, the MDF, and provision for targeted studies.
Component 2: Capital Resources to MDF for Local Investments. The objective
of this component is to improve the provision of basic local services to
the population by increasing the availability, to local government units



and local utility enterprises, of financing for investments in capitalized
expenditure on local infrastructure and service equipment. To that effect,
the project will provide additional capital resources to the MDF to
finance economically justifiable physical investments and
rehabilitations. Local government units and local utility enterprises
able to meet the agreed creditworthiness criteria defined at the outset of
the project will be eligible to access the MDF funding. The total amount
of financing resources required for local government investments in
capitalized expenditures under MDDP II is estimated at USD 24.8 million.
Of this, USD 14 million (or 56.5% of total component cost) will be
provided by IDA, while the USD 5.8 million (or 23.4% of total component
cost) will be covered by the reflows (principal and interest) derived from
MDDP and MDDP II. In addition, USD 5 million (or 20.1% of component cost)
will be provided by the individual borrowers of the MDF loans, in the form
of upfront self-contributions.
(in USD million)
Grant portion    Loan Portion
LGUs    Total
investment cost LGUs
contribution     Total Grant      IDA Funds       Total Loan
IDA Funds        MDF reflows
Tbilisi
Rep.cities
Districts
LSGs    8.5
3.8
7.5
5.0     1.7
0.8
1.5
1.0     3.4
1.5
3.0
2.0     3.4
1.5
3.0
2.0     3.4
1.5
3.0
2.0      1.4
0.6
1.2
0.8     2.0
0.9
1.8
1.2
TOTAL   24.8     5.0     9.9      9.9     9.9      4.1     5.8
The MDF operates as a revolving fund. Thus, re-flows (after deduction of
operating expenses) will also form part of its cash-flow, and would be
reincorporated into the project as a share of the loan portion of each new
investment. Reflows will also be used to finance the recurrent costs of
the MDF. Indicative calculations show that the reflows would amount to USD
5.8 million (after allowing adequate retention for 5% bad debt
-2 -



provision). Administrative procedures and lending terms will be defined
in an Operational Manual. To improve access to funds by LGUs, MDF loans
will be complemented by grants. Although the loan/grant ratio might,
advantageously, be raised from 50/50 to a larger loan/smaller grant ratio,
this will not be considered for the time being. The pervasive poverty in
Georgia already makes it difficult to address deterioration of existing
municipal infrastructure and utility services. Thus, given the proven
efficiency of the MDDP financing arrangements, these will be maintained
for MDDP II.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be located in most of the urban areas throughout the
country. The aim of the project is to tackle needs of municipalities that
are able to borrow from the MDF. It is not expected to know at the outset
of the project which municipality will qualify.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: No major environmental issues are anticipated under the proposed
project given the relatively small size and rehabilitation nature of most
of the investments. Apart from the rehabilitation works of existing
municipal infrastructure, no new structures or works of significant size
are envisaged under the project. The potential negative environmental
impacts are expected to be localized or able to be mitigated. Since most
of the work will be done in properties owned by municipal companies,
municipal land or rights-of-way assigned to municipal infrastructure, the
project will not require land acquisition and will not result in
involuntary resettlement. Since the investments to be financed will not
be known at the time of appraisal, the environmental category for the
sub-projects proposed to be Financial Intermediary (FI).
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
-3 -



significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are
expected.
Environmental Assessment. The Operational Manual will include procedures
and implementation arrangements for ensuring full consideration of
environmental safeguards. This section of the Operational Manual will be
prepared before appraisal. It will spell out the institutional
responsibilities and staff training needs for screening of sub-projects,
undertaking environmental assessment where necessary, reviewing them and
ensuring that mitigation actions are included in contract documents and/or
mitigation plans. The role of the Ministry of Environment and Nature
Resources will also be described. Public participation in the review of
sub-projects mitigation plans will also be explored.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The proposed project will build on the existing capacity in the MDF to
carry out environmental screening and assessment work. The Operation
Manual of the MDF will be updated and improved under the MDDP II. It will
include procedures and implementation arrangements for ensuring that
project sub-projects full comply with World Bank environmental safeguards
in accordance with OP 4.01 on environmental assessment and the Georgia
regulations on environmental impact assessment. During project
preparation, the enforcement capacity of the environmental and health
agencies will be assessed to identify training needs and build into the
project training programs for these agencies as appropriate.
Environmental Assessments for any category A projects will be prepared and
cleared in consultation with the World Bank.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders in this project include local government units'
authorities; residents of the participating local government units,
including all vulnerable groups (poor, sick, internally displaced);
private enterprises and/or utilities; community-based organizations; and
NGOs.   Participating local government units will be required to carry out
a Social Assessment as well as inform and consult main stakeholder groups
in determining investment priorities. In addition, one of the criteria
for selecting participating local government units will be public
participation in investment decision-making.
- 4 -



The Operational Manual will include procedures and implementation
arrangements for ensuring full consideration of environmental safeguards,
including public consultations in the review of sub-projects mitigation
plans.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      3/29/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. Operational Manual will be prepared by the time of
appraisal.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Jean-Jacques Soulacroup 03/14/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Rita E. Cestti/Person/World Bank         03/14/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   03/14/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Sumter Lee Travers       03/14/02
- 5 -



For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



