Report No. 23785
Report No: I070609 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/01/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GHANA Project ID: P070609
Project: Public Sector Management Reform Project (2nd Phase APL)          Task Team
Leader: Guenter Heidenhof
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 28, 1999     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 10, 2002         IDA Amount ($m): 78.80
Managing Unit: AFTI2 Sector: BB - Public Sector Management Adjustment; BI -
Institutional Development
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)          Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the program is to improve the efficiency,
effectiveness and quality of public services and policy management in
Ghana. It is expected to improve Ghana's overall fiscal performance in
the medium term.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The program will address four different areas which have been identified
as the essential elements for the public sector reform agenda:
Reform of Subvented Agencies (SAs)
PSMRP II will continue to support the government's objective to make the
subvented agency sector more cost-effective and to reduce government
subsidies to the sector by critically reviewing the mandates of 67
subvented agencies, closing down those without a clear mandate, and
restructuring those with a viable mandate. These selection of these
agencies (see Annex 6) has been based on (i) the objectives of the GPRS,
(ii) the strategic importance for public service delivery, and (iii) the
potential for employment generation. The second phase will also finalize
the restructuring of those agencies that have been targeted under the
pilot phase of the program.
Adjustment of central government structures and organizations
Under this component the government will finalize and further deepen the
restructuring of the Central Management Agencies (CMAs) which has begun
under PSMRP I. Key objective will be to continue the implementation of
the restructuring plans for each individual CMA which is of critical
importance for the rationalization of central government functions. Only
after the CMA-reform is finalized the project will support the reform of
10 key sector ministries including the relevant departments. Key
objectives are to (i) clarify roles and responsibilities at the various
institutional levels, also in respect of Ghana's progressive
decentralization policy, (ii) improve overall service delivery, and in
this context (iii) define and operationalize the relationship between the
public and the private sector. The ministries and departments (see Annex
6 for details) have been selected by the government on the basis of their



importance for the implementation of the GPRS and for the generation of
employment.
Improvement of systems and processes
PSMRP II will continue to address the system constraints in Ghana's public
sector. To this end, the project will finalize the implementation of
critical elements for public sector operations which were developed in
phase I, in particular the human resource management system and the
regulatory framework for the subvented agency sector. The second phase
will focus on the further refinement and introduction of a comprehensive
incentive system for the public sector, in particular the remuneration
policy reform. This will include complementary funding for the ongoing
reform of the payroll system (IPPD) [to be discussed with DFID]. PSMRP II
will also review, modify or fine-tune the existing performance management
system with the aim to introduce the revised system in key public sector
agencies by the end of phase II.
Improvement of national policy management [to be discussed]
This component is aimed at complementing ongoing activities of other
donors (UNDP, Canada, Germany) to enhance policy analysis capacity and to
improve efficiency and transparency of policy design, co-ordination and
implementation in critical areas of government, in particular in the
Office of the President and the Cabinet office. This component will also
improve communication, information sharing and consultation between the
Office of the President and policy formulation units in MDAs especially
the Policy Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Divisions (PPMEDs). It will
support the design of a framework for electronic governance and enhance
work on effective networking which has already been started by the Office
of the President including the conversion of Cabinet Paper Files into
electronic files. This will include complementary funding for the
introduction of a Cabinet Handbook with guidelines and procedures for
effective policy management.
In addition, the program will continue to provide support (i) for the
operations of the Distance Learning Center (DLC) which is part of the
Global Development Learning Network (GDLN). This will include funding for
the expansion of the center into two regional offices in Kumasi and
Tamale. In this context, the project will only finance rehabilitation of
existing buildings. (ii) for a comprehensive project management system
for the change process to ensure effective implementation of the reform
agenda.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will affect all public sector agencies in Ghana. They're
mainly located in Accra. Some subvented agencies are located in other
cities.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
- 2-



Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
NA
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
NA
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
NA
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project include Cabinet, the National Overview
Committee, public sector agencies, public servants, beneficiaries of
public services, trade unions and parliament. These stakeholders
participated in a preparation workshop for the project in October 2001.
The workshop discussed the implementation experience from the pilot phase,
reviewed progress, analyzed bottlenecks and constraints, and recommended
modifications for PSMRP II which form the basis for this document.
In PSMRP I, the design of all reengineering plans was facilitated by
consultants in conjunction with change management teams, largely comprised
of senior management ,while implementation was internally driven. PSMRP
II will further strengthen the role of senior management/change management
teams to conduct the reform process with increased transparency and
dialogue with junior staff. Change management teams will include
representation of all staff and the main client group, and the process
-3 -



will be monitored regarding its effectiveness. Adherence to the GOG's
policy on gender representation on decision-making committees and boards
will promoted.
With an increased focus on quality service delivery, beneficiary
assessment will be conducted to adequately review service delivery by the
institutions, reengineering plans will be validated with the clients, and
repeat beneficiary assessments will form part of monitoring.
Table 1 provides an overview about the stakeholders and the level of their
involvement.
Stakeholders and Beneficiaries   Preparation      Implementation  Operation
National Overview Committee      COL     COL      COL
Central Management Agencies      COL     COL     COL
Ministries, Departments, Agencies        COL      COL     COL
Local Government         CON     COL     COL
Public Managers CON/COL COL      COL
Public Servants IS/CON   CON/COL CON/COL
Private Sector  CON      CON/COL CON/COL
Parliament      IS       IS      IS
Customers                   CON/IS                    COL/CON               COL/CON
Civil Society    IS/CON  IS/CON  IS/CON
Judiciary        CON     CON     IS
Other Donors     IS/CON/COL      IS/CON/COL       IS/CON/COL
COL: collaboration; CON: Consultation; IS: Information sharing
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
- 4 -



Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. No safeguards issues
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Guenter Heidenhof        02/14/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Maria Mims       02/15/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Brian David Levy         02/15/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5-



