INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC344
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 23, 2003
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Ghana                        Project ID: P084015
Project Name: Community Water Supply  Task Team Leader: Paul Kriss
and Sanitation II
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2,  Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 50
2004                                  IDA: 26
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2004
Managing Unit: AFTU2                  Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
Loan
Sector: Water supply (80%); Sanitation  Theme: Access to urban services for the
(20%)                                 poor (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Kristine Schwebach, Edeltraut Gilgan-
Hunt
-Other financing amounts by source:                                 ($m.)
B. Project Objective
The overall APL objective is to support the GOG to extend the coverage of sustainable water and
sanitation facilities to 85 percent of the rural population by the year 2009 and establish an
operating and maintenance system in the rural communities and small towns. The proposed
project's DO is to increase RWSS service coverage and achieve effective and sustained use of
improved Community Water and Sanitation (CWS) services in villages and small towns in a total
of 6 regions, in addition to the 4 participating regions.
The specific objectives of the proposed project will include: (i) increasing capacity at the
community, small towns, district, and regional levels to plan, implement, and maintain CWS
facilities; (ii) building RWSS facilities on a demand-driven basis; (iii) changing behavioral
patterns with respect to the use of safe water and sanitary facilities in targeted communities; and
(iv) strengthening CWSA's capacity to act as an effective RWSS national facilitator and the
Ministry's of Works and Housing (MWH) ability to perform policy guidance and monitoring
tasks.
C. Project Description
The proposed second phase of the APL will be similar to the first phase, expanding coverage to
additional regions, building on what works, and based on a thorough reassessment of lessons
drawn from the implementation of the first phase of the program. The APL instrument was



chosen in order to enable a long-term intervention, gradually empowering districts to take control
of their WSS facilities. The project's main components include:
The Community Subprojects Component
The component will provide grants to communities and schools through their district assemblies
for construction of water supply and sanitary facilities.  Community subprojects include
protected communal hand-dug wells, communal boreholes equipped with handpumps,
mechanized boreholes, surface water supply systems, protected spring sources, rainwater
catchment schemes, and household and school latrines.
Capacity Building Component
The component will support training, technical assistance, community development activities,
and sector development of DA, regions, private sector firms, and NGO. The component will
provide assistance to strengthen communities' capacity to plan, implement, operate, and maintain
WSS in an effective and sustainable manner.
Project Management Component
The component will strengthen CWSA's role as facilitator and improve its ability to manage the
national CWS program. It involves the payment of a management fee to CWSA, linked to
investment performance and volume in subprojects at the District level.
D. Project location [Guideline: If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are
alternative locations under considerationt or how the location is to be determined during project
preparation]
The project will be located in six regions in Ghana (Upper East, Upper West, Ashanti, Brong
Ahafo, Central, and Westem Regions).
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[xI      Environmental Assessment ([C)/BP 4.01)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[1      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
XIX     Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
[ I     Indigcnous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[ I     Forests (OPBP 4.36)
[TBD I    Safety of Dams (OPflBP 4.37)
[j ]    Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
1I ]    Projects in Disputed Areas (OIPlBP/GP 7.60)
[! I    Projects on International Waterways (Qj1`BP/GP 7.50)
By supporting iheproposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal detertuination of the parties' clainms on the
disputed areas
2



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A  [X] B  [ ] C  [ FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
The proposed project is a second phase of an APL, the first phase of which has been designated
as a Category B project, consistent with the provisions of OP/BP/GP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.12. The
project will have significant positive impacts on the population's health and quality of life
through a reduction in water borne diseases. There are no foreseeable negative social or
environmental issues implicated.
Potential site specific impacts include:
L Water sources must be checked for quality to confirm water quality standards are met.
cI Water sources must be checked for safe yield and impact on surrounding wells.
O Water sources must be designed and constructed to prevent contamination.
O Wastewater at outlets must be disposed of properly.
a Measures to mitigate erosion and loss of vegetation must be provided in construction
contracts.
Li Individuals must be compensated for lost property and income as a result of the
construction.
Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ ] SI [X] S2 I[ S3 [ SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)
Resettlement: A small amount of land is likely to be needed for boreholes, pumping stations,
storage tanks and communal water points. Construction of these facilities as well as pipelines can
result in temporary or permanent loss of land, crops and other means of income generation. A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared prior to appraisal. The framework will spell
out how the Resettlement Action Plan will be completed prior to the beginning of activities.
Water Resources: Nearly all sub-projects will be based on groundwater. During sub-project
preparation, the safe yield and potential drawdown of water levels in the vicinity of the boreholes
will be checked to confirm that the proposed water source is sustainable and will not adversely
affect nearby wells. Exereta disposal facilities will need to be set back from water sources. If
surface sources are developed, the sustainability of the proposed abstraction and the impact of
withdrawals on downstream beneficial uses will be assessed.
Cultural Property: There is a remote chance that cultural artifacts may be discovered dunrng
the excavation of pipe trenches and foundations. An Environmental and Social management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared during project preparation and will specify actions that
contractors must take when a possible cultural artifacts are unearthed.
Safety of Dams: The ESMF mentioned above will also set out the procedures which must be
followed if a participating town intends to draw water from a reservoir controlled by an existing
or new dam.
3



Erosion: The construction of boreholes, pumping stations, pipelines and storage tanks can result
in erosion and loss of vegetation. Measures to mitigate these impacts must be included into
construction contracts.
Wastewater: The main impact of water supply systems is the wastewater that is generated,
which will produce muddy pathways and standing pools of water where mosquitoes breed, if not
disposed of properly. Design and construction contracts must provide for wastewater disposal at
all piped water outlets. Procedures to goverm private operator(s) handling of such environmental
issues will be included in their contracts. Provision would also have to be made for waste
disposal at water treatment sites.
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN]
A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues
and prepare to mitigate them?
As mentioned above, an ESMF will be prepared during project preparation. The ESMF is a
process that will enable stakeholders to identify potential adverse social and environmental
impacts that could result from constructing point sources or piped water supply and sanitation
facilities. The ESMF will provide tools for the assessment of potential impacts and will propose
mitigating measures including potential training needs and related cost estimates and a
monitoring plan. Additionally, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared.
B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?
The ESMF and RPF will be prepared in consultation with the beneficiaries and the final versions
will be disclosed at the World Bank's Public Information Center and Regional Community Water
and Sanitation Agency offices in Ghana and in all participating districts prior to appraisal.
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
ESMF
Date of Receipts by the Bank - 12/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure - 1/30/2004
Date submission to Infoshop - 1/30/2004
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework
Date of Receipts by the Bank - 12/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure - 1/30/2004
Date submission to Infoshop - 1/30/2004
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: December 8, 2003.
4



Signed anwd submitted by-                                                         DaNm  )X_f Clte
Task Team Leader:                   Paul Krisst      '                                     K 5
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:   Kristine Schwebach
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:   Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                        N'ame                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Serigne Omar      K Ya/t
Corn mietits
Sector Manager/Director      er     Inger Andersen
5



