25031
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
11 r^ .f' I 11 11
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GHANA                                  Project ID: P071157
Project: Ghana Land Administration Project      Task Team Leader: Solomon Bekure
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 15, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 15, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: AFTR2                             Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (100%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Land management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall goal of the proposed project is to stimulate economic development, reduce poverty and
promote social stability. The specific objectives will be improving security of tenure, simplifying the
process for accessing land by the populace, and developing the land market and fostering prudent
land management. These objectives will be achieved through (a) harmonization of land policies and
the legislative framework for sustainable land administration; (b) long-term institutional reform and
development for land administration; (c) establishment of an efficient and transparent system of land
titling, registration, and valuation; and (d) issuance and registration of land titles in selected urban
and rural areas as a pilot to test (b) and (c) above and innovative methodologies, including
community level land dispute resolution mechanisms. The project is the first phase of the
government's long-term land administration reform program to be implemented over 15 years.
The long term program would result in:
*  A clear coherent and consistent set of land administration policies and laws;
*  Formal recognition of the rights of all categories of land holders and facilitation of recording of
these rights in an enhanced and decentralized land administration system;
*  An efficient decentralized land administration system operating throughout Ghana in accordance
with Government policy and compatible with cultural usage and responsive to the needs of the
people, within a self sustaining financing mechanism;
*  An up to date efficient land information system that supports good land records management and
transparent transactions in land; and
*  A well functioning land market operating in both urban and rural areas.
I.A.3. Project Description:



2
ISDS
The Ghana Land Administration Project will comprise the following components:
Component 1: Harmonizing Land Policy and Regulatory Framework for Sustainable Land
Administration
a.     Revisions of laws and regulations for an effective and efficient land administration;
b.     Establishment of land tribunals and developing alternative land dispute resolution mechanisms;
c.     Inventory of all acquired State lands and determination of outstanding compensation; and
d.     Policy studies:
i. Land tenure registration to formulate government policy on what rights will be registered
on land titles.
ii. Finance and fees structure of land administration system to formulate government
policies on fees and taxes for registration of land transactions taking into account the
users willingness to pay, maximizing government revenues from land taxes, and
correcting land market distortions.
iii. Gender study and analysis.
Component II: Institutional Reform and Development
a.     Restructuring of public sector land agencies;
b.     Decentralizing and strengthening land Administration services;
c.     Strengthening customary land secretariats;
d.     Strengthening private land sector institutions; and
e.     Strengthening land administration and management training institutions
Component III Improving Land Titling, Registration, Valuation and Information Systems
a.     Development of Cadastre and Land Information Systems;
b.     Cadastral Mapping;
c.     Establishment of model land titling and registration offices;
d.     Improvement of deed and title registration; and
e.     Alternatives to land valuation and collection of land fees
Component IV: Land Titling Program
a.     Pilot projects in demarcation and registration of allodial land boundaries; and
b.     Pilot systematic land titling and registration.
Component V: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
a.     Project coordination and management;
b.     Human resources development;
c.     Community outreach and public relations; and
d.     Monitoring and evaluation and impact assessment.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in Accra and Kumasi and selected rural areas in Ashanti, Greater
Accra, Upper East and Volta Regions. The project would not impinge on any protected areas or sites or
critical natural habitats or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)



3
ISDS
Comments. The major components of the proposed project are environmentally benign and do not present
any major safeguard issues. The project's environmental classification is rated B because of the civil works
involved in the project and the need to conduct a social impact analysis on the interventions of the project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      ID Yes * No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               0-.Yes 0 No   CS TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 Q Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    ' TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       C Yes * No    C0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    C' TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 C Yes * No    C, TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes * No    C{ TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The major components of the proposed project are environmentally benign and do not present
any major safeguard issues. Office buildings will be constructed for the:
*  headquarters of the public land sector agencies in Accra and for their regional office in Kumasi;
*  classroom and laboratory at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology; and
*  offices for the customary land administration secretariats in Accra, Kumasi and a few other
selected towns.
The sites of these civil works would be on lands belonging to the government, university and traditional
authorities. No involuntary acquisition of land is foreseen. Lands belonging to the university and the
traditional authorities are free of any squatters. If it is necessary for some squatters to be moved from
govemment lands, a resettlement framework and compensation plan would be prepared prior to project
appraisal.
A key to the success and sustainability of the program will be to provide land tenure services to the
public that are viewed as fair and equitable to all classes in society. There are major social issues that
need to be tackled. First, the fear that the traditional authorities may lose power and control over land
matters in the process of land titling, registration and land administration needs to be forestalled. This
would require considerable consultation with them and studying the roots of their concerns and develop
strategies on how to bring them on board and how their full participation in the land administration
system can be co-opted. Second, there may be fear of land alienation from minority and disadvantaged
social groups. These need to be flushed out and mitigation measures included in the design of the land
administration system. Third, there are cases in which the State has acquired land from communities for
which it has not paid compensation, or is using the land for purposes other than those it was acquired for,
or has subleased the land to other parties. Such communities may object the land being registered in the



4
ISDS
name of the State. The extent of such conflicts with the State needs to be determined and strategies
prepared for their amicable resolution. Fourth, there are many land disputes under litigation. The causes
and magnitude of these disputes need to be assessed and mechanisms designed on how to resolve them.
Fifth, systematic land titling and registration will facilitate transfer of ownership and usufruct rights that
may encourage speculation in land markets resulting in high land prices, promoting landlessness and/or
preventing access of the poor to rural and urban land. Sixth, farmers near peri-urban areas may be
endangered of losing their lands as urbanization engulfs their areas and land values increase. Very often,
they are given compensation only for the improvements they have effected on the land, but not for the
inconvenience of finding new land and relocating there. Ways of reducing such social tensions and
protecting the rights of evicted tenants needs to be studied and means of mitigating their adverse social
effects included in the project design and implementation scheme.
II.D.Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The proposed project will facilitate more secure land tenure arrangements and dynamic land markets,
that are conducive to investment in land improvement and better land management techniques, resulting
in positive environmental impact. Transparent and efficient land administration systems and coherent
and transparent land management policies will provide incentives for investment in improved long-term
land use such as soil conservation and tree crop production in rural areas and investment in
environmental infrastructure such as improved kitchen and bathrooms in urban areas. Project outputs
including spatial data such as aerial photographs and cadastral maps will be useful inputs into
environmental management. The demarcation of forest and wildlife reserves and gazzettment of
globally significant biodiversity areas (GSBAs) is being carried out by a separate IDA financed Natural
Resources Management Project and the GEF supported Forest Biodiversity and Savanna Biodiversity
Protection Projects. These maps would be very useful to this project's activities.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long term adverse impacts are foreseen.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental and social assessments will be undertaken during project preparation and appropriate
mitigation plans will be incorporated in the design of the project. Environmental impact assessment of
the specific sites for civil works activities will be made to determine if these would cause any negative
environmental and social impacts. Wherever such adverse impacts are perceived, mitigation plans would
be prepared to ensure these are checked. In the event people would be dislodged in the process of land
acquisition, the mitigation plan would include an adequate resettlement and compensation plan for any
loss of homes, buildings economic activities and/or loss of other resources.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A stakeholder analysis will be conducted as part of project preparation. The major known stakeholders
include all land agencies, Ministries of Food and Agriculture, Trade & Industry, Mines & Energy, Local
Government, Works & Housing and Environment, Science & Technology. Traditional rulers through
the various Houses of Chiefs, land research institutions and the general populace. The nature of land



5
ISDS
registration using the systematic approach would be highly participatory. At each stage of surveying and
adjudicating on parcels, land owners together with the immediate neighbors and the local customary
head or representative converge on the land after due effective publication and reach consensus
regarding their boundaries. This approach is transparent. Where disputes are not resolved on the site
they are referred to the courts for adjudication. To avoid intimidation of marginalized groups during
this stage, the project preparation will take into account measures to prevent such occurrences. Social
studies to be conducted periodically during the project will uncover excluded groups for remedial
actions to be taken. The environment impact assessment report will be disclosed in-country prior to
Appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
S ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10/25/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            11/21/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/26/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Solomon Bekure                              10/18/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Dan R. Aronson/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                    10/21/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                         10/18/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
,,A~H? _~EDSACk _                      ____ . .  _  ._ _ _.



