Report No. 23638
Report No: iO55085 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GUATEMALA      Project ID: P055085
Project: RURAL ROADS    Task Team Leader: Guillermo Ruan
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 18, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 90.40
Bank Approval: October 15, 2002 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFT    Sector: TR - Rural Roads
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)       Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Rural Roads Project is a follow-on project. It uses the framework and
builds on the initiatives of Rural Roads Pilot Project included in the
on-going Rural and Main Roads Project (Loan 4260-GU) . The overall
objective of the project is to increase the efficiency of the road
transport system of Guatemala and to ensure its sustainability. The
specific objectives are to: (a) continue Bank support to the long term
process of building up the country's capacity to administer and maintain
rural roads; (b) improve the rural road network of the country, which is
critical to providing access to markets and social and other public
services; (c) rehabilitate/improve the secondary and departmental road
networks that connect the rural roads to the main road network of the
country; (d) generate employment in rural areas; and (e) help insure the
sustainability of road and transport improvements.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
A. WORKS
A.1 Rural Roads Program
- Rehabilitation of Rural Roads. Rehabilitation of about 1500 km of
unpaved (gravel) rural roads in the core network of the associations
included in the project.
- Spot Improvement Program. About 5000 meters of critical sections of
roads outside the core network of the municipal associations included in
the project.
- Road Maintenance. Routine and periodic maintenance activities of the
rural roads rehabilitated under the project. (Municipal Associations:
US$2.OM)
- Maintenance Pilot Project - Introduction of microenterprises for road
maintenance.
- Non-motorized Transport Pilot.   Pilot project for the   improvement of
tracks and trails and construction of pedestrian bridges to improve rural
mobility.
- Labor-Intensive Road Rehabilitation Pilot. Piloting of labor intensive
works.
A.2 Secondary/Departmental Roads Program



- Rehabilitation of Secondary and Departmental Roads. The rehabilitation
of about 500 km of secondary and departmental roads that connect the core
road networks of the associations with the main roads of the country.
- Road Maintenance. Routine Maintenance of secondary and departmental
roads rehabilitated/improved
B. INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
B.1 Support for Decentralized Road Development
- Municipal Capacity Strengthening
- Technical Units for Associations (UTAVs)
- TA for Municipal Associations
- TA for INFOM
- TA on Rural Transport Services
- Supervision of Works
- Final Designs/Project Preparation
B.2 Support for Secondary/Departmental Roads
- Project Coordination/Equipment
- Engineering Studies/Final Designs
- Work Supervision
C. CONTINGENCIES
C.1 Physical Contingencies
C.2 Price Contingencies
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Guatemala, several regions.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Both the rural and feeder road subprojects will continue the
same approach adopted for the San Marcos pilot, that is, the
rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads along existing alignments.
Therefore, the risk of additional direct or indirect impacts are minimal.
The pilot phase did not incur any displacement of population and no
resettlement is envisaged in this operation either.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
- 2 -



If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
During the pilot phase no major issues concerning safeguard issues have
been raised. However, most rural population in Guatemala is indigenous.
Since the bulk of the project beneficiaries are indigenous people, the
project itself is being designed along the provisions of the OD 4.20. The
project should ensure that all public consultation and information
processes are carried out in native languages as needed.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The selected project alternative is adequate from an environmental
standpoint.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      4/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 4/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   5/1/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
- 3 -



(For category A projects)       Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop  Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by         Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Guillermo Ruan  8/14/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:       Elena Correa    8/14/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        George Ledec    8/14/2001
Sector Manager/Director:        Danny M. Leipziger      8/14/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 4 -



