25024
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: GUINEA-BISSAU                          Project ID: P049513
Project: Coastal and Biodiversity Management Project  Task Team Leader: Michel Simeon
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 15, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: January 15, 2004                 IDA Amount ($m): 2.00
Managing Unit: AFTES                            Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (100%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);
Biodiversity (P); Other environment and natural
resources management (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Guinea Bissau's coastal complex is characterized by an extensive interpenetration of terrestrial and aquatic
environments, including vast estuaries, a large archipelago rising from a continental platform of about
70,000 kM2, and seasonal coastal plains. The coastal biotopes are known to be among the richest on the
WestAfrican coast in terms of diversity, productivity and food potential. In contrast, the coastal
biodiversity of neighboring countries has already been seriously degraded, because of industrial and urban
development, which has lead to increased levels of pollution and the degradation of marine and coastal
ecosystems.
The Government of Guinea Bissau (GOGB) has long recognized the importance of its coastal and marine
natural resources to both the local and national economy, and is increasingly aware of the importance of
these resources to the sub-region's economy. GOBG has requested that the Bank assist its efforts to
sustainably manage its unique coastal ecosystems and related biodiversity, to promote appropriate and
responsible natural resource management schemes, and to help it address the threats resulting ongoing and
planned activities, most particularly industrial fisheries and offshore petroleum.
The development objective of the proposed Coastal Biodiversity Management Program aims to promote
the rational management of Guinea Bissau's coastal biodiversity for both conservation and sustainable
development ends, with a particular emphasis on local communities. This is in line with national
development priorities, which focus on the reduction of poverty and the development of the social sector.
The program's global objective is to strengthen the conservation of globally significant habitats and species
under national jurisdiction. The program will build on results from earlier environmental initiatives and on
an existing network of protected areas along the coastline of Guinea-Bissau, and will contribute to poverty
reduction in rural coastal areas by providing livelihood strategies through participatory sustainable



2
ISDS
management schemes for natural resource use.
The global and development objectives are sought via the following operational outputs: 1) improved
sustainability and coherence of the organizational, policy and financial framework for managing coastal
ecosystems and sustainable use of related natural resources, 2) effective management of protected areas, 3)
development of community-based biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, 4) improved management
of the coastal fisheries sector, to reduce pressure on the fragile ecosystem balance, 5) implementation of
environmental impact assessment legislation and its application to activities in the coastal zone.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The program comprises 6 principal components. Current estimated program cost is USD 9.0 Million, of
which the GEF will fund USD 5.0 Million.
Component I - Establishment of a sustainable institutional framework for biodiversity conservation
and management. (Estimated cost: USD 1.3Mfor program implementation costs).
This component will focus on the establishment of an institutional framework that ensures the coordinated,
priority-driven management of protected areas and biodiversity, over the long term. The proposed
framework includes: i) an administratively and financially autonomous Institute for Biodiversity and
Protected Area Management (IBAP), which would be mandated by Government to implement national
policies and strategies for the management of biodiversity and protected areas; and ii) a sustainable
financing mechanism, the Foundation, to provide sustainable in-country funding for biodiversity
conservation and management of protected areas in Guinea-Bissau's coastal areas on the long run.
With respect to IBAP, the component will finance the legal, physical and capacity building set-up costs
associated with its establishment. These will include inter alia preparation of legal statutes for IBAP,
amendment of the Protected Areas Framework Law and other existing legislation to reflect IBAP's roles and
responsibilities, identification and establishment of IBAP's Board, design of institutional and governance
structures, development of internal administrative and financial operating procedures, provision and
equipment of IBAP headquarters, procurement of qualified staff, and provision of necessary training.
With respect to the sustainable financing mechanism, the component will cover the costs associated with
designing and putting in place all the necessary legal and institutional instruments to establish the
Foundation (a conservation trust fund). Once established, the Foundation will work in collaboration with
implementation partners instead of developing implementation capacity itself. It will allocate funds to IBAP
and other suitable NGO and CBO partners to implement activities in cooperation with local communities
supporting biodiversity conservation and management goals. Administrative expenses of implementation
partners will be covered as long as they are in reasonable balance to funds that flow to activities on the
ground.
In order to establish a long-term funding mechanism beyond project duration, it is envisaged to create an
endowment fund triggered by a set of benchmarks (following guidelines for GEF supported trust funds)
once sufficient donor or private sector capital has been secured as a result of a fund raising strategy. It is
currently anticipated that benchmarks should be met at the end of the first project and that materialization of
the endowment fund would take place with the commencement of the second phase project. At present,
fund raising is focused in particular on petroleum and industrial fishery sector investors. Discussions with
several representatives of the petroleum sector suggest that there would be willingness to capitalize this
Foundation.
Component II - Biodiversity conservation and protected areas management. (Estimated cost. USD 2.5
M.)



3
ISDS
This component will focus on strengthening the capacity for and improving the conservation of biodiversity,
both nationally and regionally. Interventions will concentrate on institutional strengthening and on the
management of the four existing protected areas and the proposed Mata de Cantanhez Park, as well as on the
conservation of key globally and regionally threatened fauna (including species of marine turtles, sharks,
migratory birds and colobus monkeys as well as the African manatee, sea-going hippopotamus, and
chimpanzee).
Building on and complementing ongoing activities, the component will support the gradual integration of
existing stand-alone projects into a coordinated program of activities to be overseen by IBAP. Reinforcing
the decentralized participatory approach to protected areas management specified in the Protected Areas
Framework Law, component activities will be implemented by IBAP in partnership with national and
local-level stakeholders, including local govemment officials, the communities, and the private sector. As
IBAP itself is only expected to become operational at the end of PY2, interim arrangements will be required
to transition from these individually managed projects to the coordinated program. To this end, it is
foreseen that prior to the creation of IBAP, these activities will continue to be implemented by other partners
within the framework of the ongoing projects, such as IUCN's Protected Areas Nucleus (NAP) for the
management of protected areas, the Coastal Planning Unit (GPC) for biodiversity studies and monitoring,
and Department of the Environment (DGA) for the management of the Lagoa de Cufada Natural Park). As
the existing projects draw to a close, and the program takes over the financing of their activities, their
administrative and oversight will be taken up by IUCN's NAP. IUCN will report to the future Director of
IBAP (who will be hired at program start-up to oversee establishment of IBAP, and will sit in MAFC), thus
allowing the Director to become familiar with the ongoing program. IBAP will assume responsibility for
oversight and further integration of this program of activities once operational.
Specifically funds available under this component will be used to directly support IBAP (once created) and
its national and local-level partners' efforts to improve the conservation and management of protected areas
and biodiversity within Guinea Bissau. The types of costs to be financed include those associated with: i)
identification, classification and management of the proposed Mata de Cantanhez protected area; ii)
elaboration, finalization, approval and implementation of management plans for existing protected areas; iii)
strengthening and operation of the multi-stakeholder Protected Area Management Committees; iv)
elaboration and implementation of endangered and threatened species action plans; v) implementation of a
biodiversity-focused public awareness program; vi) design and implementation of a long-term biodiversity
monitoring system (including completion of baseline and other periodic studies); vii) participation in and
information sharing with national, regional and global biodiversity and threatened species networks; and
viii) capacity building required to implement the above.
The funds under this component will be managed under the same rules as all components until the
Foundation is operational (expected during Program Year 3). At this point, the remaining funds budgeted
for this component will be transferred to the Foundation and disbursed using this mechanism.
Component III - Sustainable biodiversity management-based community development. (Estimated
cost. USD 1.5 M)
This component aims to promote conservation and sustainable use of biological resources at the local level.
Priority will be given to activities that at the same time help reduce poverty and empower poorer
communities. Activities will be concentrated on communities located in or around protected areas or within
the Biosphere Reserve; these areas will thus serve as development poles.
The component will thus support the participatory identification and implementation of community-based
micro-projects that directly and indirectly promote biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of natural
resources. This will be achieved via the establishment of a "sustainable development fund" (SDF) through
which biodiversity-friendly micro-projects or activities proposed by eligible beneficiaries (communities,



4
ISDS
resource user associations, local NGOs, etc) can be financed. In addition, the component will support a
multi-faceted, local-level facilitation process to promote stakeholder participation in the overall program and
facilitate access to the SDF.
The SDF is expected to comprise approximately 60% of the component budget (i.e., USD 600,000) and will
have two financing windows. The first, building on the IUCN model, would dispense matching grants of up
to $10,000 in support of specific micro-projects directly to project proponents. Based on prior national
experience and conservation and poverty reduction criteria five priority themes for intervention have
tentatively been identified, these are food security, artisanal fishing, palm exploitation, ecotourism and
renewable energy. It is expected that the bulk of the SDF funds will be disbursed via this window. The
second window would pilot the establishment of revolving Community Development Funds (CDF), though
which community members, particularly women and other vulnerable groups, could access small-scale
micro-credit. Community Development Funds would not exceed $20,000. Proposals for financing through
either window will be expected to meet clearly defined eligibility criteria, for example compatibility with
management objectives of the protected area, technical feasibility, cost effectiveness, ecological, economic
and social sustainability, and demonstrated community commitment and management capacity. Specific
interventions will be identified through participatory processes involving the communities and resource
users themselves, facilitated by local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and community associations.
The remaining 40% of the component budget will support activities related to the local-level facilitation
process and management of the SDF itself. Specifically, it will cover the costs of: i) outreach activities by
facilitators (local government representatives, NGOs and park staff, and community association leaders),
including awareness raising and extension services (meetings, pilot activity demonstrations, agro-ecological
assessments, dissemination of lessons learned, study tours, etc.); ii) technical support to interested
communities and resource user associations, for example participatory diagnosis, assistance in
preparation/implementation of micro-project proposals, management of Community Development Funds;
iii) targeted capacity building for local facilitators and other key stakeholders, including the communities
themselves, in areas such as participatory diagnosis and project preparation, micro credit and community
revolving funds, financial management, monitoring and evaluation; and iv) management of the SDF,
including operation of multi-stakeholder financial and technical committees for the evaluation and approval
of micro-project and CDF proposals, and monitoring and evaluation activities.
Component IV - Improved fisheries conservation and management. (Estimated cost: USD 2.00 Al).
Management of the fisheries sector is central to the question of biodiversity conservation and sustainable
development in the coastal zone of Guinea Bissau and her regional neighbors and needs to be addressed
when taking an integrated approach to maintain ecosystem resilience and function. Consequently, the
proposed Program will tackle fishery issues with direct impact on coastal biodiversity management and
complementary to activities under Component 2, particularly in the buffer zones surrounding protected
areas. This component will concentrate its support on increasing the protection of the more sensitive
breeding and nursery grounds that underpin the fisheries ecosystem as a whole. It will develop and test a
new concept and practice for the conservation of fisheries' resources in Guinea Bissau, namely the
introduction of Fishing Reserves, i.e., fishing zones governed by special regulations.
Surveillance over the reserves and enforcement of management regulations will be implemented through
local stakeholders, in partnership with the extension service of the Ministry of Fisheries. This pilot
approach is expected to facilitate ownership of local stakeholders over national coastal resources and to
provide incentives for protection of fish nursing and breeding grounds.
Funds under this component would support: i) biological and socioeconomic studies to support the
identification and selection of ecologically sensitive areas where the establishment of Fishing Reserves
would be expected to promote biodiversity conservation; ii) preparation of regulations for these Reserves,



5
ISDS
including support for the public consultation processes; iii) preparing and implementing participatory
surveillance plans to enforce the regulations (including facilitating the establishment of partnerships
between public, private and local communities); iv) public awareness and sensitization campaigns to
promote a responsible fishing culture (as defined in FAO responsible fishing guidelines) and awareness of
the important role played by these Fishing Reserves; v) regular meetings of the regional Conselhos
Consultivos da Pesca Artisanal; and vi) biological and socioeconomic monitoring and evaluation of the
impacts. Implementation of specific community-based fisheries sustainable use activities will be supported
under Component III.
Component V - Establishment of environmental and social regulatory safeguards. (Estimated cost:
USD 0. 7 Al).
This component aims to strengthen the broad legal framework for environmental management by financing
the establishment of an environmental impact assessment process, to ensure that environmental and social
safeguards are integrated into development activities. It will thus support the development, adoption,
dissemination and implementation of environmental impact assessment (EIA) legislation, regulations and
procedures, and capacity building for EIA review and monitoring of compliance.
Most critically, the component will also support an evaluation of the environmental and social impacts of
industrial fisheries and proposed offshore petroleum development, including the organization of public
hearings and other consultative mechanisms.
In addition, the component will support the review and revision of national legislation and policies to ensure
harmonization both internally and with respect to national commitments to biodiversity related intemational
conventions (Biodiversity, Ramsar, CITES, Bonn).
Component VI - Program management and monitoring and evaluation. (Estimated cost: USD 1.0 M.)
This component will support the coordination and management structures underpinning program
implementation. It will thus finance: i) the establishment and operation of a small Program Management
Unit (PMU); ii) the operation of the multi-institutional structures necessary to ensure coordination amongst
various implementing agencies and vertical integration of program activities within sectoral programs (e.g.,
national steering and consultative committees); and iii) the development and implementation of a monitoring
and evaluation mechanism for the overall program, including a consultancy to undertake periodic
independent evaluations of program impact (including beginning, mid and end term beneficiary
assessments).
With respect to monitoring and evaluation, it should be noted that a distinction has been made between
program progress and impact. Component VI would cover the costs associated with monitoring program
implementation progress while the costs of gathering baseline and monitoring data relevant to the
subsequent independent evaluation of biological, ecological and social trends during the lifetime of the
program and beyond will be supported under Components II, III and IV.
Follow on Phase II Program: A second phase to this program is envisaged to build on results of the first
program phase, to adapt program activities to conservation needs and opportunities identified over time and
to consolidate pilot activities based to initial experiences and lessons learned. Based on the success in
raising funds to be capitalized in an endowment fund, the GEF would be requested to match extemal
contributions to the Foundation up to a value of $ 4 million.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



6
ISDS
Coastal zone
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The rationale being that while aimed at protecting the environment, the program could possibly
touch on potentially serious issues such as petroleum, resettlement, and the fate of the Bijagos, an
indigenous people. A comprehensive environmental and social assessment is required.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    ! TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes (o No   C' TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               * Yes O No    G TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes 0 No    C' TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   3 Yes C No    * TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes C No    * TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 O Yes * No    C' TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes 0 No    * TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    C] TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Some Safeguard Policies are triggered or are TBD. An EA and SA will be prepared to identify the issues
and address them. No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected as a
consequence of the project. Main issues include fisheries management and the protection of the
mangrove forests, the two being intimately linked as reduced mangroves will generally result in reduced
fishery production; and the impacts from external sources, such as an oil spill. The project would over-time
prepare an oil spill response plan, even though it has been shown that the impacts on natural resources
from oil spills are not as long term as once thought, but the short term impacts on natural resources and
communities might be severe.
The EA/SA will seek to determine whether or not the project would not limit access to asset or means of
livelihood to some people living in the project areas, in which case any adverse impact will need to be
mitigated. Hence the need to ensure that a good stakeholders analysis and consultation will be part of the
EA/SA process.
II.D. Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
NA
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
NA
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



7
ISDS
The no-project alternative would have significant negative impacts on the environment. If no adequate
action is taken through protection of the area, biodiversity would severely be damaged in the decades to
come, because of increasing external social and economic pressure in the area.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Implementation of the EMP to be regularly monitored.
The EA/SA will confirm whether or not the program triggers the above safeguard policies.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation will take place through the Steering Committee and the Consultative Council, as well as the
local level Park Management Committees. The EA/SA will be disclosed to the public before appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classifcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               8/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           8/20/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            8/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  8/30/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               8/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           8/20/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            8/30/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual



8
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Michel Simeon                                 10/21/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                       10/21/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Richard G. Scobey                            10/21/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH    t       f FEED8ACK  1U51TE Mi A T 



