Oc/
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                AWorld Free of Povorty
.;hfoShop
ltMc Wo'   lom t en
Report No. AC54
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: HONDURAS                                Project ID: P070038
Project: Trade Facilitation and Productivity Enhancement Task Team Leader: John Henry Stein
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 9, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 24, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: LCSFP                             Sector: General industry and trade sector (50%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Micro- and SME finance (20%); Ports; waterways
Status: Lending                                  and shipping (10%); Information technology (10%);
Vocational training (10%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the proposed project is to increase the productivity of the Honduran private
sector, thereby improving Honduras's competitiveness and economic growth, which will in turn increase
employment and reduce the poverty level. The immediate objective of the project is to improve
Honduras' investment climate and local firms' capacity to export in order to prepare Honduras to take
advantage of trade opportunities under existing and new Trade Promotion Agreements. The project
would achieve its objectives by: (a) supporting policy and legal reforms-e.g., promotion of competition
and consumer protection policies; (b) strengthening existing institutions and creating new institutions to
improve competitiveness-e.g., strengthening of FIDE and the Ministry of Trade; creation of a
Competition Policy Institute and a National Quality Council; (c) providing advisory services and
matching grants to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and to firms operating in the most
dynamic local industries - maquila, tourism, nontraditional agriculture and forestry - to facilitate access
to export markets and productivity improvements; (d)financing small scale initiatives (pilots) to improve
productivity of selected areas by upgrading local infrastructure, promoting business innovation and use
of technology, and increasing MSMEs' access to training and advisory services.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project will support development of Honduras' private sector through initiatives aimed at
improving the country's overall business environment; this will benefit all firms, independent of their
size, industry or location. In addition, the operation will provide direct support to MSMEs - to reduce
specific constraints on growth that these firms face-and to firms operating in industries with high
comparative advantages-to ensure that the country exploits the benefits of these sectors and thereby



2
ISDS
achieves productivity increases as quickly as possible. Components and sub-components are briefly
described below:
1.    Improve key elements of Honduras' investment climate. This component entails:
a.     To reduce the burden of administrative procedures to start and operate a business, the
project will provide technical assistance to revise and redefine existing procedures at the national and
local levels. Specific attention will be dedicated to sanitary, environmental and migration permits, as well
as to conflict resolution in areas related to business registration and administration. Pilots for simplifying
procedures will be developed in two or three selected municipalities.
b.     To reduce firms' anti-competitive behavior, the project will support policy reforms and
technical assistance for institutional capacity building. Policy reforms will include the preparation of a
Competition Law and the enforcement of the current Consumer Protection Law. Institutional capacity
building will include the creation and institutional strengthening of a Competition Policy Institute
c.     To promote trade, the project will support improvements to the Government's capacity
to: participate in trade negotiations; assess and define measures to mitigate sector impact of free trade
agreements on sensitive sectors (e.g, nontraditional agriculture and forestry); and strengthen
enforcement of anti-subsidies, safeguards and countervailing duties.
d.     To improve quality and reduce the costs of infrastructure and logistics, the project will
support initiatives in three areas: (i) development of a study on the efficiency of the Honduran
distribution chain, (ii) follow-up activities to ensure continuity with infrastructure initiatives proposed
under the Economic and Financial Management (EFMTA) Technical Assistance project, and (iii)
rationalization of customs procedures.
2.     Promoting private sector innovation. This component will entail:
a.     Support for creation of CITEs (facilities for industry-specific production processes, such
as textile design centers and fruit & vegetable packaging centers). The project will encourage firms to use
CITEs by providing incentives on a matching basis.
b.     To facilitate promotion of "knowledge intensive FDI" and expand linkages between
foreign and local companies, the project will: (i) evaluate Honduras' current FDI policies and their
success in attracting "selected, knowledge-intense" FDI; (ii) finance a communication campaign to
promote Honduras as an attractive country for FDI; (iii) create and fund twinning programs pairing
Honduran firms and applied research institutes with industry counterparts in successful economies (e.g.
Costa Rica, Malaysia, Ireland, Israel); (iv) finance studies to identify foreign companies that could
benefit from locating branches in Honduras and target initiatives to attract these firms (FDI head hunting
); and (v) provide incentives to promote linkages between foreign and local companies. This component
of the project is being developed in collaboration with MIGA, which is currently working on an
institutional strengthening plan for FIDE.
c.     To develop a National Quality System and increase firms' awareness of the importance
of quality certification, the project will provide technical assistance and investments aimed at: (i) creating
a National Quality Council; (ii) support passing of the new Metrology Law; (iii) developing quality
standards, including standards for specific sectors (e g., forestry, tourism), and environmental standards
(based on ISO 14000); (iv) support industry wide implementation of quality management programs,
including technical assistance to review productive processes and environmental management practices;
(v) improving the quality of public and private laboratories to ensure that they meet international
standards for accreditation; (vi) ensuring effective operation of the National Metrology Laboratory; (vii)
evaluating existing Quality Information Centers (WTO Entry Points); (viii) endorsing a communication
campaign to raise firms' awareness of the importance of quality - with specific focus on firms operating
in high-economic growth-potential sectors; and (ix) providing incentives to government suppliers to
encourage them to introduce quality systems.



3
ISDS
3.     To improve the skills of the labor force, the project will provide technical assistance and
investments needed to implement training reforms, as well as initiatives that the FIAS study currently
under preparation will identify as priorities.
4.     To enhance competitiveness at the local level, the project will pilot the elaboration of local
competitiveness strategies in four localities to be selected on the basis of their high potential for
economic development. It will also pilot strategy implementation in one or two of the selected locations,
under the leadership of a pubic/private partnership. In the selected area(s), the proposed project will
address infrastructure bottlenecks in an integrated approach, as well as provide advisory services to
improve innovation and productivity of local firms (e.g., creation of CITEs, business development
services for MSMEs, streamlining of administrative procedures for business registration and operation).
Copan has been tentatively identified for the implementation phase. Other candidates areas include
coastal Garifuna communities. Initial assessments indicate resources will be needed for: consultant
services and expertise to develop the competitiveness strategies, private management for service
provision in water, sanitation and solid waste and for development of online information and services for
local firms; equipment and software for streamlining administrative procedures for business registration
and operation; small physical works to alleviate infrastructure bottlenecks; training; local consultations,
outreach and communication strategies.
5.     Funds to develop a communication campaign on themes related to competitiveness will be
dedicated to: (i) supporting the Government preparing a communication strategy on competitiveness, (ii)
financing seminars, workshops and exchanges on these themes between the public and the private sector
and (iii) financing communication campaigns from the Government to the broader audience, especially
related to sector reforms needed to improve private sector involvement in provision of infrastructure and
services.
6.     The financing of the Project Implementation Unit will provide funds to support the creation of
the unit, the costs of specialists and consultants to support it, operational expenses (including travel),
training and limited equipment. This should ensure an efficient implementation and adequate monitoring
of the different project components, as well as compliance with the World Bank financial management
and procurement guidelines.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover the entire country. The project will provide technical assistance to national
and sub-national agencies, civil society organizations and private MSMEs. The main
beneficiaries of the project will be micro, small and medium enterprises, along with other
producers and participants in the supply chain, such as transport and service providers, freight
handlers, and ultimately consumers as product quality rises and costs are reduced.
The project approach to competitiveness and trade facilitation is highly comprehensive. TA will
be provided to improve critical elements of the investment climate, promote private sector
innovation, and support the efforts of the GOH to improve the skills of the labor force, develop a
communication campaign to support the competitiveness strategy. These activities do not have a
geographical focus.
The project will develop a culturally sensitive implementation strategy that recognizes the



4
ISDS
presence of indigenous peoples as potential local beneficiaries. Several components will extent
benefits to indigenous communities. A framework to guarantee that indigenous peoples benefit
from the project is being prepared.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments. The project is not expected to have any potential large scale significant and/or
irreversible environmental impact. The proposed project follows a broad cross-sector approach
centered around institutional capacity building, improving critical elements of the investment
climate and creating incentives to promote innovation, quality assurance and environmental
management systems in local firms. Environmental considerations are mainstreamed in all project
components. The project will also pilot the elaboration of local competitiveness strategies in four
localities and their implementation in one or two. Small physical works to alleviate infrastructure
bottlenecks will follow Bank's safeguard policies, local environmental regulations and
environmentally sound construction standards and procedures.
The project is expected to generate environmental benefits through: (a) greater awareness of
environmental regulations in all participants; (b) develop streamlined environmental standards
and guides to support MSME in evaluating and reducing their environmental impact; and,, (c)
providing incentives for firms to seek quality and environmental certification for their products.
Furthermore, the project proposes to develop strategic environmental assessments for selected
industries providing the GOH with specific recommendations to address critical environmental
issues.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BF'/GP 4.01)                 * Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                          O Yes * No   O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                     O Yes O No   * TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                 0 Yes * No   O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 1 1.03)                            O Yes * No   O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                              * Yes ONo    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     0 Yes * No   0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                              O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)      0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*               0 Yes * No   0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is expected to increase productivity and innovation in Honduras's private sector. Key
barriers are being targeted. The quality management approach - which include environmental
standards, complemented with TA for industrial processes redesign, should improve input



5
ISDS
handling, decrease wastage, ancd reduce emissions to the environment. Overall the project should
have a positive impact on the environment. The project includes support to the Ministry of the
Environment through the financing of strategic environmental assessments for key selected
sectors, to be defined during project preparation.
The pilot implementation of a local competitiveness strategy in Copan, the creation of CITEs for
artisan products from indigenous peoples, and the possibility of assisting Garifuna communities
implies the need to develop a framework to adjust the proposed activities to the socio-cultural
characteristics of these intendecd beneficiaries. To this end steps are being taken to engage
indigenous peoples specialists to provide guidance on design consideration and implementation
procedures.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componenl.
No negative cumulative impacts are expected. Nevertheless, the Ministry of the Environment
will be able to select key sectors for strategic environmental assessments. During project
preparation discussion will be held to identify such sectors.
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long term negative impacts are expected from the project. The project is expected to change
management practices in MSMEs. It is expected that the implementation of quality management
will improve work ambient conditions, reduce wastage, and decrease pollution. The Ministry of
the Environment will be supported to strategically identify key sectors where improved business
practices will translate into concrete environmental benefits.
I[.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
FIDE and the GOH, with the support of the project preparation team, are developing a cultural
sensitive implementation strategy. Support studies include: (i) identification and characterization
of indigenous groups that may be impacted by the project, based on existing information; (ii)
description of the indigenous peoples legal framework, with emphasis of special rights and
responsibilities; (iii) identification of local developed and maintained participatory mechanisms
to be use in the specific design and development of activities impacting ethnic minorities; and
(iv) development of a implementation framework to facilitate, or guarantee, that the indigenous
communities will benefit from the project.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Positive environmental and social impacts are expected from the implementation of the project.
All activities will comply with environmental regulations as contemplated in the Bank's
safeguard policies and Honduras norms. The Ministry of the Environment will be strengthened to
carry out strategic environmental impacts for selected key sectors. The project is contemplating
the creation of centers for technical innovation, CITEs, to support wood manufactures and
furniture production. A careful delimitation of the activities is needed to assess the need to call
upon the Forestry OP. Nevertheless, the project contemplates funds to support strategic
environmental assessments, one of which is being recommended to cover the forestry sector in
Honduras. It is acknowledged that Honduras has a well developed forestry sector, good
regulations, but lack capacity for enforcement. The strategic sector environmental assessment



6
ISDS
would produce a fresh look to the existing legal and institutional framework, review the
profitability of productive activities, and explore government options to improve the
environmental and commercial performance of the sector. Other specific interventions from the
Bank and IDB in forestry will serve as the main vehicles for conducting policy dialogue and
addressing environmental concerns.
FIDE and the PIU will include or draw on available environmental and indigenous peoples
specialists for project supervision. The monitoring and evaluation plan will include clear
indicators to verify safeguards compliance.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A concerted effort has been made to involve all potential stakeholders during project preparation,
in order to get there opinions and commitments. This has included a public forum on Honduras'
competitiveness where the project and its components were presented to a wide audience,
comprising Government, business and civil society representatives. Advising or executing
boards with participation of key stakeholders are being devised for the implementation of several
components. In the case of activities involving or benefiting indigenous peoples an
implementation framework would be developed to ensure their participation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



7
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             John Henry Stein                             04/29/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Alejandro Deeb                          04/29/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Daniel R. Gross                           04/29/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Danny M. Leipziger                           04/29/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
L     ARLC; UK               I   _AP         LW    CASE J



