Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC305 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 26, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P083244 
Project Name: Nuestras Raices Program 
Task Team Leader: Andrea Vermehren 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 10 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Civic engagement, participation and 
community driven development (P);Indigenous 
peoples (P);Other human development (P);Other 
social protection and risk management (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Rajeev Swami 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
With nearly two-thirds of the population considered as poor and nearly half extremely poor,  Honduras is one of the 
poorest countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region and is characterized by a high degree of income 
disparity. According to the 2001 census, Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples number over 440,000 representing 
7.2 percent of the total population of Honduras and are divided into nine distinct ethnic groups. The ethnic 
communities are among the poorest in the country, with much higher than average rates of malnutrition and 
illiteracy as well as unsatisfied basic needs.  Their participation in the democratic processes at the central and local 
government levels is limited.  In 2001, the Honduran Government presented the country’s Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP), which seeks to reduce poverty by 24 percent over the period 2001 – 15 by coordinating 
efforts to reduce poverty through a comprehensive set of measures.  The objective of “Strengthening Social 
Protection for Specific Groups” (pillar 5 of the PRSP) is to improve the living conditions of people living in 
conditions of extreme-poverty, especially children, adolescents, senior citizens, women, persons with disabilities and 
ethnic groups, in order to enable their social integration and development through equitable access to opportunities. 
As part of this strategy, the Government of Honduras (GOH) has strengthened its efforts to address the persistent 
problems of the indigenous and black peoples.   
  
During the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy consultations in 2003, the GOH reiterated its commitment to 
improving the living conditions of the country’s vulnerable groups, particularly the ethnic communities, and asked 
the Bank to continue its support to one of the most prominent and successful programs in this area, the 
Nuestras 
Raíces
 Program, implemented by the Honduras Social Investment Fund (FHIS).  
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The objective
 of the project is “to contribute to an increased participation of indigenous and 
Afro-Honduran groups in the holistic development processes of their communities and their 
nation, through the strengthening of local capacity to build sustainable organizations, 
development projects and cultural identity.” The project would have three components: 
 
Page  2
 
 
a. 
Participatory Development Planning by ethnic group
:  The purpose of this exercise is threefold: (i) to train 
and  prepare ethnic communities to actively participate in the municipal planning process,  (ii) to identify 
projects to be financed under 
Nuestras Raíces
, and (iii) to encourage ethnic federations to work more closely 
with municipalities to leverage funds. Each of the nine ethnic groups would prepare a strategic plan outlining 
the vision, mission, and strategic goals for its members.  
b. 
Grants for subprojects:  
Most of the project funds would be invested in community-executed projects.  These 
resources would be allocated proportionately among the nine ethnic groups, based upon the 2001 census data, 
while guaranteeing a minimum allocation for the five smallest ethnic groups.  Projects will be executed using a 
“community-driven development” methodology in accordance with FHIS’s new manual “Proyectos Ejecutados 
por las Comunidades Indígenas y Negras Hondureñas (PEC-INH)”, which includes provisions for cultural 
adequacy in the case of Nuestras Raices projects. The manual includes a “negative” menu of sub-projects that 
can not be financed under the operation, in line with safeguard policies. Communities would be expected to 
finance, through cash or in-kind, contributions which account for at least 10 percent of their project’s value. 
FHIS counterpart funding would be another 10%. Project funds would be transferred directly to a Community 
Project Committee which would have a legal status and a leadership that is elected or, in those cases where an 
organization already exists, confirmed, by the entire community.  The communities would contract specialists to 
assist with technical and social aspects of project design and implementation.   
c. 
Capacity-building and Institutional Strengthening:  
The 
Nuestras Raíces
 Technical Unit located within 
FHIS would be responsible, as before, for managing the project.  For the successful implementation of the 
program, it would closely coordinate with the Ethnic Federations, the community committees, the locally 
contracted community facilitators, and the FHIS contracted supervisors.  To strengthen the capacity of ethnic 
communities to lead their own development process, the Nuestras Raíces program would provide training and 
technical assistance to the communities in participatory needs assessment, project identification, planning, 
execution, operation and maintenance, and funds and materials management.  The program would have an MIS 
(as part of the FHIS MIS) to monitor project progress at various stages of the project cycle. External audits 
would be carried out regularly. Finally, funds would be set aside for an external ex-post evaluation of the 
program, whose results would be compared with those of the  previous Nuestras Raices project. 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Nationwide, only in ethnic communities.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The project would be managed by FHIS, whose capacity has been deemed adequate to manage the project based on 
its previous experience with implementing the Nuestras Raices program and on its recent move to implement 
community-executed projects nationwide. As before, the Nuestras Raices team of FHIS is coordinating closely with 
the ethnic representations who are as much part of the project’s planning process as they will be during 
implementation. To strengthen the capacity of ethnic communities to lead their own development process, the 
Nuestras Raíces program would provide training and technical assistance to the communities in carrying out 
participatory needs assessments, project identification, planning, execution, operation and maintenance, and funds 
and materials management.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[   ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[   ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[   ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[   ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[   ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[   ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[   ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[   ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
Project has been classified as Category B.  Even though the Nuestras Raíces Project has been 
conceived to contribute to the strengthening of the social protection of indigenous and Afro-
Honduran communities, the possibility to finance small infrastructure in sensitive areas might 
cause potential adverse environmental impacts.  
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ X ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
 
There are no major issues with safeguards, given the fact that the project itself can be seen as an ‘indigenous peoples 
development plan (IPDP)”, and FHIS’ sound instruments and procedures regarding environmental protection.  It 
was confirmed that this project is a Category B project that will require an Environmental Assessment (EA) to be 
included in the Operational Manual. QAT already sent detailed comments, based on which an annex for the manual 
on environmental issues has been elaborated. This annex will be revised by the task teams environmental officer and 
resubmitted for QAT's comments/approval. The disclosure of the EA will be done before project appraisal. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
In the envisioned participatory development planning process (component 1), gender and environmental aspects will 
appropriately taken into account and awareness on these issues will be raised in ethnic communities.  The project 
cycle includes all the necessary provisions to ensure that subprojects are carried out in accordance with all relevant 
environment regulations and safeguards.  The disclosure of the Environmental Assessment will be done before 
project appraisal. 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding safeguards during 
project preparation] 
 
Since the project was rated category B, it will require an Environmental Assessment (EA) to be included in the 
Operational Manual.  The EA will be disclosed before appraisal. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
N/A.
 
