25230
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
E., 
lnfoShop
}tc Wa'XJ Bk
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/10/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                    Project ID: P073370
Project: Madhya Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring  Task Team Leader: Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 24, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 18, 2003                  IDA Amount ($m): 244.00
Managing Unit: SASRD                              Sector: Irrigation & drainage (50%); General
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  water/sanitation/flood protection sector (30%);
Status: Lending                                   Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P); Water
resource management (P); Administrative and civil
service reform (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective would be to improve productivity of water for the enhancement of
socially and environmentally-sustainable growth and poverty reduction.
"Productivity of water" is defined as the sum of the net mul,ti sectoral benefits per unit of water use in a
riverbasin framework. This would include the net benefits'of irrigated agriculture, fisheries, hydropower,
drinking water, industries, navigation, and environmental and other community uses of water. It
encapsulates the principles of integrated water resour,ces management (IWRM) in an economic
development framework. Inherent in this'objective isithat water ought to be put to an optimal
combination of beneficial uses across sectors keeping in&mind the nature of that use (consumptive or
non-consumptive) as well as its quality impacts and requirements. IWRM implies that water will be
conserved and that surface and ground water would be considered conjunctively. Improvement in the
productivity of water would be a stepping stone to sustainable water resources development and
management which is a key parameter for economic growth, as water is a critical parameter that affects
and is affected by many critical economic sectors that hold the key to alleviating poverty, particularly in
rural areas.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component A. Water Sector Management Reforms
This component would support the establishment and operationalization of the proposed planning,
allocation and regulatory mechanisms at the State and basin-levels.



2
ISDS
Planning and Allocation Mechanisms
At the State-level: An institution (State Water Resources Agency (SWaRA), would be developed for
environmentally and socially sustainable inter-sectoral water allocation with optimal water resources
management in a basin context throughout the State. This agency would be carved out of the existing
Water Resources Department with the addition of multi-disciplinary skills in the fields of hydrology,
engineering, economics, social sciences, environment, agriculture, surveying, computing water law
and planning. SWaRA would be supported by a technical unit (State Water Resources Data and
Analysis Center (SWaRDAC ), which would collate, verify, analyze and disseminate information
needed for integrated water resources management and basin planning. The project would provide
the necessary hardware, software, consultants, some operating costs of SWaRA, and related training
and study tours.
At the Basin-level: The Sind Basin Development and Management Board and Tons Basin
Development and Management Board (SBDMB & TBDMB) would be created (under the umbrella
of SWaRA) and strengthened to operationalize the concept of integrated water resources
management in a basin framework with decentralized basin development and management. These
Boards are expected to be focal points for "shared vision" water resources planning and management
in the selected basins. Basin boards would also regulate pollution of natural water bodies in the basin
through regulatory and market-driven approaches in coordination with the enforcement mechanisms
of the MP State Pollution Control Board. Support would be provided for infrastructure, technical
advisory services and some operating costs. The structure and work methodology of these Boards
would be determined during preparation, appraisal and later modified as required based on
experience gained during implementation.
Regulatory mechanisms
Bulk: A central autonomous agency (State Water Tariff Regulatory Commission (SWaTReCQ),
would be established to review and monitor water sector costs and revenues, and to rationalize and
set bulk water user fees to enable the sector institutions to be financially self-sustaining. Legal
expertise required to set up such a commission together with support for hardware, software and
initial operating costs would be provided by the project.
Retail: The water user associations (already established throughout Madhya Pradesh by an Act) and
local self-governments would be provided with the necessary technical assistance to rationalize and
set user fees in the irrigation distribution systems within the framework of the bulk rates set up by the
SWaTReC.
Component B. Irrigation Sub-Sector Management Reforms
This component would support measures related to delivering reliable irrigation services at
reasonable cost by financially-self sustaining entities be it public or public-private partnerships.
Line agency reforms. The current water resources department would be restructured to handle
irigation and drainage operations. It is proposed to provide technical assistance and necessary
equipment and training (including technical as well as change management capacity building) to
assist GoMP in improving and modernizing the functioning of irrigation and drainage sub-sector
institutions. The project would support the implementation of a comprehensive Management
Information System and decision support tools, building on a good computer and communications



3
ISDS
network.
Public - Private Partnerships: GoMP is already moving ahead with experimentation on bringing the
private sector into its irrigation and drainage operations. Support would be provided for measures to
introduce, encourage and strengthen public-private partnerships to reduce costs and attract
investements in the sector. In addition, during preparation, dialog already commenced with IFC
would be pursued to bring in synergy with IFC operations. A special focus would be on equipping
the existing WUAs in the project areas with the skills necessary to perform more effectively. Special
studies would be supported to develop workable institutional models, including Panchayati Raj
Institutions for the unbundled operations.
Component C. Integrated Water Resources Management in Two Focus Basins.
Decision Support Systems (DSS) development through information systems (including GIS) and
modeling for socially and environmentally sustainable optimal water resources management in Sind
and Tons Basins would be supported. This would enable GoMP to evaluate water quality, quantity
issues, surface water and groundwater availability and options for optimal use of these resources
given the current and forecast demands under various scenarios of efficiency improvement, market
forces intervention, tradeable water rights etc.
Preparation and use of basin plans: Support would be provided for the preparation and use of a basin
plan for the Sind and Tons basins utilizing the DSS developed above and these plans would be used
to guide future investment decisions in the basin. Basin development plans prepared using the DSS
and Basin Social and Environmental Assessments would be updated as necessary, using interactive
tools and participatory approaches and be integrated with the MIS and telemetry systems to be
developed in the basin. The basin plans would be used in efficient water allocation amongst sectors
and in formulating investment strategies in addition to ensuring integrated water resources
management. In subsequent phases of the program, this planning process and analytical approach
would be adapted and replicated in other basins of the State.
Rainwater harvesting through improvement of community-managed village ponds through technical
advisory services and conservation and management of other water bodies in the Sind and Tons
Basins through small works and technical assistance for sustainable community-based management
would be supported. Fisheries improvement would be supported in the village ponds and other
natural water bodies using procedures described under Component D below.
Development of Small Hydros. dam-toe hydros and canal-drop hvdroswould be supported. It appears
that there is considerable potential for these in the two basins. As part of integrated water resources
management, investments would be considered to develop this potential in a comprehensive manner
in these basins in the first phase. In addition, studies will also be conducted to assess the technical,
economic and social feasibility of developing community based run-of the river village hydro
projects in the two basins.
Preparation of State of the Basin reports: State of the Basin reports would be prepared to present the
inter-sectoral water related data, information and maps in a basin context, reflect stakeholder
consultations, and outline key issues to be addressed and various options to address them. These
products are expected to play an important role in the multi-stakeholderprocess for the development
of a shared vision of the future for the development and management of these basins.
Component D. Irrigated Agriculture Service Delivery Improvement infive basins



4
ISDS
This component would operationalize the concepts and provide the necessary investments for (i)
reliable delivery of water measured and supplied on an appropriate volumetric basis in the irrigation
systems of these basins to improve system performance, cost recovery and accountability of the
service provider; (ii) an outcome-oriented approach with integrated sustainable agricultural
intensification and diversification and private sector participation to complement effective water
management; and (iii) unbundled operation and management of the irrigation and drainage systems,
including participatory user management and private sector participation.
Asset improvement: Most of the assets created for utilizing the water resources of these five basins
for irrigation are in a dilapidated condition which hinders their efficient operation. The result is
scarce water resources are being wasted which the State can ill-afford. It is necessary to rehabilitate
and modernize these systems including volumetric delivery mechanisms, electronic and other
measuring devices, computerized operations and management information systems required for
real-time operations. Prior to carrying out the improvements, an appropriate knowledge base would
be built (detailed topographic and asset surveys and GIS development), and detailed consultations
with WUAs and fisherfolk and other stakeholders together with social and environmental analyses
would be carried out. Asset rehabilitation would be on a demand-driven basis and community
involvement would be ensured through extensive consultations with the already-operational WUAs.
Such upgraded systems can be operated and maintained by a well-trained organizational set-up of
water user associations, fishermen's cooperatives and private sector operators in addition to line
agency operations and management. It is proposed to rehabilitate and modernize all irrigation assets
in the five basins on a demand-driven basis with 10 to 15% of the investment cost contribution from
the stakeholders. As part of this project sub-component, the scope to improve the performance of the
irrigation pumping systems along the canals as well as within the WUAs will be studied during
preparation. Pre-feasibility studies for the development of irrigation canal based and dam-toe based
small hydro projects (upto 10 MW) in the Sind and Tons basins will be undertaken during
preparation in association with the Madhya Pradesh Energy Development Agency.
Agricultural intensification and diversification (including extension services for intensification and
diversification, horticulture, integrated pest management): through collaboration of line agencies and
the private sector would be supported under a farming systems approach. In Madhya Pradesh,
considerable diversified cropping systems are already in place. However there is considerable scope
for intensification and further diversification to horticulture and other high value crops. It is proposed
to provide assistance in this regard and to improve inter-agency coordination amongst various line
agencies operating in the APC Branch and the WRD. Support for extension, study tours and other
training for farmers and on-farm trials for agriculture and horticulture, and promotion of
environmentally sustainable techniques, improvements in livestock management and knowledge
dissemination through village kiosks would be provided. Livestock improvement as part of
agricultural diversification efforts would be supported under the project.
Fisheries: In Madhya Pradesh several of the waterbodies created by WRD assets are already being
utilized for fisheries under different arrangements; upto 2000 ha waterspread area assets are owned
by the PRI and leased to fishermen's cooperatives with technical advice provided by the Fisheries
Department and larger waterspreads are managed by Masya Mahasangh with fishermen's
cooperatives. It is possible to improve the production from these and other waterbodies considerably.
It is proposed to provide technical assistance and investment support required for this purpose.
Public-Private Partnerships: Support would be provided for implementing various management
options for the above which would include but not limited to (i) leasing to a private sector operator;



5
ISDS
(ii) transfer to WUAs and their federations; (iii) transfer to a financially-decentralized
irrigation/drainage/fisheries entity; and (iv) specialized crop zone management by private sector.
Component E. Project Coordination
The project activities would be coordinated by a multi-disciplinary Project Activities Core Team
(PACT). This component would be designed to assist the PACT with its role in facilitating and
guiding the implementation and monitoring of all project activities, ensuring synergy and
coordination amongst activities and agencies implementing these activities, preparing consolidated
reports and facilitating training. PACT would be responsible for baseline surveys starting from
project preparation period and update of such information throughout project implementation and be
responsible for project monitoring and evaluation in addition to direct implementing agencies for
technical, social, institutional and economic issues.
Component F. Feasibility Studies and Preparation Activities for the next phase.
This would include initiating environmental, social and other assessments, topographic surveys and
preparation of feasibility studies for activities to be undertaken in the next phase of the proposed
water sector restructuring program. Lessons learned during early implementation period of this
project would be reflected in this second phase preparatory work.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project would involve a few institutional development components that would be State-wide in Madhya
Pradesh - these include computerization, MIS/GIS development, training, capacity-building and access to
expertise for institutional reform. Physical investments would be concentrated on a few northern river
basins (Chambal, Betwa, Sindh, Ken and Tons) and would be primarily in the form of rehabilitation of
existing irrigation systems and demonstration of integrated water resources management.
A detailed socio-economic and environmental baseline of the area would be developed as part of the
Environmental and Social Assessment and used to assess potential project impacts and opportunities. Given
the nature of the project, there are not expected to be any significant adverse impacts of protected areas,
natural habitats, cultural property or socially sensitive areas. Adequate consultation would be undertaken
and a detailed spatial screening framework would be undertaken during initial preparation to reflect this in
the selection of areas. A comprehensive environmental mitigation and social development plan and
consultation framework would be prepared in order to ensure compliance with Bank, GOI and GOMP
safeguard policies and guidelines.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments. Although the physical investments will be primarily of a rehabilitation type, an Environmental
Category A classification has been adopted given the spatial scale of investment, the new nature of some of
the activities, the hydropower investments possible, and the number of Bank safeguard policies triggered.
This would be revised if necessary after the findings of the proposed Environmental and Social Assessment.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                  * Yes ' No C TBD



6
ISDS
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes C No    * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               O Yes * No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 * Yes O No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   * Yes C No    C TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      .C Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes O No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.1 a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The preparatory work, field visits and meetings so far have indicated the following key environmental
issues related to the proposed project.
*   Weak Institutional Capacity
- Weak mainstreaming of environmental issues in the water sector and irrigation subsector
- Lack of holistic water resources management
- Weak environmental knowledge base
- Weak institutional framework and skills to systematially address environmental issues
*   Mainstreaming Environmental Safeguards and Enhancements in Physical Investments
- There are a number of pre-existing environmental problems related to the design and operation
of current minor, medium and major schemes that need to be examined in further detail. These
include waterlogging, water wastage, public health concems from water-related diseases, etc.
- Pertaining to the works to be selected for rehabilitation, there is a need to include
environmental criteria in the selection of the schemes to be rehabilitated. In addition, there is a
need to define upfront the manner of execution of works to fully include environmental and
social considerations through adequate consultation and access to expertise in addressing
redesign (e.g. watercourse alignments, provision of adequate drainage, etc.), reconstruction
(e.g. dredge disposal, environmental clauses in contracts, etc.) and post-rehabilitation operation
(e.g. minimum flows, etc.) related issues.
- Environmental and social issues relating to integrated water resources management investments
(e.g. hydro) would have individual EAs prepared.
- Opportunities for environmental mainstreaming in the project (e.g. through sustainability and
ecological enhancements, energy conservation and demand-side management)
- Safeguards (EA, dam safety, pest management, international rivers are applicable); natural
habitats to be determined in the Environmental and Social Assesment
* Private-Public Partnership Related
- Adequacy of environmental clauses in contracts
- Adequate capacity in private sector and WUA partners to sufficiently mainstream
environmental and social issues



7
ISDS
- Improvement of environmental content in information kiosks and extension services to be
developed through PPP
These and other emerging environmental issues will be further examined during further project and the
Environmental and Social Assessment preparation and through consultations with various stakeholders.
The primary stakeholders in the project include farmers and other water users, NGOs, various GOMP
departments, and the private sector.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The approach is aimed at improving the management of social and environmental issues in the water sector
in the WRD and other associated institutions that should help the mainstreaming consideration of these
issues in the State. Some of the cumulative adverse impacts include:
*   Potentially increased induced use of pesticides and fertilizers in the area (to mitigate this, a pest
management plan will be prepared and organic fertilizers and environmentally-beneficial cultural
practices and extension will be targeted)
*   Crucial importance of Dam Safety (to mitigate this, a dam safety plan will be prepared to further
strengthen the measures put in place by the recent Bank-supported Dam Safety Project)
*   Through the basin approaches proposed under the project, the cumulative impacts of existing and
ongoing programs in the State on water harvesting will be examined to make them more sustainable and
as part of an overall basin planning and management vision
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
It is expected that there would be a change in paradigm of WRM and irrigated agriculture through
strengthened participatory approaches and introduction of new and appropriate technology. Few adverse
long-term impacts anticipated at this stage but will be reexamined as part of the integrated environmental
and social assessment.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Key alternatives that have been looked at for the project are described in the PCD.
In addition, the following alternatives would be examined during project preparation:
*   Mechanism to build environmental and social expertise in the WRD (choices including in-house existing
WRD staff re-deployment, introduction of specialists, etc.)
*   Relative role of the Water User Associations and Panchayats (it is expected that clear roles and
responsibilities would be evolved during project preparation that learn from the experiences in this and
other states)
*   Role of NGOs (the role of NGOs in the proposed project will be examined in detail - from providing
training and capacity building at one end to actually facilitating water management on the other)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The following table summarizes the processes envisaged to ensure compliance with the relevant
safeguard policies.
WB Safeguard Policy   Triggered                         Comments
(Yes/No)
Environmental        Yes          > This is a Category A project and triggers this OP As the physical works
Assessment (OP 4.01, BP              are of a rehabilitation nature, they are not anticipated to cause significant



8
ISDS
4.01, GP 4.01)                              adverse environmental or social impacts The combined Social and
Environmental Assessment is expected to produce a programmatic,
CDD-type policy and management plan framework, plus specific
EMP/RAP/IPDPs for all identified sub-project investments for the first
year of the project, before appraisal (these would also be prepared a year
in advance for all subsequent works).
Natural habitats (OP 4.04,  TBD           > During project preparation, potential adverse impacts (although unlikely
BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                           given the rehabilitation focus of physical investments) on natural habitats
will be examined in detail, support for management of water-dependent
natural habitats such as wetland and waterlogged areas (especially
enhancement of knowledge-base and training/capacity-building) are
expected to be enhanced in the project. The project will include measures
to enhance natural habitats but will develop a clear approach in the
framework to exclude sub-projects which would trigger the policy
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP     No              > None of the project activities will trigger this OP as no forestry activities
4.36)                                        or activities on forest land are envisaged.
Pest Management (OP       Yes             > Although the project does not plan to finance any pesticides, there is a
4.09)                                        possibility of induced impact of greater pesticide use due to increased
agricultural intensification and diversification Hence, integrated pest
management activities should be enhanced A pest management plan is
to be developed in this regard.
Cultural Property (OPN    Yes             > No archaeological or other cultural sites of significance are expected to
11.03)                                      be impacted by proposed project However, the centuries-old Chandela
tanks mostly have associated cultural property that may be impacted
during rehabilitation This, and other potential cultural property issues,
cause this OP to be triggered and will be further studied in detail with
respect to the physical investments and an appropriate Cultural Property
Action Plan or a framework for such a plan will be developed that will
include screening, mitigating and enhancing affected sites, as well as
include chance finds procedures for civil works contracts
Indigenous Peoples (OD    Yes             > Many of the project area "focus basins" have significant tribal
4.20)                                       populations and a Tribal Development Strategy and Plans will be
developed during the project (plans for the first year by appraisal and a
year in advance for subsequent years developed in consultation with the
tribals) to minimize any adverse project impacts on tribals as well as to
enhance access to project benefits. A detailed GIS of social and other
indicators at village, block and district level is being analyzed for the
area and the distribution of tribal villages will be examined with respect
to the proposed potential investment areas The scope of the Tribal
Development Strategy and Plan would be examined during preparation
and would be different for different project interventions (e g in minor
tanks, small hydro, etc.). Synergies with other programs and projects
(including the DPIP) in this regard would also be examined Measures
to enhance informed participation and culturally relevant solutions for
tribal groups will be evolved during project preparation.
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes             > Although no involuntary resettlement and rehabilitation is anticipated
(OD 4.30)                                   under the project, an R&R Strategy and Framework Action Plans will be
prepared in case involuntary resettlement is required (plans for the first
year by appraisal and a year in advance for subsequent years) In
addition, assistance would be provided to develop a sector-wide R&R
policy (or a State-wide R&R policy that is currently under preparation)
for GOMP.
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37,  Yes             > This policy is applicable, both for Large Dams that are associated with
BP 4.37)                                    many major and medium irrigation projects, as well as small tanks
associated with some minor projects The recently-closed Bank-financed
Dam Safety Project has built significant capacity and set up systematic
procedures and mechanisms for dam safety in MP that has sustained
beyond the project closing Under a Dam Safety Action Plan for this
project, this capacity will be further strengthened and complemented
with actions for small dams also and will include capacity building,



9
ISDS
awareness, information management, access to technical expertise,
intemal and third-party (review panel) checking of designs/redesigns foe
each dam and analytical and communication support.
Projects in International  Yes     > Although all of the project "focus basins" are in an intemational river
Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50,             basin (Ganges), there is not anticipated to be any significant impact
GP 7.50)                             upstream or downstream on water quality or quantity given the nature of
interventions However, the OP is triggered and, according to BP 7.50, a
waiver on notification will be sought
Projects in Disputed  No           > The project is not in a disputed area and the OP is not triggered
Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60,
GP 7.60)
An Environment Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared as part of the integrated Environmental and
Social Assessment. It will examine opportunities and details measures to enhance the mainstreaming of
environmental and social considerations in the project while ensuring compliance with all applicable
World Bank, GOI and GOMP environmental policies, laws and guidelines. The Project Preparation
Team of the GOMP would oversee the entire ESA and EMP development. Independent Consultants
would be engaged to conduct the ESA with the support of the GOMP. Water resources planning,
allocation and integrated water resources management would be carried out by the State and Basin-level
Water Resources Development and Management Entities. Irrigation and drainage reform and investment
program would be carried out by the restructured MP WRD together with the farmer organizations and
the private sector. Rationalized tariff setting and introduction of formal water markets would be through
the tariff regulator. Other agencies involved would be WALMI for training and WIA support and all the
departments in the APC branch of GoMP. Effective consultative arrangements involving farmers would
be established early on to allow farmer input into the preparation of feasibility studies and designs for the
modemization of irrigation and drainage infrastructure allowing for conjunctive use of groundwater and
surface water.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An integrated approach to water resource management would require village level communities to work
in close coordination with a range of stakeholders including the groundwater, rural water supply and
sanitation, and agriculture departments in addition to the water resources department, Panchayati Raj
institutions, NGOs/civil society organizations, academic institutions, consultants/experts, private sector
agencies etc. The project preparation process would aim to involve all these agencies in consultations
right from project conceptualization through preparation and implementation. Roles and responsibilities
for each of these stakeholders would be agreed upon during preparation and formal or informal
arrangements would be put in place.The constitution of Basin level management Boards under the project
would be used to enhance stakeholder representation at appropriate levels. Madhya Pradesh was one of
the first states in India to embrace Participatory Irrigation Management completely - and has instituted
WUAs in all major, medium and minor schemes after having held elections. The State of Madhya
Pradesh has passed an enabling Act for Participatory Irrigation Management and implemented it.
Representatives of Water User Associations (WUAs) in the selected basins would be involved in basin
level consultations for social and environmental assessment and other aspects of project preparation. To
enable WUA representatives articulate their point of view based on adequate consultation at the local
level with WUA members and the rest of the community, the project would put in place a mechanism for
community mobilization/organization and conflict resolution.
E. Safeguards Classtfication. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.



10
ISDS
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05/01/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           07/01/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            07/01/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  07/01/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05/01/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           07/01/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            07/01/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05/01/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           07/01/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            07/01/2003
Pest Management Plan                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05/01/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           07/01/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            07/01/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05/01/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           07/01/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            07/01/2003
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal                   November 7, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Shankar Narayanan/Person/World Bank  November 7, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep/Person/World Bank  November 7, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Sonia Kapoor/Person/World Bank       November 7, 2002
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                      November 7, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:     Constance A.Bernard                        November 7, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here



lm |  -     s-fSIaAgOHS   --  dVVA I            WOaM( ; -         M- -----H3MV3S_
sasi
L .



