Report No. 23703
Report No: I073094 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/13/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P073094
Project: ANDHRA PRADESH COMMUNITY FOREST MANAGEMENT       Task Team Leader:
Irshad A. Khan
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 7, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 16, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 106.32
Managing Unit: SASRD     Sector: AT - Forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Project Development Objectives. The project development objective is to
reduce rural poverty through improved forest management with community
participation. A specific outcome of this objective would be for the poor
and primarily tribal forest-dependent communities to assume full
responsibility for the development and maintenance of forest areas
formally placed under their stewardship. As communities assume management
responsibility under the system of Community Forest Management (CFM)
supported by this project, they will receive legal entitlement to incomes
generated from both non-timber and timber forest products.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will be implemented in 14 districts (Adilabad, Nizamabad,
Mahbubnagar, Medak, Khammam, Warangal, Karimnagar, East Godavari,
Visakhapatnam, Vizianagaram, Srikakulam, Chittoor, Cuddapah and Nellore).
with high poverty incidence distributed in the forested northern, coastal
and southern belts with a total of 3.86 m ha of forest land (50 percent of
which is open forest or scrub). The three main components to be financed
by the project include (a) enabling environment for CFM, (b) forest
management, and (c) community development.
(a)   Enabling environment for CFM. (US $ 22.13 Million). The project
would support policy and institutional changes and capacity building both
of the government, community organizations and NGOs. The existing
institutional framework for the joint forest management would be reviewed
and modified to make it more conducive to implementing community based
forest management (CFM). The Government Order dated December 6, 1996 and
other related Government Orders and guidelines will be reviewed and
replaced by a new comprehensive Government Order providing rules,
procedure and process for CFM. A draft institutional reform matrix has
been discussed with GOAP which would be one of the main bases for creating
an enabling environment. The project would support project management,
monitoring and evaluation, studies and consultancies, Project Monitoring
Unit, staff amenities, communication facilities etc.
(b) Forest Management. (US $ 79.42 Million) This component would focus on
improving productivity of designated forest lands through improved
planning and silvicultural practices, introduction of Non-Timber Forest



Products (NTFP) using multiple use shrub and tree species including
medicinal plants, agroforestry, common land afforestation, fodder and
pasture development. The project would also support adaptive forestry
research, inventory, an environmental and pest management plan, and
development of forest management information system that would support
project management.
(c) Community development. (US $ 24.13 Million) The focus of this
component would be to help the communities in improving their village
infrastructure and livelihood opportunities through forest as well as
non-forest based income generation activities. The project support would
be available for limited community infrastructure development in the Vana
Samrakshana Samithis (VSS) villages, where no other agency is extending
such assistance, with a view to foster a sense of unity within the
village. A tribal development plan would be an integral subcomponent
aiming at improving the livelihood of the tribal communities. A
resettlement action plan would include mitigation measures for adverse
impacts, if any, due to the project on the livelihoods of the local
people. The Project will also finance NGO support, women community
volunteers and preparation of micro plans.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in the State of Andhra Pradesh in south-eastern
India. Andhra Pradesh is the fifth largest State in terms of geographical
area as well as forest area in the Country    The forest resources in the
State, as elsewhere in the Country, are put to excessive use and
exploitation and, therefore, suffer from degradation and denudation,
resulting in poor socio-economic conditions and quality of life. Nearly
43t of the state area with 30- of the total population, is drought-prone.
Nearly 70- of the cultivated area is rain-fed.    Erratic rainfall and low
water table are the limiting factors for intensive agriculture. The
marginal returns and low yields have induced farmers to expand their
agricultural holdings into areas of very poor potential, aggravating the
problem of soil erosion. Most of the rural people are under-employed and,
hence, the low per capita income and consequent poverty.
The project seeks to empower forest dependent communities to undertake the
management and protection of forests in 14 districts and covering 3.86
million ha. of forest land in Andhra Pradesh. Majority of the
beneficiaries of the project belong to tribal communities living in
fringes of the forest areas. While no physical displacement is envisaged
under the project, some of the families dependent on forest land for their
livelihood may be affected due to project activities.
No culturally or socially sensitive areas are included in the project area.
B. Check Environmental Classification: ERROR: Invalid UNID; UNID must be
a 32-digit hex string.
Comments: The proposed project activities are expected to generally have
positive environmental and social impacts and no major adverse
environmental or social impacts are anticipated. Any potential
-2 -



environmental impact is expected to be small, localized and easily
manageable within existing environmental codes or practices.     The project
is classified as B and a combined Environmental and Social Assessment has
been conducted to develop various management options.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The key social and environmental concerns in the forest sector identified
were: (i) shifting cultivation in forest areas; (ii) forest encroachment;
(iii) unsustainable exploitation of fuelwood; and (iv) grazing of domestic
livestock. In terms of the proposed project interventions, the SEA argues
that environmental impacts from the proposed forest management operations
and community development are overwhelmingly positive and any negative
impacts are likely to be very insignificant, site-specific and easily
managed by proper surveillance, design and monitoring of project
investments. Specific measures are identified in the SEA for enhancing
the potential positive benefits and mitigation any risks arising from
project interventions. No irreversible adverse impacts are anticipated.
Since the project is community driven, most of the safeguard issues are
expected to be resolved through discussions within the community during
the microplanning process.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Given the nature of the project design, in that planning and
implementation of project activities will be done at a site-specific
level, no significant cumulative adverse environmental and social impacts
are expected. To ensure potential benefits are achieved, special
attention will be focused in the microplanning and monitoring processes to
capture such benefits.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
No potential significant long-term adverse impacts are anticipated in the
-3 -



project area. Potential positive impacts of the project may include
sustainable forest resource management, improvement in village amenities
and better inter-departmental linkages.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The key project alternative approaches (from various perspectives) as well
as a brief analysis of the with and without project scenarios is presented
below:
Alternatives     Strengths / potential benefits   Shortcomings/ potential risks
Traditional forestry     Primary objective was management of timber resources
Environmental and social concerns did not receive attention. Biotic
interference continued to degrade the forests
Social forestry Pressure on state owned forests for meeting requirement of pulp for
forest based industries, small timber and firewood for general public
likely to be eased. Optimum utilization of waste lands. Small and marginal
farmers targeted.        Pressure on forests by local communities for their domestic and
livelihood not addressed. Activities too scattered to have impact. No
holistic approach to management of forests. Activities were planned and
managed with little sustainability considerations. .
Joint Forest Management Improvement in forest density and quality. Community
participation leading to better appreciation of forestry issues and better
management of forests. Targeted to forest dependent and vulnerable groups
Forest management driven more by economic considerations. May not be
sustainable in long run. Productivity issues inadequately addressed.
Community ownership concerns. Initiatives not fully instutionalized and
dependent heavily on local leadership.
Community Forest Management      Holistic development of all natural resources. Improved
environmental management. Increased forest productivity. Sustainable
management of forest and other natural resources. Environmental and social
management plans integrated into planning at the village level.           Potential
conflicts in  big and heterogeneous VSS.    Still untested.
Without Project Scenario                 Continued degradation of forests, acceleration
in run off, and increase in soil erosion; limited recharge of ground water; Inadequate
fuel wood and fodder supply; limited availability of NTFP;
Greater biodiversity loses; Less sustainable forest management;
Poverty among the forest dependent communities not likely to be addressed;
Limited community empowerment; Limited women's empowerment; Increase in
incidence of conflicts
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
To assess the environmental impacts, APFD has prepared a Social and
Environmental Assessment (SEA) for the project which is consistent with
O.P. 4.01 and the GOI's environmental assessment policies. An
environmental management plan, pest management plan, R&R policy and plan
and tribal development plan were prepared as part of the SEA. In terms of
the forestry OD, the project will promote community management of forests
and improved environmental protection. GOAP state-wide forest strategy is
aimed at sustainable management of forests. Policies and institutional
capacity will be further strengthened to promote, manage, monitor and
implement the strategy. In terms of the natural habitats OD, the project
- 4 -



will not support any significant conversion or degradation of natural
habitats. Specific screening mechanisms would be adopted during project
implementation to assess and avoid any potential adverse impact on
natural habitats as part of the microplanning process at the VSS level and
for mitigation any impacts.
In terms of pest management, the project will not finance purchase of
pesticides. The use of pesticides in forestry practices in Andhra Pradesh
is currently limited to forest nurseries (where they are used in a limited
way for treating leaf defoliators) and in areas infested with termites.
However, pest and pesticide management issues relevant to the project were
addressed in the SEA and a pest management plan has been developed as part
of the SEA to ensure that project supported activities in forestry and
agriculture are consistent with the state's own ongoing Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) plan. Recommendations on Integrated Pest Managment
generated by the Indian Council of Forestry Recearchand Education (ICFRE)
will also be incorporated. The pest management plan identifies activities
to be implemented under the project, including training, capacity-building
and demonstrations in IPM.
Resettlement: The most important safeguard issue to be addressed under the
project relates to involuntary resettlement. Although the project does
not involve physical displacement, or new land acquisition, encroachment
of forest area is a major issue. During planning and implementation of
Micro plan at VSS level, efforts will be made to minimize negative effects
of the project on the local population, including encroachers, dependent
on forest lands for their livelihood. Given the history of encroachment in
the state and the experiences of the previous project, the present project
does not envisage that all encroachers will surrender their encroached
land. However, efforts under the project would be to persuade, through
educating them on the ill effects of forest lands encroached, and
encourage them to surrender such lands and arrange for their alternate
livelihood. However, there will be no forcible taking over of land for
project activities. Guidelines to document the process of surrendering
encroached forest lands have been developed. Where people are not willing
to surrender encroached forest land, they will be arranged to take up
agroforestry in such lands with agreement on sharing of benefits with the
VSS. Based on the findings of the Social and Environmental Assessment
(SEA) carried out for a sample of VSS areas, GOAP has prepared a
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
for the project as envisaged under OD 4.30. The RAP contains mitigation
measures to ensure that those affected are assisted, at least, in
restoring their livelihoods to existing levels. A model RAP has also been
prepared for one VSS area and such RAPs will be prepared for each of the
VSS covered under the project and involve resettlement.
Indigenous (Tribal) people: The indigenous peoples policy applies in this
project. The percentage of 'indigenous peoples' referred as tribals is
approximately 8t in the fourteen project districts with sizable difference
between districts. Nearly half of the VSS proposed to be covered under the
project have more than 50t population as tribals. The main objectives of
the project in relation to tribal population are to help ensure that
potential benefits of the project are accessible to tribal communities in
VSS areas and that fresh sources of social and economic imbalances are
prevented. Based on the SEA and the consultations conducted, GOAP has
- 5-



prepared a Tribal Development Plan (TDP). The plan identifies issues
related to tribals under the project and the strategies to address these
issues. Broadly, the TDP under the project will help that indigenous
peoples are (i) effectively represented in project-related
decision-making; (ii) provided wage employment on priority basis (iii)
assisted to improve their skill base for income generation activities and
(iv) able to access local markets, institutional credit and services and
on-going Government schemes for their socio-economic development. GOAP has
also prepared a model TDP which will serve as a base for the local VSS
communities to prepare VSS level TDP.
These plans would be mainstreamed into the development of the detailed VSS
level Micro plan that would be developed by each VSS with the
facilitation of the forest department, NGOs, VSS Advisory Council and
others. These microplans, that would be agreed with the APFD, would be
implemented by the VSS. They would identify specific activities that
should be implemented for improving the socio-environment condition in
the village and avoiding associated risks and indicate specific
responsibilities for their implementation and monitoring. In addition,
during project implementation, environmental screening of proposed
investments will be carried out at the microplanning level facilitated by
NGO/CO and APFD field-level staff to develop customized mitigation or
enhancement strategies as part of the plan.
A detailed monitoring and evaluation framework and indicators have been
developed to enable mainstreaming of environmental and social objectives
and safeguards into project decision-making. The monitoring framework
envisages both internal and external monitoring of the project, including
social and environmental aspects. A four stage participatory M&E system
is proposed: (i) input and output monitoring (physical and financial);
(ii) process monitoring; (iii) performance monitoring; and (iv) impact
assessment/evaluation. Environmental indicators include such aspects as
impact on water sources, ground water, soil and moisture regimes, soil and
nutrient components, run-off, changes in land cover and use, species
richness and diversity, etc. In terms on the impact on forest resources,
changes in fuelwood dependency, control of grazing and changes in
population of domestic livestock, encroachment, village hygiene
conditions, common property resource conditions, etc. would be monitored.
Social indicators include livelihood status of forest dependent families,
village infrastructure, involvement of vulnerable groups, etc. Appropriate
institutional arrangements have also been made to adequately address these
issues. Capacity-building and study/M&E activities have also been
incorporated to strengthen and facilitate this process and build a better
information base for management. The use of GIS, remote sensing,
photography and effective surveys as tools have been stressed - their use
for environmental and social development management will be mainstreamed
into the proposed Forest Management Information System.
The Project Monitoring Unit will be overall responsible for the
monitoring. The PMU will be supported by a Conservator of Forests
(Monitoring) and support staff, for overseeing the monitoring aspects of
the project. Computerized monitoring packages will be developed covering
all project components and activities and will be installed at different
levels (in the field and through to head-office). Monitoring would be
undertaken at different levels, such as (i) at the VSS level, monitoring
- 6 -



would be undertaken by the VSS management committee, NGO/Community
Organization (CO), WCO and APFD field-level staff. ; (ii) at the
Divisional level monitoring will be undertaken by the DFO, FRO (focusing
on social issues) and Divisional level Forest Committee; (iii) at the
District level monitoring would be through the DFO, FRO and District level
Forest Committee; and (iv) at the State level through the PMU and State
level Forest Committee. In addition, an external agency will be engaged
to monitor and evaluate project activities.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are the members of the VSS that have already
been created under a previous project. The more progressive of these VSS
have been identified for this follow-on activity to give them more forest
management rights and responsibilities. Another key stakeholder is the
Forest Department, which this project seeks to further reform, modernize
and make even more client-oriented. In addition, there are a number of
other stakeholders including NGOs, private sector, academia and other
government agencies that have been consulted as part of the project
preparation. A strong mechanism for consultation has also been developed
in the project as part of initial awareness and PRA activities.
The SEA was undertaken through a stratified random sampling approach and
conducted through a participatory process involving various community
stakeholder groups, including forest dependents, encroachers, (VSS) and
local level NGOs, wherever they were present. A number of participatory
techniques were employed, including Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA),
Focus Group Discussions, individual interviews and interactions, joint
walks in forest with villagers. Data was also collected from local
governmental and district officials and academics. The interim report was
discussed at two state-level workshops and three regional consultation
meetings with stakeholders, including NGOs and civil society. All these
consultations contributed toward project design. It is anticipated that
APFD will continue to work and consolidate its relationship with NGOs and
civil society that were so actively engaged in the previous project.
These organizations will be involved in facilitating local community
participation in the proposed project at the VSS level.
Although a number of consultations have been held on various aspects of
the project with many stakeholders, the consultations on environmental and
social aspects are as follows:
The first consultation on Social and Environmental Assessment report held
on September 06, 2001 at Dullapally. The participants in the Workshop
include Forest Department officials, NGOs, World Bank representatives.
The second consultation on Social and Environmental Assessment report held
on September 12, 2001 at Tirupathi. The focus of the Workshop was on the
content and coverage of and presentation style of the report from regional
setting point of view (NIRD). The Workshop was attended by 46 officials
and executives of Forest Department, NGOs and VSS.
The third one-day consultation on Social and Environmental Assessment
report held on October 19, 2001 at Mancherial. The Workshop was attended
by 60 delegates consisting of Forest Officers, NGOs and VSSs closely
- 7 -



associated with management of forest.
The fourth one-day consultation on Social and Environmental Assessment
report held on October 22, 2001 at Rajahmundry. The Workshop was attended
by 60 delegates consisting of Forest Officers, NGOs and VSSs closely
associated with management of forest.
The final consultation Workshop held at APFA Dullapally, on November 02,
2001. In this Workshop, 35 delegates consisting of Forest Officers, NGOs
and VSSs closely associated with management of forest.
After the field study of VSS is over in each district a meeting was held
with the Forest Department, NGOs, VSS members and line departments and
financial institutions. The districts covered for the study were: Khammam,
Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, Medak and Chittoor as follows:
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              1/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure          2/7/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop           2/8/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              1/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure          2/7/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop           2/8/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              1/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure          2/7/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop           2/8/2002
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              1/21/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure          2/7/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop           2/8/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
-8-



Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Irshad A. Khan  02/07/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Mohammed Hasan
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Malcolm Jansen
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep
Approved by:    Name     Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Paneer Selvam        02/13/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex    02/13/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-9-



