Report No. 23255
Report No: I050655 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/16/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P050655
Project: RAJASTHAN HEALTH SYSTEMS        Task Team Leader: Sadia Afroze Chowdhury
Appraisal Date: April 16, 2002 IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: December 17, 2002    IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: SASHD     Sector: HB - Basic Health
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall goal of the health sector in Rajasthan is to improve the
health and nutritional status of its population, in particular the poor,
women, children, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes (SC/STs), and
nomadic populations, most of whom reside in remote and hard-to-reach hilly
terrain and in desert regions.
The proposed project would contribute to this goal by achieving the
following development objectives:
Enhance performance of the health system at the primary and secondary
levels
Improve efficiency in the allocation of health resources through policy
and institutional development
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project would be a sector investment loan with policy issues
addressing key areas at the primary and secondary levels of health care in
Rajasthan. Its scope would be limited initially to five years and the
project would be developed within the overall program for development of
the health sector in the state. It will have three main components:
I. Management Development and Institutional Strengthening. This component
would focus primarily on strengthening institutions and systems by
improving overall planning and strengthening management and implementation
capacity (e.g. financial and program management, procurement), improving
human resource development for program management as well as clinical
care, procurement of drugs and equipment, referral between the primary and
secondary levels of care specially for reproductive health and
tuberculosis, health care waste management and surveillance; and,
improving the institutional framework for policy development. An
information system would be established to facilitate sharing and
utilization of data in the above-mentioned areas, as well as information
derived from health studies and findings, literature, research data,
indigenous knowledge, and best practices. It would finance professional
services and workshops, studies, training, vehicles, and operational
expenses and salaries of incremental staff on a declining basis.



II. Improvement of Service Quality and Effectiveness at the Primary and
Secondary Level. This component would carry out extension and/or
renovation of Primary Health Centers, Community Health Centers,
Sub-District and District Hospitals, develop service delivery norms,
improve the health care waste management system, upgrade effectiveness of
clinical, management and support services, and improve the referral
mechanism. It would finance civil works, furniture, equipment, vehicles,
drugs and medical supplies, MIS/IEC materials, training, monitoring and
supervision, salaries of incremental staff on a declining basis, and
operations and maintenance.
III. Innovations to Enhance Access and Equity to Disadvantaged Sections.
This component would strengthen the capacity of the community, empower
them to identify their health needs, demand appropriate services and make
the providers accountable for quality services. It will also support
public-private partnerships with a special focus on traditional providers
and traditional birth attendants (DAIs) for referral of women, children.
Innovations in service delivery and health financing though NGOs, and
contracting of clinical and non-clinical services will also be piloted. It
would finance professional services, contracting, training, IEC,
workshops, studies, surveys, operational expenses, and salaries of
incremental staff on a declining basis.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Rajasthan is the eighth most populous state in India with a population of
over 56 million. It is the second largest state in area, embodying immense
regional variations, both in terms of geography and demographics. The
north-east consists of plains, the southern region of thick forests and
rugged ravine topography inhabited by tribal populations, and the western
region of an extreme scarcity of water and poor quality of soil,
characterized by small and scattered settlements and nomadic populations.
The state possesses only 1 percent of India's total water resources; 80
percent of its land area is classified as arid or semi-arid. This project
would benefit the entire population of the state which is over 56 million
people. The project investments will target the poor, tribal and migratory
populations and women and children. The project will directly benefit
approximately 6 million tribal persons living in Rajasthan.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
-2-



Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
There are two safeguard issues associated with the proposed project:
Environment and Indigenous Peoples. Neither of these have any potential
large scale, irreversible or long term impacts.
OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples. Rajasthan has a tribal population of
approximately 6 million people which represents 12t of the total
population. One of the development objectives of this project is to
enhance performance of the health systems, at the primary and secondary
level through expansion of access and improvement in quality of health
services. The project specifically aims to improve health service delivery
to tribal populations.
Medical Waste Management. The project is expected to have limited adverse
environmental impact. A comprehensive medical waste management plan will
be developed for the project.
Civil Works*. The civil works under this project include: extension and/or
renovation of existing health facilities at the primary and secondary
level. No land acquisition is required; if any new facilities are
constructed, they will only be built on land in actual possession of the
government and where encroachers and squatters issues do not exist. The
resettlement policy, therefore, does not apply. The project team will
ensure that all civil works will follow applicable construction building
codes, including those for water supply, sanitation, ventilation, safety
and hygiene, as per relevant Bureau of Indian Standard codes.
*According to the Government of Rajasthan's project proposal, this project
will only include upgrading and extension of existing facilities. During
project preparation, a survey will be conducted to assess whether gaps
exist in provision of basic services to dispersed and migratory
populations. If the need exists, construction of a few primary level
facilities may be warranted.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
-3-



Addressed below.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Indigenous Peoples. During preparation for the proposed project, GOR would
develop a tribal strategy. This strategy would be in line with the project
objectives of improving the health outcomes of the people of Rajasthan
with an emphasis on SC/ST and nomadic populations. The tribal strategy
would improve the quality of health services in these areas as well as
increase access to health services by expanding primary and secondary
health services in tribal and remote areas either by enhancing public
health services or contracting out NGOs and CBOs depending on feasibility.
The project will also strengthen linkages between the primary and
secondary care services, strengthen service delivery mechanisms, involve
the private sector including traditional healers and build the capacity of
communities to address their own needs through increased awareness.
Medical Waste Management. The borrower will prepare a draft environmental
analysis (EA) report for IDA's review before appraisal. The draft report
will address issues related to hospital waste management (liquid and
solid) and drinking water quality, as reported below. The EA report will
also include a plan and budget to implement the recommended measures.
Solid Wastes. The objective is to ensure that all health-care facilities
supported by the project comply with the requirements of GOI's Bio-Medical
Rules. To achieve this, the EA will include a suitable "hospital waste
management" plan for Rajasthan. Such a plan will provide a detailed
blueprint for the segregation and management (i.e. types of treatment and
disposal technologies) of each waste category specified under the GOI's
Bio-Medical Rules. It will also include steps to be followed at different
size health-care facilities (including the awareness/training
requirements, supply of materials and personal protection equipment,
construction of facilities, purchase of equipment) and an implementation
plan. The borrower will also be exploring possibilities to provide
necessary awareness/training to the state health officials so that they
can expand the experience gained in project hospitals to "non-project
hospitals" in Rajasthan.
Liquid Waste: The objective is to ensure that all newly constructed and
existing health-care facilities supported under the project meet the
standards for liquid wastes prescribed by the GOI's Bio-Medical Rules. To
achieve this, the EA will include proto-type designs (for different groups
or types or sizes of facilities) for adequate drainage and on-site
disposal (treatment if required) arrangements and a protocol for routine
operation and maintenance.
Water Quality: In addition to above, EA would include a plan for
monitoring the quality of drinking water at the project health care
facilities and recommend mitigatory measures to comply with the national
drinking water standards.
Civil Works. For rehabilitation and extension of health facilities at the
primary and secondary levels, the project will strictly follow engineering
and civil construction codes that exist for the state during planning and
implementation of new health care facilities. Particular attention will be
paid to water, sewage and construction-related debris.
- 4 -



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Tribal communities, NGOs, private providers, and local government
officials working in tribal areas will participate in project preparation
through consultation workshops and focus discussions to define performance
indicators and plans for monitoring and evaluation during the course of
the project and to identify needs and barriers to obtaining quality care
and expanding access. Utilization of services of those belonging to
scheduled tribes and their satisfaction with health services will be
routinely monitored and incorporated into the health management
information system and used for local planning and management and
performance assessment of the project.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure 5/31/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure 5/31/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop
-5-



If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Sadia Afroze Chowdhury   11/16/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        11/16/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Emmanuel Y. Jimenez      11/15/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



