ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                AWori 1Froo sli Prjirty y
InfoShop
Report No: AC79
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20/05/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                  Project ID: P050649
Project: Tamil Nadu Road Sector Project         Task Team Leader: A.K. Swaminathan
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 27, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m): 348.00
Bank Approval: June 17, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI                            Sector: Roads and highways (90%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (10%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
development (P); Trade facilitation and market
access (P); Other public sector governance (S)
].A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to improve the quality and sustainability of the state's core road
network. The core road network refers to the state highways and major district roads being managed
by the Highways Department (HD) of Tamil Nadu. This objective is to be achieved through
production of the following four outputs (i) capacity and quality enhancement of about 750 km of
state roads in the core network with proper management of social and environmental impacts; (ii)
rehabilitation, major maintenance on about 2,000 km and blackspot improvements at some of the
critical locations on the core network; (iii) improvements to the management of the state road
network through institutional strengthening and public-private partnerships; and (iv) enhanced
funding and improved allocation procedures for the road sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Road Upgrading Component (about 750 /cmThis component primarily aims to improve the
capacity of the state road network through widening and strengthening of about 750 km of existing
state highways and 14 bypasses to two-lane roads with or without paved shoulders, depending on
traffic and other considerations. It is expected to bring in medium to large sized contractors through
international competitive bidding procedures for the execution of these works. The designs have
been done by international consultants and works will also be supervised by consultants procured
through international competition. Environmental and social assessment for these works have been
carried out and appropriate mitigation plans have been developed for handling the various kinds of
impacts. These would be implemented during the project along with or before the execution of
works. This component will also support the State's initiative for public-private partnerships in road
construction and operations which would also be in compliance with the agreed and applicable



2
ISDS
environmental and social safeguard principles. The size of the component is about $321 million and
the Bank share about $245 million.
Road Maintenance and Safety Works Component. Under this component the project would address
the periodic maintenance and safety related minor works needed to maintain a smooth, safe and
comfortable flow of traffic on the core road network of the state. It is proposed to take up
maintenance of about 2000 km of state roads over a four year period with the Bank's assistance
decreasing over the years. These would be a mix of conventional maintenance contracts and
performance-based maintenance contracts. These contracts are targetted to involve small to medium
sized national contractors to help strengthen their capabilities. These would be supervised by the
departmental officers with a periodic technical review being undertaken by an independent
consultant. Similarly, black spots identified under the project will be analysed and suitable minor
interventions up to 100 locations would be designed and executed to help improve the situation.
These would be studied after implementation to review the effectiveness of the interventions. The
size of the component is about $1 11 million and the Bank share about $88 million.
Institutional Strengthening and Policy Development ComponentJnder this component of the
project the state government would utilise the services of experts and consultant firms to help in the
implementation of the Institutional Strengthening Action Plan. The component would also strengthen
the road maintenance planning and implementation within Highways Department through supporting
the development of a maintenance management system for coming up with multi-year rolling
maintenance programmes/budgets for the core network of the state. Improving the capacity of
agencies concerned with road safety in the State will also be taken up through technical assistance
services and training. This component will also help the state in looking at public-private partnership
(PPP) for road/transport infrastructure development through appropriate technical assistance. The
size of the component is about $15 million and the Bank share about $12 million.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in the state of Tamil Nadu in the southern part of India. The key social features
of the state include an impressive control of population growth, continuing urbanization, a complex
social fabric characterized by strong cultural traditions and distinctive rural landscapes. The
population is predominately rural with one third living in urban areas.
The upgradation project roads are located in two specific geographical areas of the state in the North
(TNRSP-01) and East (TNRSP-02,03,and 04). All the road corridors traverse through a number of
human settlements and some cultural, religious and tourist locations. Project roads pass through 11
clistricts (Vellore, Tiruvannamalai, Villipuram, Cuddalore, Perembur, Thanjavore, Tiruvarur,
Nagapatnam, Pudikottai, Ramnanathapuram and Tuticorn) which are predominately rural, except
Tiruvanmallai, Tuticorn and Vellore where the urban population is in the range of 30-50 percent. The
project districts are slow growth districts; regarded as backward, with limited access, and far away
from the major industrial districts. The upgradation roads do not pass through any tribal dominated
districts - the tribal population is less than I percent in all project districts except Tiruvanmallai
where the tribal population is about 3 percent. There are no significant religious and cultural
properties which will be impacted due to the project. The project roads do not pass through national
parks/wildlife sanctuaries although there is a road stretch along the eastern corridor that passes close
to Udayamarthandapuram Bird Sanctuary. Two road stretches on the northern corridors pass through



3
ISDS
reserve forest and conversion of 3.12 hectares of forest land was unavoidable. The eastern corridors
are along the coast where there is a problem of salt water intrusion of ground water. The maintenance
roads will be spread across the state.
Most project affected people (PAPs) belong to poorer sections of society consisting of scheduled
castes and backward communities. A large proportion of PAPs (more than two thirds) are vulnerable -
either living below the poverty line and/or belonging to scheduled castes and backward communities -
and largely live in temporary houses (65%) with poor construction materials. Those losing private
lands are mostly small and medium farmers. The occupational pattern of affected persons indicates
that more than half depend on cultivation while the remaining depend on petty business and casual
work. Only a minority engage in regular government or private jobs.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The project has been categorized 'A' considering the combined social and environmental impacts
due to high population density and the presence of specific eco-sensitive areas (i.e. the coastal zone) in the
immediate vicinity of some of the project roads. Most of the impacts are local and reversible. They will be
mitigated, minimized and enhanced by addressing them through good environment management practices.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               * Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environment Assessment (OP 4.01) and Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)The road corridors have
been selected to cause minimal direct adverse impacts on the people, land, cultural property and the
ecologically sensitive areas of the state and no potential large scale or irreversible impacts were
identified by the Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) process.
Environmental and social safeguard issues have been carefully considered and integrated with the
project designs for the upgradation as well as maintenance works.
The upgradation roads are mostly in plain terrain and pass through agricultural lands. About 5,700
roadside trees are proposed to be cut and compensatory plantation undertaken at a ratio of 4:1. With
respect to eco-sensitive areas, two road stretches pass through reserve forests and conversion of 3.2



4
ISDS
ha of forest land was unavoidable. This is degraded forest and does not constitute a natural habitat.
There are road stretches that pass close to Udayamarthandapuram Bird sanctuary and some reserve
forests. Measures to mitigate any adverse impacts have been identified and included as part of the
EMPs. Three contract packages (TNRSP 02, 03 and 04) run along the eastern coast, where
mangroves, aquaculture farms and salt pans are present. However, none of these are close to the
roads. The need for addressing induced development (salt water intrusion due to excessive
groundwater withdrawal) along the eastern corridors was identified as a concern during the EA
process.
As with any road project, the usual construction-related impacts will be mitigated. The issues include
the operation of quarries, borrow area management, sand mining from river beds, siting and proper
maintenance (particularly, in relation to air emissions) of hot mix plants, as well as proper
management of construction camps. There are a number of major and minor bridges to be constructed
or refurbished for which, proper construction management practices will be adopted at these
locations. However, the rivers crossed are seasonal so no specific planning such as the diversion of
water courses is required and no major impacts are envisaged. The impacts envisaged on maintenance
roads are limited to those during construction. Mitigation measures such as proper siting of hot mix
plants and construction camps have been planned for the same. However, some of the maintenance
roads may pass close or through eco-sensitive areas (reserve forest areas, coastal areas and others) for
which additional mitigation measures have been specified. Proposed mitigation / enhancement
measures included in the contract-wise Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) are to: (a) manage
zonstruction-related impacts such as identifying suitable locations for siting construction camps and
hot mix plants, (b) relocate common cultural properties, and (c) compensate for tree loss. For the
maintenance works, a generic Environment and Resettlement Management Plan (ERMP) includes
standard construction-related mitigation and screening guidelines to determine whether there are any
major environment and resettlement impacts in specific roads that will require additional measures.
Cultural property (OPN 11.03): There are a number of religious and historic sites in the vicinity of
the project roads. Mitigation measures to avoid damage during construction, such as precautions in
handling of heavy equipment in proximity to temple sites, reduction of noise and excessive vibrations
and prevention of dumping debris in temple tanks etc are provided in the cultural property resources
plan, which is part of the EMPs. One roadside sacred grove will be partially affected. About 1,800
community assets will be affected including 84 roadside ponds / water resource bodies, 189 hand
pumps, 565 drinking water taps and 26 wells.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12): The project requires about 570 hectares of land, of which 380
hectares are private. A substantial amount of this land is required for 13 bypasses (370 hectares)
which are being proposed to avoid displacement of residential and commercial properties by road
widening in urban areas. The 14th bypass at Ramanathapuram (about 12 km long) will be taken up in
the second phase of the project and the detailed assessments are being ubdertaken now. This large
scale land acquisition will affect about 15,000 households, of which 8,200 are severe impacts in the
form of loss of houses or livelihood (agricultural based or petty shops). The land acqusiton process
has been already initiated and so far 36 hectares of private land ( 8%) has been acquired. The
negotiations for another 42 hectares also completed and the compensation will be paid shortly. A
census survey among the potentially affected households has been carried out to record the baseline
characteristics of the PAPs. In some of the cases, the census data is more than 2 years old. In all
such cases where the census data is more than 2 years, the key socio-economic an demographic data
will be updated by the NGOs providing implementation support after ascertaining their impacts
through joint verification exercise. To mitigate the impacts associated with land acqusiton and
displacement, the borrower has adopted a project specific resettlement policy outlining the principles
and support mechanisms including an entitlement matrix. Based on this policy, a Resettlement Action



5
ISDS
Plan (RAP) has been drawn up by the Borrower describing the baseline characteristics of affected
persons, institutional arrangements, time table, budget as well as the monitoring and evaluation
arrangements. The HD will be responsible for the implementation of RAP along with concerned local
district administrations. Local NGOs having experience in similar activities will help implement the
provisions of the RAP.
Indigenous Peoples (4.20): The proposed project roads do not pass through any tribal districts. The
census survey revealed that only four project affected households belong to tribal families. Impacts to
four people do not constitute IPs as defined in the OD 4.20. These four households are spread in
different stretches and do not exhibit any of the characteristics described in OD 4.20 in terms of
attachment to ancestral territories, self identification or identification by others, language spoken,
customary social and political institutions and subsistence oriented production. Therefore, the "OD
4.20 on Indigenous peoples" is not triggered to this project.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are no significant cumulative impacts arising from the identified safeguard policies and project
components. All the environmental and social concerns identified are relatively independent and will
be mitigated through contract-specific Environmental Management Plans and a Resettlement Action
Plan for the upgradation roads, and Environmental & Resettlement Management Plan for the
maintenance roads.
The main potential cumulative impacts relate to the combination of safeguard policies (Involuntary
Resettlement and Environmental Assessment) being triggered in case of proposed resettlement sites.
The plans for resettlement sites will also include an EMP with appropriate environment management
measures both for siting and development.
iI.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The findings from the EA and SIA process indicate that there will not be any adverse long term
impact due to the improvement and rehabilitation/maintenance of existing roads. The long term
impacts associated with resettlement should translate into positive benefits for those squatter families;
improved and secure housing and better access to basic amenities. One potential negative long term
impact is where PAPs lose such a substantial part of their land holding that they need to change their
livelihood from land based to non land based occupations. Upgrading and widening of roads is likely
to lead to further development in project areas. Poor management of this development may create
negative impacts in the long term by way of additional stress on natural resources, particularly on
ground water and alterations in land use patterns. To gain a clearer understanding of such issues, the
project plans to conduct a study based on which further recommendations can be planned.
II.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
During the detailed feasibility study and the EA and SIA process, several alignment, structural and
geometric design alternatives were considered, including through public consultation, for all the
project roads. The minimization of the following factors were considered in the final design:
resettlement and rehabilitation, tree cutting, loss of arable land, vehicle operating cost and travel time,
and finally conflicts between through traffic and local activity.
I1.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The HD engaged an independent consultant to review, identify gaps and strengthen the EA and RAP



6
ISDS
wherever appropriate. The safeguard reports now comprise (i) a Consolidated EA and RAP for entire
project, (ii) contract specific EMPs for each improvement road and, (iii) a generic Environmental and
Resettlement Management Plan (ERMP) for maintenance roads. These reports are all consistent with
relevant Borrower legislation and policies as well as Bank policies.
An Environment and Social Development Cell has been created within the HD to coordinate the
implementation of environment and social aspects of the project. This Cell will coordinate with the
HD's field level staff who have been assigned responsibilities to ensure proper implementation of the
plans. EMPs for the improvement works and ERMPs for the maintenance works will form part of the
contract documents. The supervision consultant teams will include dedicated environmental
engineers (contract-level and field-level) who will be responsible for ensuring that contractors
undertake the works according to contract requirements. The contractors will also have a dedicated
environment person to ensure proper day-to-day implementation.
For speedy land acquisition, the GOTN has adopted a process of private negotiations for efficient and
fair acquisition of private land. The compensation to be paid through private negotiations consist of
150% of guideline value plus 13 % towards costs of registration. The guideline value is fixed on the
basis of land type, productivity, irrigation sources and land transctions and is more realistic than the
registered value which vulnerable to manipulations. The guideline values are revised once in three
years in rural and annually in urban areas. In case the guideline value is more than one year old an
additional 5% for each year will also be paid. Resettlement sites are being identified close to existing
villages to enable easy access to basic amenities and opportunities for resettled persons. NGOs will
assist in the implementation of RAP with full support from the district administration. The proposal
from NGOs have been invited and they are expected to be on board by end of May, 2003.
The project includes substantial training and orientation programmes of all relevant parties - staff
from the HD, NGOs, the supervision consultants and the contractors. The training and orientation
plans / modules are integral to the EMPs, RAP and ERMP.
I[I.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultation has been fully incorporated in project preparation with the objective of (i)
identifying specific environmental and social issues, (ii) soliciting comments on project formulation,
route selection and design standards and (iii) soliciting proposals for mitigating or offsetting potential
environmental and social impacts.  Various design decisions, particularly finalization of the
alignments, have been taken in consultation with affected communities. The following public
consultations occurred during project preparation:
*   A task force comprising specialists from the Project Coordinating Consultant along with the
Divisional Engineer (Highways) in each district was constituted to conduct public consultation.
Public hearings were conducted for all the 11 districts the upgradation roads pass through.
*   State level with NGO's having state-wide jurisdiction (4),
* Collectors of districts through which project roads traverse (10),
*   Village level meetings with public / PAPs, (15),
*   NGOs in districts where sensitive ecological areas have been identified (10) and
*   Proposed bypass locations (10).
*   Government agencies that undertake land use planning (especially along the eastern project roads



7
ISDS
i.e., contract packages - TNRSP 02, 03 and 04). Individual consultations have been held with
these land use agencies and a consultative workshop was also held in October 2002. The outcome
of these consultations has also been suitably incorporated in project design.
The draft environment and social safeguard documents were disclosed locally in all project district
libraries on December 19, 2002. These were also disclosed in the Bank's Infoshop in Washington and
the Public Information Centre in Delhi during the last week of December, 2002.
Preparation        Implementation         Operation
Beneficiaries/community  Consultations (CON)  Collaboration (COL)
groups
Intermediary NGOs          CON/COL              CON/COL                COL
Academic institutions      CON/COL                COL                  COL
Local government             COL                  COL                  COL
Other donors           Information Sharing  Information Sharing
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[XI SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[  S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[  S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
.F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             6/1/1998
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          12/19/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          12/27/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED              1/3/2003
(For category A projects)
,Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               11/5/2002      12/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           10/31/2002     12/19/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            11/11/2002     12/27/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
P'est Management Plan:                                     Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable



8
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   ExSected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             A.K. Swaminathan                              05/19/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Sonia Chand Sandhu/Person/World Bank     05/16/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  I U B Reddy/Person/World Bank            05/16/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  S. Vaideeswaran
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                          05/15/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Guang Zhe Chen; Vincent Gouarne             05/15/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEED6ACK       Strg MAP       SHOWCASE



