ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                               Ar'.'c at Poveirty
lnfoShop
Report No AC10
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/02/2003
Section 1 - Basic Information
A. Basic Pro ect Data
Country INDIA                                   Project ID P082510
Project: Karnataka Urban Water & Sanitation Sector  Task Team Leader Oscar E. Alvarado
lm provemnent Project
Authorized to Appraise Date. August 29, 2003    IBRD Amounit ($m). 13.60
Bank Approval: January 20, 2004                IDA AmoUnt ($in):
Managinig Unit: SASEI                           Sector General water; sanitation and flood
Lendinig InstruLm1enlt. Specific lnvestmenit Loan (SIL)  protection sector (80%); Sub-niational government
Status Lending                                  adminiiistrationi (20%)
Theme. Other urban developmenit (P), Other
financial and private sector development (P), Public
expenditure; financial managemenit and procurement
(S)
I A 2. Project Objectives
The Vision: The long-term vision for the urban water supply and sanitation (WSS) sector in the
State of Karnataka is to turn its traditionally very poor performance into high quality and
sustainable services in all its urban local bodies (ULBs). The strategy to achieve this vision is to
carryout a phased program, including incremental steps towards full service coverage and
high-quality service provision in an efficient and financially sustainable fashion. In the
medium-term, the strategy envisages achieving the WSS service provision model that would be
provided by autonomous, customer responsive, and commercially-oriented utilities through
effective public-private partnerships.
In the short term, a state level sector reform based on1 the Government of Karnataka (GoK)'s new
urban water sector policy would be implemented, and at the local level, demonstration cities
would be selected to participate in testing such initial reforms. In particular, this initial reform for
Karnataka entails: (a) creating sound regulatory, institutional and legal frameworks for the WSS
sector; (b) demonstrating that it is possible to provide adequate and continuous WSS services; (c)
upgrading the management of WSS services in the participating ULBs to ensure that
performance standards are satisfactory to the customers and consistent with their willingness to
pay, and (d) creating an enabling environment, institutional capacity, and incentives to serve the
poor and to involve the private sector in the WSS service provision.



2
ISDS
The proposed project will support the first phase of the above-mentioned long-term program and
vision for the urban WSS sector in Karnataka. The project is intended to be a way to initiate
implementation of key basic sector reforms and testing of means to achieve improved and
sustainable WSS service provision in the participating ULBs. The Bank intends to remain in
close partnership with GoK throughout the development of the above vision.
Project Development Objective: The main objectives of the proposed project are to: (a) launch
GoK's urban WSS sector reforn process based on the state urban water policy; and (b) improve
urban WSS services in the participating ULBs (Hubli-Dharwad, Belgaum, and Gulbarga) and
demonstrate that sustainable, efficient, and commercially-oriented service provision can be
achieved. More specifically, the project envisages to:
*     carry out initial sector reform activities at the state level, including establishment of
sound institutional, legal, and regulatory frameworks;
*     prepare the ground for public-private partnerships as a realistic option for WSS provision;
*     eliminate priority water service bottlenecks and improve service in the participating
ULBs to increase their quantity and continuity of water supply;
*     prepare and implement a comprehensive strategy, including capacity building and
institutional strengthening to improve WSS provision and its sustainability in Karnataka
ULBs; and
*     attain increased consumer awareness of and support for WSS reform.
I.A.3. Project Description.
The project comprises two main components: (a) technical assistance (TA) to support GoK's
sector reform agenda and prepare the follow-on investment project; and (b) selected investments
in three ULBs to improve bulk water supplies and demonstrate the feasibility of continuous and
safe water supply in pilot areas.
Technical Assistance Component: The TA component will focus on three areas: (a) statewide
urban water policy framework; (b) local ULB level reform; and (c) preparation of a business
model and PSP process for service provision in the three participating ULBs The TA loan
subcomponents will have specific outputs to be achieved in a set time frame.
(a) Statewide Urban Water Policy Framewvork. The objective of this subcomponent is to assist
GoK in redesigning and implementing staged sector reforms mostly based on the new state urban
water policy framework. The major reform activities would entail new institutional, regulatory,
and legal frameworks at the state level,including a sectoral social and environmental assessment
framework, drawing upon State of the Environment Report.. Project preparation activities will
focus on establishing a detailed sector strategy, the institutional strengthening plan, and the sector
agency design.
(b) TA jor Local Level Reform The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen the
institutional capacity at the local level to bring better WSS services to the three participating
ULBs. This would be achieved physically through demonstration projects and priority



3
ISDS
investments (see investment component) and would require a modified institutional framework.
The envisaged strategy is to generate basic improvements, such as a better commercial system,
prepare to engage in public-private partnerships with private operators in the medium term (2-3
years), and contract out the operational management of the demonstration projects. Detailed
definition and design of the corresponding activities will be based on the project preparation
studies.
(c) TA for Preparation of a PSP Process and Followving Project Phase This subcomponent
comprises carrying out feasibility studies and business plans for defining the appropriate
management scheme for the services in the three participating ULBs, and thereafter, the
preparation of bidding documents for the form of PSP deemed most appropriate. As noted
before, PSP will be designed under this project but implemented soon after, during the next
phase project. Identification studies would also be carried out for scaling up the project in the
three ULBs to other Karnataka cities.
Investment Component: The objective of this component is to improve quantity of water
provision and to attain continuous service in selected demonstration areas of the three
participating ULBs. This project component will comprise (i) priority investments in the
participating ULBs, and (ii) demonstration projects in selected areas to generate local credibility
in the overall Program. Specific activities for this component include
(a) Priority investments The primary objective of this sub-component is to increase bulk supply
to the whole city to benefit mostly all connected citizens. Also, by benefiting the entire connected
population of the three cities, it will help mitigate possible negative reactions from consumers
outside the demonstration areas, who would otherwise get no improvement in the service. Basic
works under the subcomponent comprise (i) for Belgaum and Gulbarga, reducing leakage from
transmission and secondary bulk supply transmission pipelines supplying the service reservoirs
and (ii) for Hubli-Dharwad, increasing bulk supply capability of Malaprabha project by
relocating the jack-well, replacing pumps, augmenting, and extending transmission pipeline, in
addition to reducing leakage from transmission pipelines up to service reservoirs.
(b) Demonstration Projects The primary objective of this subcomponent is to demonstrate that
24-hour, continuous supply is achievable and to show the benefits-health, technical, operational
and commercial-it brings. The four demonstration projects (two demo areas are in
Hubli-Dharwad) will be focused only on parts of the city distribution system, possibly benefiting
between 5% to 10% of the population in each participating ULB. In each selected area, the
demonstration projects will include works to enable the area to be isolated from the rest of the
system and fed from a single point; system component upgrades to permit continuous,
pressurized supply; and identification of supply "bottlenecks" and ad hoc low-cost system
improvements. It will comprise designing, tendering, constructing works and assisting in the
provision continuous operation.
(c) Monitoring the Socioeconomic and Environmental Effects of Continuous Supply and
Exposure to a Comimercial Environment Intended to support all demonstration projects, this will
include the preparation and implementation of a monitoring system, awareness and information



4
ISDS
campaigns, workshops, continuous surveys and social intermediation services. Detailed design of
the monitoring system will be defined during project preparation but will likely include: health
and hygiene-to determine if there is a significant reduction in waterbome disease; economic
effects on households for all categories of supply-direct connections, standpipes, tube wells,
tankers and springs; effects on the billing and collection effectiveness; the conditions under
which continuous supply requires a related program to provide sewerage (UGD); the extent to
which the system will need to be extended in each city; the ability and degree to which customers
are willing to pay for an improved service.
Project components, indicative timeframe, and linkage with possible follow-on activities are
shown in the diagram below:
Jan 03-June 03      July 03-Dec 04          2005 ->          > 2008-2010
Preparation of priority Design+implementation 0  Demo zone O&M +
and demonstration  investments, initiate O&M                     per PSP
investments       for demo zone    Initial Citywide PSP  .     ..   P.P
State-level TA to ULBs for prcparation of initial PSP Oversight ofInitial PSP and  Techinllcl Lppoiritor
institutional ~ ~      PeartinofDepr SP          0
TA (policy  titutional,leal, regulatory, etc.)  Preparation of Deeper PSP  .'""'' hr
*4           First phase         *          Second phase *
(Proposed KWASSIP I)           (Possible KWASSIP 11)
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, informationi aboLit the key environimenltal and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas )
Projet location comprise three Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in Northern Karnataka, and their surroundings:
Hubli-Dharwad, Gulbarga, Belgaum -- with a combined population of about 2 million. There are no knowr
protected areas or critical natural habitats in the project areas, and the project is not expected to affect cultu
sensitive areas.
B. Clheck E,tvironmental C/assification: B (Partial Assessment)
Commn,ents The Environmental Category proposed for the project because of its size and focus on
demonstration projects and priority investments is B, which is based on the information available till
date. The priority investments and the demonstration projects in 3 ULBs are not likely to result in
significant environmental impacts both individually or cumulatively. The potential environmental
impacts of most of the envisaged sub projects are typically construction related and are reversible.
These impacts can be managed by development and implementation of good environmental
management and mitigation plans as well adopting good engineering practices.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                              Applicability
Environmental Assessmenit (OP/BP/GP 4 01)                * Yes 0 No    C} TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                         CYes *No      CTBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                     U Yes *No QTBD



5
ISDS
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  Yes * No C; TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11 03)                            C Yes GNo    * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             C, Yes C No  * TBD
InIvoluntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     Yes 0 No   C TBD
Safety of Darns (OP/BP 4.37)                               Yes    No  CI TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7 50)      0 Yes * No   C TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7 60)*              C Yes 0 No C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of thepartues'claim s
on the dispuited areas
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill tn all r elevant questions If tnforniatton Is not avatlable,
describe steps to be taken to obtaini necessary data
IT D I a Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project: Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible Impacts.
Environmental Safeguards
GoK plans to integrate environmental issues in the project at three levels:
At the policy level, through the integration of environmental concerns into the State UWSS
policy and related strategy and action plans, with particular attention to the issue of wastewater
management
At the sectoral level, through the preparation of a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA)
which would cover the urban sector in general, including WSS. The SEA would be carried out as
part of the state TA during implementation of KWASSIP I and would serve as a key project
preparation document for both the subsequent phases of KWASSIP and the Municipal Reform
Project. The SEA would build upon the State of the Environment Repor t currently under
preparation (expected completion in Spring 2003). The SEA would cover broader regional issues
such as cumulative impacts, potential induced urbanization, and shared regional disposal
facilities. In addition, environmental aspects pertaining to potential PSP in urban infrastructure
and environmental management would be examined, particularly with respect to contractual
obligations and regulation
At the project level, a joint social and environmental management framework (SEMF) would be
developed and applied to all subprojects under subsequent phases of KWASSIP and the Urban
Sector Reform Project. The framework would be developed during project implementation.
Because of the nature and the small size of the investments considered under KWASSIP I
(priority investments and demonstration projects), no significant environmental impacts are
expected. However, a Limited Environmental Assessment (LEA) of the envisaged works is
proposed to be undertaken to assess the extent and significance of environmental impacts due to
the proposed priority investments and demonstration projects in three ULBs In order to mitigate
adverse environmental impacts during planning and implementation of works, an Environmental



6
ISDS
Management Plan (EMP), including Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs), will be prepared
by an independent environmental consultant, working closely with the engineering/design
consultant. The EMP will be fully integrated in the contract for implementation and operation of
priority works and demonstration projects and will be the responsibility of the consulting firm
implementing the works. Terms of reference for the preparation of ECOPs, LEA and EMP will
be cross-referenced in the ToR for the design of the investment component.
Cultural Property may be triggered since physical cultural property could potentially be impacted
or chance finds discovered. The applicability of OPN 11.03 will be assessed in the LEA (and
later during implementation in the SEA and SEMF) and, if needed, chance find contract clauses
and procedures developed or an appropriate cultural property management plan developed as part
of the EMP.
Other safeguard policies such as OP 4.04 Natural Habitat and OP 4.36 Forestry are not triggered
by the proposed project and this will be confirmed in the LEA.
Social Safeguards:
Involuntary Resettlement: According to available information, the nature of the identified
subprojects requires no land acquisition or displacement of people. The main land requirement
anticipated will be for the intake well for Hubli-Dharwad, which is already under Governmental
possession. Thus, OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement will not be triggered. The possible
follow-on projects could require resettlement, depending on the type, extent, and nature of
investments. Therefore, during implementation of this project, potential resettlement in future
projects will be addressed in the Social and Environmental Management Framework (SEMF).
Indigenous Peoples: Given the urban situation, the population is not likely to meet the
characteristics mentioned under OD 4.20. It is how ever essential that a public consultation and
communication strategy is developed and implemented for creating a suitable climate for the
intended reforms. The applicability of OD 4.20 needs to be examined closely after the pilot areas
for demonstration are identified. The Social Assessment will examine the applicability or
otherwise of the Bank's Operational Directive on Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20), taking into
account the key characteristics of identifying such groups as defined in the Operational Directive.
Not withstanding the applicability or otherwise of OD 4.20, efforts are needed in phase I to
improve service delivery to slums and colonies of poor house holds.
lI.D.]b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componenit
No significant cumulative impacts are expected. The potential environmental impacts due to the
WSS scheme rehabilitation are mostly construction-related and are reversible. These impacts can
be managed by developing and implementing good environmental management and mitigation
plans and good engineering practices. Potential cumulative impacts of the reform process and
possible follow-on projects will be assessed during project implementation as part of the TA
component.



7
ISDS
Il .D. l c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area
Social impacts: The current project, through its demonstration of the utility of sector reforms, is
expected to improve service levels for all consumers, and in particular, benefiting women, poor
households and slums in the demonstration area. Socio-economic and health benefits are
anticipated as a result of project interventions. Such benefits will flow to all the ULB citizens
when the operations are scaled up in subsequent phase. The project will also help advancing
governance and decentralization agenda as well. How ever the subsequent phases may involve
land acquisition. This issue should be examined carefully during implementation of current
phase. By taking due care while planning the next phase, land acquisition (and consequently its
adverse impacts), could be minimized.
Environmental impacts: No significant long-term environmental impacts are expected. Potential
long-term impacts of the reform process and possible follow-on projects will be assessed during
project implementation as part of the TA component.
11 D 2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if requlred)
An economic analysis of the project components will be carried out in close coordination with
the social and environmental assessment, particularly with regards to analysis of alternatives,
assessment of baseline social and environmental conditions, coping costs, affordability and
willingness to pay. Environmental Code of Practices will consider analysis of alternatives
technical options including screening of demonstration project area and priority investments and
will be part of the Limited Environmental Analyses and EMP. The criteria for demonstration site
selection includes social and environmental criteria.
11 D.3 Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment): To mitigate adverse environmental impacts during
planning and implementing of works envisaged under KWASSIP I, GoK proposes to engage an
independent environment consultant to prepare the ECOPs, the LEA of the envisaged works, and
the EMP. The environment consultant will closely coordinate with the design consultant and
will ensure complete integration of environmental concerns and mitigation measures in the
design, as identified in the ECOPs and LEA.
The independent environment consultant to be engaged for this project would oversee the work
of the engineering consultant and would ensure due consideration of environmental issues in the
other project components (policy, TA) by consolidating and augmenting environmental work
carried out in the various consultancies. The consultant shall:
*     Plan and undertake environmental work (Environmental Codes of Practice,
Environmental Management Plan, Monitoring & Evaluation        indicators) and
provide guidance/quality assurance to the engineering design consultant to integrate
environmental concerns.
*     Plan for and draft ToR for environmental activities to be carried out during project
implementation (capacity building, sectoral EA/framework for PSP, etc.). The framework
developed for the Urban Sector Reform project should apply to all urban sector operations,
including subsequent phases of KWASSIP).
*     Provide environmental inputs into the preparation of the strategy and action plan that will



8
ISDS
be based on the urban WSS policy statement;
Provide environmental inputs into the social intermediation and communication strategy,
including carrying out consultations with project       beneficiaries,
The EMP will outline the measures incorporated in the design, construction, and operation of the
investment component to mitigate potential environmental impacts. The plan would include,
inter alia, an implementation schedule, monitoring program, estimated budget and institutional
measures, and cover measures to protect cultural property, mitigate noise, and manage
construction site waste. It would include cross-references to contract clauses linking the
mitigation measures to contract documents. The consulting firm implementing the project would
be responsible for ensuring that contractors strictly adhere to EMP provisions.
IT.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechlaniismlis for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stake holders include elected representatives, ULB officials, citizens of the ULB and
demonstration area (stratified across gender and economic categories), private sector and public
sector institutions, non-governmental and community based organizations. There have been
already several rounds of consultations with cross section of all stakeholders. This will be
continued during the planned participatory Social and Environmental assessments for project
preparation and during implementation. A systematic communicationi strategy will be prepared
and implemented based on detailed stakeholder analysis and consultations. Social intermediation
support is envisaged from local NGOs and other support organizations during implementation.
E. Safeguardls Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutionial risks
in maniagemnenit of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven developmenit or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard Issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assess,nent/An7alysis/MaIancgeinent Plan.       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  5/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              6/15/2003
Date of submission to lnfoSlhop                              6/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framewiork.                          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of"in-countiy" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



9
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples Developnment Plan/Framework               Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan                                         Expected      Actiual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to linfoShop
Dam Safety Mancagenment Plan                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of ''i-counltry" disclosure
Date of submissioni to InfoShop
If in-counitry disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Oscar E. Alvarado                            04/01/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1.  Christophe Bosch                        03/28/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2.  R R Mohan
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Sanjay Srivastava
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator L Panneer Selvam                           04/01/03
Sector Manager/Director       Sonia Hammam                                 03/31/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
F%EARCH      , rFE.DDACf sE mAP           -s Ja AriK    ,



