Report No. 23214
Report No: I072539 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/15/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P072539
Project: Kerala State Transport Project          Task Team Leader: Stein Lundebye
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 14, 2001    IBRD Amount ($m): 255.00
Bank Approval: March 19, 2002    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI     Sector: TH - Highways; TP - Ports & Waterways
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The principal development objectives of this project are to improve
traffic flow and road safety on Kerala State's primary road network,
strengthen the institutional and financial capacity of key transport
agencies in Kerala. The project will support the achievement of the above
development objectives by: (a) improving the capacity and quality of the
highly congested state highways and major district roads, and piloting an
inland water transport (IWT) improvement component on selected canals; (b)
improving road maintenance planning and management practices; (c) reducing
road accidents along major roads; (d) strengthening technical, financial
and management capacities of the Kerala Public Works Department (PWD) and
the Kerala Irrigation Department (ID).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will have four main components: (a) transport corridor
improvement: upgrading of state highways (SHs), including related social
and environmental mitigation measures, and rehabilitation of IWT canals;
(b) periodic maintenance of SHs and major district roads (MDRs); (c) road
safety improvement component; and (d) institutional development and
technical assistance component.
Components:
1. Transport corridor improvements: (a) upgrading of about 600 km. of
priority state highways, (b) rehabilitation of about 100 km IWT canals
(c) Resettlement and rehabilitation assistance.
2. Periodic maintenance program for about 1,000 km state highways.
3. Road safety engineering program.
4. Institutional strengthening of PWD and ID, TA for preparation of follow
up studies and implementation of state road safety action plan.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project roads are located through out the state of Kerala, in 12 of
its14 districts. The pilot waterways are in the south-west. Kerala is
characterized by a variety of water regimes - rivers, backwaters, lakes



and ponds - and receives heavy rainfall during its six monsoon months. The
road corridors and the pilot waterways traverse through a number of human
settlements and some cultural / religious / tourist locations and do not
pass through national parks / wildlife sanctuaries / reserved forests.
The area is densely populated, with some parts exceeding 1000 persons per
square kilometer.
Most of the civil works, will be carried out on the existing Right-of-Way.
The majority of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are those settled
along the existing ROW. The Social Assessment (SA) carried out as part of
the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for road upgrading found that the
project will affect 15319 families (Phase I and II). In Phase I 859
families will be displaced. Agriculture land of 99.31 hecatares will be
required for both phases.
The SA further found that most of the PAPs are likely to belong to Hindu's
and the rest are Christians and Muslims. Kerala has a literacy rate of
almost 90 ', the highest in the country.    The whole of Kerala has acquired
urban characteristics, with a very thin dividing line between urban and
rural areas. There has been a significant trend among the people to
migrate to the Gulf countries as well as within India. Nearly 174 Project
Affected Families (PAFs) fall below the poverty line, defined as annual
income below Rs. 24,000 per family.
The proposed widening of the project roads in Phase I will have limited
impact on common property resources, with 36 religious structures getting
affected and in most cases only the boundary wall or part of compound area
will be required for the project. Although these are not protected
monuments, a mitigation plan as per OPN 11.03 has been prepared as part of
the RAP and Environment Management Plan (EMP). Approximately, 1200 trees
will be cut within the Corridor of Impact (COI) to widen the road during
Phase I. The replantation will be carried out at a ratio of 1:2 with
additional provisions for noise barriers and landscaping.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The project has been categorized 'A' considering the combined
social and environmental impacts due to high population density and the
natural environment in Kerala. Most of the impacts are local, reversible
and are proposed to be mitigated, minimized and enhanced by addressing
them through good environment and social management practices.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
- 2 -



necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The road corridors and waterways have been selected to cause minimal
direct adverse impacts on the people, land, cultural property and the
ecologically sensitive areas of the State and no potential large scale or
irreversible impacts were identified by the EA and SA process.
Environmental and social safeguard issues have been carefully considered
and integrated into the selection of the alignment of Phase I and II road
improvement works, pilot waterways as well as maintenance works.
The project is designed to minimize land acquisition and to avoid large
scale displacement of communities by limiting the widening to the existing
formation width of present-day roads (from 7m to 10 m).      Noting that all
residential/commercial structures are located along the carriage way, even
minor widening would result in affecting and displacing these structures.
Acquisition of agricultural and residential land, homestead land, and
commercial structures will be required for the improvement and widening of
the road, to the extent either resettlement and relocation is necessary
for the affected people.
Significant issues emerging from the environment analysis include: (a)
soil erosion, sedimentation, roadside flooding, slope instability (in
hilly regions), drainage and submergence problems due to heavy rainfall,
necessitating raised formation levels in certain road sections, a number
of cross-drainage structures and the use of embankment stabilization
techniques; (b) road safety associated high accident rates due to poor
traffic/road management practices and sub-standard geometric design for
horizontal curves, for which curve improvements, short realignments and
bypasses have been considered ; (c) loss of roadside trees for which an
extensive tree plantation plan has been prepared; (d) land use with
respect to sensitivity of paddy field conversions for collection of borrow
material and locating construction camps for which mitigation
measures/guidelines for camp locations and minimization of paddy land
acquisition has been integrated in the EMPs; (e) possible impacts on
cultural properties along the road side for which enhancement plans have
been proposed; and (f) air, water and noise for which monitoring plans
have been provided in the EMPs for construction and operation phases.
Construction related impacts will be confined to the existing right-of-way
(ROW) to the extent possible except for realignments and bypasses
(proposed only in Phase II). These mainly include: (a) air and noise
pollution during the construction and operation of the roads; (b) dust and
smoke from material transport, crushers and asphalt plants during
construction; (c) pollution from spills of oil fuel and lubricants; and
(d) operation of borrow pits, quarries and construction camps. Mitigation
measures for these are a part of the EMP for upgrading and maintenance
roads and waterways.
Key environmental and social issues emerging from the analysis of the
waterways include: (a) bank erosion; (b) removal and disposal of water
hyacinth; (c) transportation and disposal of dredge; (d) noise
disturbance; (e) impact on water quality due to sewage disposal from
private residences and other sources; and (f) fuel and lubricant leaks
from the boats. Dredge disposal and water hyacinth disposal plans have
been prepared as part of the Environment and Social Assessment and
management Plans (ESAMP). Disposal sites have been located along the
- 3 -



waterways to minimize transportation. As the pilot waterways receive waste
water discharges from residences along the banks and other sources,
measures to improve sanitation practices have also been considered. No
land will be acquired for the rehabilitation of inland waterways and no
persons will be adversely impacted. However community assets and other
resources are being enhanced and plans are included in the ESAMP.The
findings from the EA and SA process indicate that there will be no
irreversible impacts foreseen in the project.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
There are no significant cumulative impacts stemming from the identified
safeguard policies and project components. All the environmental and
social concerns identified are relatively independent and will be
mitigated through corridor specific and detailed environmental and social
management plans and Resettlement Action Plans.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The findings from the EA and SA process indicate that there will not be
any adverse long term impact due to the improvement and
rehabilitation/maintenance of the existing road. The pilot waterways
component will have no potential long term adverse impacts.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
During the detailed feasibility study and the EA and SA process, several
alternatives were considered for all the project roads including for the
widening component and the waterways. The criteria for choosing the final
option were a composite of the following factors: minimizing R&R activity,
reducing tree cutting, reducing loss of arable land, minimize vehicle
operating cost and travel time, and reducing conflicts between through
traffic and local activity. The above was assessed based on the EA and SA
including public consultation.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
To assess and mitigate against adverse environmental impacts of the
project, GOK has prepared a Sectoral Environment Assessment (SEA) for the
project and EIA/EMPs, for the Phase I road improvement works, an
Enviornment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the rehabilitation and
maintenance works (Phase I), and an ESAMP for the IWT component. These
reports are consistent with O.P. 4.01, OPN 4.11 and GOI's environmental
assessment policies. The socio-economic and cultural assessments to
prepare the RAP in accordance with the O.D. 4.30 and 4.20 have been
prepared and integrated with the project design and endorsed by GOK. The
R&R policy incudes an entitlement framework consistent with the Bank's
O.D. 4.30 and O.D. 4.20 to deal with land acquisition and other potential
adverse social impacts of the civil works program. The census and the
baseline socio-economic survey have determined the likely adverse
impacts. A RAP has been prepared to mitigate the potential adverse
impacts generated by the project. The R&R entitlement framework has bee
approved by the GOK and endorsed by the World Bank. Furthermore, since
the project is classified as a Category "A" project, GOK has engaged an
"independent" consultant to review and where appropriate, strengthen the
SEA, EIA/EMPs, ESMP, ESAMP, and RAP. The EA and SA reports for the Phase
- 4 -



II road improvement works and bypasses are currently under preparation and
will follow the same standards and approach that was followed for Phase I
road improvement works.
An Environment and Social Management Cell created within the PWD will
coordinate the implementation of environmental and social components of
the project, along with NGOs. The project management team also includes
adequate staff from the Irrigation Department to coordinate the IWT
component. Independent consultants, as Supervision Consultants, will be
responsible for implementing and monitoring all aspects of the project,
and their team will also include Environmental and Social Specialists and
external evaluators for monitoring the implementation of the RAP and
ESAMP. Training of the PWD and ID staff, and NGOs, the Supervision
Consultants and the Contractors' personnel will be undertaken as per the
training modules and plan prepared as part of the EMPs, RAP and ESAMP.
During the construction, the engineers will be assisted by the various
divisional officers of the PWD in the implementation and by the
environmental specialist of the SC and NGO contracted to implement the
proposed tree plantation program. The supervision of the
rehabilitation/maintenance roads is to be taken up by the divisional
officers of the PWD. Quality Assurance (QA) consultants will be appointed
to ensure the final quality of the rehabilitation/maintenance roads. The
QA consultants, will include sufficient environmental expertise to ensure
that the provisions of the ESMP are properly implemented. Furthermore,
the QA consultants will impart training to the contractors and PWD staff.
The ESMP for the rehabilitation/maintenance works will form part of the
contract documents.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The public consultation strategy included integrating stakeholder concerns
upstream and through out the project cycle. In parallel with environmental
and social screening, the PWD held three scoping workshops, to identify
environment and social issues upstream in the project preparation process
and scope the EAs and SA and ESAMP accordingly. Detailed information was
distributed to nearly 200 NGOs, government agencies, University and
Research organizations. Extensive district and local level consultation
complemented this process with different social groups, district
administration, NGOs and other interested groups. Further, the project
authority organized various discussions and consultations with different
social groups and stakeholders at district and state level. The views of
the stakeholders have been incorporated to facilitate the minimization of
negative impact, and to enhance the benefits through the design and
preparation of the RAP. Moreover, focus group discussions with the
villagers and panchaytas enabled GOK to develop the R&R policy and the RAP
and ESAMP according to the real needs of the affected PAPs.
The SEA, EIA, EMPs (link specific), R&R policy, RAP and ESAMP, and ESMP
(maintenance roads) have been made public through Bank's PIC and in the
project area in October 2001. To ensure continuous participation of
people, RAP and ESAMP provides the mechanism for institutionalizing
consultation with the affected people and the panchayats for the
implementation and monitoring the progress of the work . A series of
follow on consultations have been planned and the first was carried out in
September 2001 to share the EMPs, RAP, ESAMP, ESMP and the designs.
- 5 -



E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              11/1/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          9/20/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           11/15/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)                11/7/2001
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              11/9/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          9/20/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           11/15/2001
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Stein Lundebye  11/14/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Sonia Kapoor/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Mridula Singh/Person/World Bank
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        11/14/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Vincent Gouarne 11/14/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



