Report No. 23324
Report No: I069889 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/15/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P069889
Project: Mizoram State Roads Project      Task Team Leader: Fabio Galli
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 21, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 19, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 60.00
Managing Unit: SASEI     Sector: TH - Highways
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The principal development objectives of the project are to improve the
management and carrying capacity of the Mizoram core State road network.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Project will fund six major components: (a) improvement (widening and
strengthening) of about 184 km of State roads; (b) implementation of the
Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (R&IPDP),
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) for the civil works components; (c)
rehabilitation/maintenance of about 520 km of state roads; (d) design,
supervision, and technical advisory services for civil works; (e)
implementation of Technical Assistance (TA), training, equipment, and
pre-investment studies to help implement the Institutional Strengthening
Action Plan (ISAP); and (f) road safety engineering measures.
Components:
1. Improvement (widening and strengthening) of about 184 km of state roads
2. Implementation of R&IPDP, EMP, and ESMP for the civil works components
3. Rehabilitation and maintenance of about 520 km of state roads
4. Design, supervision, and TA services for the civil works components
5. Institutional strengthening (including equipment, TA, training, and
pre-investment studies)
6. Road safety engineering.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The 98 km Phase I improvement road from Aizawl to Buangpui via Hmuifang
passes through 18 villages (19 settlements). The Phase II improvement
roads include the 71 km road from Buangpui to Lunglei, and the 15 km
Aizawl bypass. In general, roads in Mizoram pass through steep hilly
terrain and fragile geology, and are often prone to frequent landslides
and damage from inadequate drainage during heavy monsoon rains.



About 89 percent of Mizoram is classified as forest land, and most of the
roads being improved and rehabilitated/maintained under the project, pass
through these forests. Of the total forest land, 70 percent is village or
other forests (referred as unclassified forests). Along the Phase I
improvement road, the forest land alongside the road are unclassified
forests. None of the project roads are in the vicinity of any recognized
national park or wildlife sanctuary. The Environmental Assessment (EA)
has identified six stretches of rich (not unique) biodiversity -
ecological identity areas - adjacent to the road. The surveys have also
identified the existence of 41 species of medicinal plants, orchids and
cyathea (tree-fern). Of these, three types of orchids and the cyathea are
endangered species. All of these are found in abundance in the ecological
identity areas and in limited number in other areas. These medicinal
plants are in use by the local population. The surveys also identified a
stretch of road where Chinese Pangolins, an endangered fauna species,
have been observed. The project, through its mitigation measures, will
protect the medicinal plants, orchids and cyathea within the ecological
identity areas. In addition, precautionary measures relevant to
construction-related impacts will also be undertaken. The project will
include measures to ensure that the habitats of the pangolins are not
disturbed. Approximately 2,500 trees (comprising mostly of bamboo and some
teak plantations) will need to be cut within the Corridor of Impact (COI)
for the Phase I road improvement works.
With the scarcity of flat land, the development of settlements is
restricted to the arterial routes, with residential and commercial
development adjacent to the road (very close on the valley side). Most of
the civil works, will be carried out on the existing Right-of-Way (ROW).
The majority of the Project Affected People (PAP) are those settled along
the existing ROW. The Social Assessment (SA) carried out as part of the
R&IPDP for the road improvement (widening and strengthening) found that
the project will affect a total of about 1504 Project Affected Families
(PAF) who will face a range of impacts ranging from minor to severe. In
total, 133 PAFs will be displaced and a total of 107 hectares of land will
be required. The project also affects and displaces a number of
properties, including 311 agriculture properties.
Furthermore, the SA found that the major tribes in the project impact area
are Lusei, Sailo, Ralte, Hmar, Paite, Lai and Mara. In addition to these
tribes there are other tribes existing in this region, like the Chakmas
and Reangs who also come under the broad division of 'Mizo'. The Mizos
came under the influence of the British Missionaries in the 19th century
and most practice Christianity. Generally the Mizos depend upon the
available natural resources for their subsistence. Their traditional
occupation is agriculture, and the traditional system of cultivation is
called 'jhum' or 'shifting' cultivation. Furthermore, part of the
population is dependent for their livelihood on unclassified forests.
Even with the notified forests, except for the national parks and wildlife
sanctuaries, people enjoy customary or usufruct rights.
There are no protected or archeological monuments which will be impacted
by the project. However, there are 12 graves that are within the COI.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The project has been classified as a Category "A" project
mainly based on the construction related impacts in a hilly terrain,
- 2 -



adverse impacts on people and on agriculture land. Furthermore, the
project will impact some bio-diversity stretches. Most of the impacts are
local, reversible and are proposed to be mitigated, minimized and enhanced
by addressing them through good environment and social management
practices.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The road corridors have been selected to cause minimal adverse impacts on
people, common property resources managed by the Village Council for
shifting cultivation, and the ecologically sensitive areas and no
potential large scale or irreversible impacts were identified by the EA
and SA process. Environmental and social safeguard issues have been
carefully considered and integrated into the selection of the Phase I and
II road improvement and rehabilitation/maintenance works.
Social Issues. Since many of the residential/commercial structures are
located on the edge of the road, even minor widening will result in
displacement of a few of these structures. Acquisition of agricultural and
residential land, homestead land, and commercial structures will be
required for the improvement of the road, to the extent either
resettlement and relocation is necessary for the affected people. The
project affects and displaces a number of properties. All people impacted
belong to the Scheduled Tribes.
Environmental issues. The EA has identified that if the road construction
activities are not managed properly, cutting into the hillside to increase
the formation width for the road could lead to slope instability and
increase in the number of landslides. The excess waste material from
slope trimming will require proper handling and disposal. Water
availability during the non-monsoon months has been identified as a
potential constraint during construction. The investigations have
identified a number of locations along the improvement road, which have
rich biodiversity and some plants which have been used in past by the
local population for medicinal purpose. The surveys also identified a
-3 -



stretch of roadside where Chinese Pangolins have been spotted. However,
the forest lands along the improvement roads proposed for improvement do
not possess unique biodiversity or ecosystems, and therefore, adverse
impacts on nature reserves and wildlife are not anticipated. Only one
project maintenance road passes about four km from a wildlife sanctuary.
Since the proposed rehabilitation/maintenance works consist mainly of
improvements to the existing pavement surface, road drainage, selected
slope protection works, repair/replacement of culverts, repair of bridges,
and provision of road signs, with works to be carried out within the
existing formation width, no adverse environmental and social impacts are
expected.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
There are no significant cumulative impacts stemming from the application
of the safeguard policies and project components. All the environmental
and social concerns identified are relatively independent and will be
mitigated through corridor specific and detailed environmental and social
management plans and the R&IPDP.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The findings from the environmental and social assessment process indicate
that there will not be any adverse long term impact due to the improvement
and rehabilitation/maintenance of the existing road. However, the Aizawl
bypass will permanently change the use of approximately 24 ha of land from
agricultural land to road infrastructure. On the positive side the
construction of the bypass is expected to relieve traffic congestion,
improve safety and air and noise pollution in Aizawl.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Mizoram has no railway infrastructure, its topography limits the potential
for development of inland water based transport, and air transport will
only ever meet limited high- value elements of the state's overall
transportation needs. The alternative of developing rail infrastructure in
the state was not seriously considered because of low traffic volumes and
the very difficult terrain, which together would make railway investments
inefficient and uneconomical. Therefore, improvement of the road network
is the only practical alternative to improve transport infrastructure in
the State. Furthermore, since the improvement of the rural road network is
already being assisted through centrally-funded rural development schemes,
it was decided to focus investments on the project on the State's core
road network.
During the detailed feasibility study and the EA and SA process, several
alternatives were considered for the proposed project roads. The criteria
for choosing the final option, based on the environmental and social
assessment were a composite of the following factors: minimizing R&R
activity, minimizing construction related impacts, reducing tree cutting,
reducing loss of land, minimize vehicle operating cost and travel time.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
To assess and mitigate against adverse environmental impacts of the
project, the Government of Mizoram (GOM) has prepared a SEA for the
- 4 -



project and EIA/EMPs for the Phase I road improvement works, and an ESMP
for the Phase I rehabilitation and maintenance works. These reports are
consistent with O.P. 4.01, O.P. 4.04, OPN 4.11 and the Government of
India's environmental assessment policies. The socio-economic, cultural
assessments and the R&IPDP have been prepared in accordance with the O.D.
4.30 and 4.20 and the results have been integrated with the project design
and endorsed by the Government of Mizoram. The R&R policy includes an
entitlement framework consistent with the Bank's O.D. 4.30 and O.D. 4.20
to deal with land acquisition and other potential adverse social impacts
of the civil works program. The census and the baseline socio-economic
surveys have determined the likely adverse impacts and a R&IPDP has been
prepared to mitigate the potential adverse impacts generated by the
project. The R&R entitlement framework has been approved by the
Government and endorsed by the World Bank. Also, since the project is
classified as a Category "A" project, the Government has engaged an
"independent" consultant to review and where appropriate, strengthen the
SEA, EIA/EMPs, ESMP, and R&PIDP. The EA and SA reports for the Phase II
road improvement works and the Aizawl bypass are currently under
preparation and will follow the same standards and approach as that for
the Phase I road improvement works.
The project will be implemented by the Mizoram Public Works Department
(PWD) through the Engineer-in-Chief, who will be responsible for effective
implementation of the project activities. The implementation of the EMP
by the contractors will be the responsibility of the Project Director,
assigned by an Executive and an Assistant Engineer (Environment).
Supervision consultants will assist the PWD in the monitoring and
evaluation of the improvement road. The environmental specialist of the
supervision consultants and NGO contracted to implement the proposed tree
plantation program will support the PWD in the implementation of the EMP.
The supervision consultant will also provide environmental awareness
training to the contractors and the PWD staff.
The supervision of the maintenance roads will be taken up the divisional
officers of the PWD. Technical advisory consultants (TAC) will be
appointed to ensure the final quality of the rehabilitation/maintenance
roads. The TAC consultants, will include sufficient environmental
expertise to ensure that the provisions of the ESMP are properly
implemented. In addition, the TAC consultant will impart training to the
contractors and PWD staff. The ESMP for the rehabilitation works will
form part of the contract documents.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Mizoram has a long history of community work with active participation
from youth and women. Beginning July 1999, extensive public consultation
have been carried out during the preparation of the SEA, EIA, EMP and
R&IPDP. At the State level, the consultation was in the form of the MSRP
Road Show. At the local level, the consultations have been in the form of
group and public meetings where information was provided to the
participants. Follow-up consultation on the EMP and R&IPDP for Phase I
road improvement works have been completed. The same approach will be
followed for the preparation of the EIA, EMP and R&IPDP for the Phase II
road improvement works and the Aizawl bypass. The public consultation
- 5-



process provided the necessary input to modify engineering designs to
minimize potential negative impacts and develop mitigation measures to
address the adverse impacts. The project proposes to further ensure
community participation during implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      10/31/2001       11/1/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/16/2001        11/9/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   11/12/2001       11/12/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        11/12/2001      11/12/2001
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      10/31/2001       11/1/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/16/2001        11/9/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   11/12/2001       11/12/2001
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      10/31/2001       11/1/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/16/2001        11/9/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   11/12/2001       11/12/2001
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Fabio Galli     02/15/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Mridula Singh
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Anil Somani
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        02/15/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Vincent Gouarne 02/15/2002
- 6 -



For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



