                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                  Report No: AC136
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/30/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDIA                                                 Project ID: P079675
Project: Karnataka Urban Sector Reform Project                 Task Team Leader: Robert Maurer
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 15, 2003                 IBRD Amount ($m): 160.00
Bank Approval: May 16, 2004                                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI                                           Sector: Sub-national government administration
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             (40%); Solid waste management (30%); General
Status: Lending                                                water/sanitation/flood protection sector (30%)
                                                               Theme: Access to urban services for the poor (P);
                                                               Municipal finance (P); Municipal governance and
                                                               institution building (P); Other urban development
                                                               (P); Decentralization (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objectives of the project are three fold: (a) at the state level, foster the decentralization process
through improved governance and oversight of local governments; (b) at the municipal level, enhance
the accountability and financial soundness of the Urban Local Bodies (ULB) of Karnataka, and c)
improve service delivery to the urban population.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

1. Project components: (See Annex 1)

The proposed project has three main components. The detailed description is presented in Annex 1.

A.      Policy Reforms and Institutional Support Component:

Key activities at the state level would potentially include technical assistance in the following areas,
which would be finalized during project preparation :
    Implementing administration reforms and business process simplification in ULBs;
    Strengthening automation and capacity of DMA , regional DMA units and municipal staff;
    Improving state-level systems for accounting and establishing an urban finance framework ;
    Implementing spatial policy and reforming land use regulations; and
    Rationalizing state transfers;

With regard to Bangalore Maha Nagara Palike (BMP) and other agencies such as Bangalore
Development Authority (BDA), support would be available for:

    Computerization of functions in BMP, BDA and Bangalore Water and Sanitation Board (BWSSB);
    Capacity building of staff in BMP and BDA;
    TA for enhancing metropolitan governance in Bangalore;
    TA for Bangalore Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority;
    Strengthening of Strategic Land Use Planning capabilities in BDA.

                                                       2
                                                                                                          ISDS



B.       Resource Mobilization and Financial Management Component:

    Implementing new capital-value based system and self assessment of properties;
    Automating/computerizing municipal functions;
    Strengthening financial management (budgeting, accounting, reporting and auditing) systems;

C.       Investment Component

The two main subcomponents are:

Support for project development capacity and advisory services: The low level of ULBs' capacity,
especially with regard to their ability to formulate, structure, and manage infrastructure projects, is a key
area of concern, especially for a project design based on self-selection of ULBs. This will be addressed
through a Project Development Support subcomponent. It would include support for preparation of
Capital Investment Plan (CIP) and priority infrastructure pipeline. It would also provide technical
assistance to selected ULBs with regard to formulation and management of specific rehabilitation
programs arising out of CIPs.

The preparation of CIP would be a two phased approach wherein, in the first phase, a rapid assessment of
demands for rehabilitation and fiscal capacities will be carried out. The objective is to get an initial
assessment of demand and financial capacities. This will be by way of integration of the CIP and a
Financial Operating Plan (FOP). This initial plan will be debated within the local body and select
stakeholders, and a priority plan will be drawn with initial costs. Based on approvals by KUIDFC, the
second phase of this activity will involve detailed design. Based on the revised estimates, the local body
will formalize the request to KUIDFC supported by a FOP and a revenue enhancement plan.

Performance linked investment program:

The investments support will primarily be towards rehabilitation of current assets. Access to investment
for rehabilitation will be on the principle of selectivity. However, in order to firm up the pipeline of the
project, an initial pre-selection will be carried out based on debt bearing capacity for select cities. For
these cities, the CIP will be prepared and access to investment will depend on:

    Increase of at least 20% in property tax demand over previous year;
    Collection efficiency of over 70% with regard to property tax; and
    Demonstrated revision to water charges
    Debt servicing ability

While the access conditions mentioned above would apply to all cities, there will be a cap on level of
access by Bangalore. No restriction is envisaged in terms of withdrawals for investment.

D.       Bangalore Development Program:

As the larger scope of the project is to support urban reforms, Bangalore, as the prime city in the state,
will be supported by a separate component. The nature of support provided would cover all urban
entities in Bangalore and investment support for basic services in BMP linked to reform / performance as
outlined under Section C above.

                                                        3
                                                                                                        ISDS



Components:



Policy Reforms and Institutional Support Component:
Resource Mobilization and Financial Management Component:
Investment Componet
Project Development Facility
Investment Support
Bangalore Development Program
Project Management




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)

Comments:

The Environmental Category proposed for the project is A, which is based on the information vailable till
date. The categorization of the project may be reconsidered and changed during the project preparation, once
the precise nature and location of the investment component is defined.

The sub projects for investment in urban infrastructure may result in significant environmental impacts
both individually or cumulatively. In particular investment in solid waste landfills and sewage treatment
may entail significant environmental impacts, magnitude of which are not known at this stage. The
potential environmental impacts of most of the envisaged urban infrastructure sub projects are typically
construction related and are reversible. These impacts can be managed by development and
implementation of good environmental management and mitigation plans. There may be requirement for
resettlement of slum dwellers and special provisions for tribal groups, triggering OD4.20 and OD 4.30,
thus mandating a category A classification.

The justification for Category A emerge from the fact that

a)       the large number of sub-projects envisaged in the investment component could lead to significant
cumulative and induced impacts; and
b)       some of the infrastructure sub-projects, such as those for disposal of municipal solid waste and
sewage, may be large in terms of their scale and investment needs, and hence may lead to significant
though reversible impacts.

                                                      4
                                                                                                      ISDS




C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                    Policy                                         Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes      No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes      No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes      No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes      No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes      No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes      No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes      No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes      No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes      No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes      No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental
Given that the project would finance investment in urban basic services, most of the significant
environmental issues would relate to direct environmental impacts. Sensitivity to the environmental
issues will ensure that the investments are properly planned, sited, designed, constructed, and operated
and maintained. In addition, significant environmental issues could also arise over the long-term due to
cumulative / induced impacts of a large number of investments. Potential also exists for the triggering of
safeguards policy related to cultural property, which in the urban context includes places of worship
which are very common in urban areas. As for the reform component of the project, significant indirect
environmental impacts would need to be attended to ensure town planning and land management,
budgets for operation and maintenance of basic infrastructure, the ability of the urban poor to pay for
services, adequate capacity of the municipal bodies and CBOs to prepare and implement subprojects, etc.
All potential social and environmental impacts ­ including induced, cumulative and long-term impacts --
related to the various project components will be identified and managed as per a Sector Environmental
Analyses and Management Framework (SEA&MF) to be prepared by KUIDFC.

In addition, environmental issues pertaining to potential private sector participation in urban
infrastructure and environmental management - such as municipal solid waste disposal and sewage
treatment and disposal - would need to be examined. Sanitary landfills for disposal of municipal solid
waste and sewage treatment plants for treatment and disposal of sewage are large environmental
infrastructure investments, which if financed by the project, could lead to significant permanent positive
impacts on the environment, if these facilities are designed and operated properly.

Social While the local urban communities are the primary beneficiaries of the project, the
important vulnerable groups among them are slum dwellers, women, working children, migrant
workers, tribal people and potential project affected families due to land appropriation.
Therefore, one of the important social issues in the project relates to the exclusion of these vulnerable

                                                        5
                                                                                                        ISDS



groups from municipal services due to their lack of or inadequate access to services and/or information
about them, or constraints in their ability to utilize such services. Besides, to ensure that the urban
services are available to these groups, the project needs to consider and improve low levels of social
capital due to lack of information, inadequate emphasis on the rights and responsibilities of citizens,
insecurity of assets, weak organization of the poor and other urban residents, resulting in low access as
well as inadequate voice and choice; insecurity of land tenure and property rights (and other regulatory
frameworks) that affect the quality of housing and living environments, and employment/income-earning
opportunities. The project would have to address possible adverse social and economic consequences of
land acquisition, and clearance of encroachments/squatters particularly in implementing investment
component which would trigger the safeguard policy on involuntary resettlement. The project would
have to address potential conflicts between diverse stakeholders and interest groups. For example, there
would be a need to ensure that `slum landlords' and local elites do not unduly influence investment plans
to protect their own interests and priorities.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The safeguard policy OP 4.01 on environmental assessment will be applicable in conjunction
with OP/BP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement particularly to the urban investment component.
Involuntary resettlement may take place because of land acquisition (if any), for investment in
priority urban infrastructure. The indigenous peoples OD could be particularly relevant in towns
located in tribal districts, depending on the findings of the Social Assessment. Potential
cumulative impacts could arise from clustering of multiple investment components in an area or
municipality. For example, connecting a large number of slums to the citywide infrastructure
without increasing the capacity of the citywide infrastructure could lead to the cumulative impact
of excessive load on citywide infrastructure. Applicability of OD 4.2 on indigenous peoples will
be determined once the results of the social assessment are available whether the local (project)
people meet the criteria given in OD 4.20 and are likely to be affected by the project. However,
whether or not indigenous peoples are affected by the project, a Vulnerable Community
Development Plan (VCDP) would be prepared to address issues related to vulnerable sections
like slum dwellers, urban poor households, tribals and other groups. Similarly, a gender action
plan would be prepared to mainstream the concerns and issues realted to women in urban areas.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The economic analysis of the project components will be carried out in close coordination with the social
and environmental assessment, particularly with regards to analysis of alternatives, assessment of
baseline social and environmental conditions, coping costs, affordability and willingness to pay.
Guidelines for analysis of alternatives technical options will be prepared as part of the Sector
Environmental Analyses and Management Framework (SEA&MF). A system would be designed to
screen project alternatives for their economic viability, level of priority, cost-effectiveness, and other
social and environmental criteria. Local governments would be trained in selection of projects based on
analysis of alternatives and other criteria.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

As part of the SEA&MF, the consultants engaged by KUIDFC would prepare an environmental

                                                      6
                                                                                                           ISDS



management plan (EMP) in accordance with the Bank's OP 4.01, which will be part of the SEA&MF
report to be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance prior to Appraisal and disseminated in
accordance with the Bank's Disclosure of Information Policy. The EMP will cover at least the following
aspects:

i)       the overall outcomes that the EMP would aim to reduce environmental health risks, reduce
vulnerability of the poor to environmental events           (such as floods), and increasing security of
livelihoods (by safeguarding space for the unorganized commercial / service sector)
ii)      the process of applying environmental screening and assessment of investment projects and
associated guidelines, and
iii)     a strategy for capacity building of ULBs, DMA, other Government departments/ organizations,
NGOs and other civil society organizations in      urban environmental management.


OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats may be triggered depending on the location of the proposed sub-projects.
However, the applicability of this policy will be determined once the project area has been defined and
baseline data on natural habitat are available. In case it is not possible to decide prior to appraisal, the
SEA&MF would include simple screening procedures to identify those sub-projects that will have an
adverse impact on natural habitat and establish criteria for developing appropriate mitigation measures.

OPN 11.03 on Cultural Property is likely to be triggered. The SEA&MF will include procedures to
deal with chance finds and to mitigate any likely adverse impacts on physical cultural properties during
construction and operation of the proposed facilities.

OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples: This may be triggered depending on the results of the proposed social
assessment (SA) - i.e., whether Indigenous People (IP), meeting the criteria given in OD 4.20, are likely
to be affected by the project or not.



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Preparation of Capital Investment Plans, is a participatory process and number of CBOs and NGOs
would be involved in the CIP process, along with representatives of the community development
organizations in an area. As part of project preparation, KUIDFC/consultant would organize stakeholders
workshops at different levels to get their input. Thus, key stakeholders will participate in all aspects of
the project and sub-projects ­ policy-making, planning, implementation, monitoring and
post-implementation.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[X] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address

                                                    7
                                                                                                  ISDS



         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            12/11/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        12/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive      12/23/2003
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            12/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        12/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/15/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            12/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        12/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/15/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Robert Maurer                                      06/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Mohammad Hasan/Person/World Bank                   06/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Sanjay Srivastava/Person/World Bank                06/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                                      06/30/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Vincent Gouarne                                    06/30/2003

