                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   CONCEPT STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 6, 2003


I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: India                                  Project ID: P084790
Project Name: Maharashtra Water Sector          Task Team Leader: R.S. Pathak
Improvement Project (MWSIP)
Estimated Appraisal Date: Nov 15, 2004          Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 295
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2005            GEF amount ($m.): NIL
Managing Unit: SASRD                            PCF amount ($m.):NIL
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment         Other financing amounts ($m.) by source:
Loan
Sector: Agriculture, Fishery and Forestry       Borrower: 45.0
(Irrigation and Drainage)                       Others (Farmers): 10.0
Theme: Environment and Natural Resource
Management (Water Resource                      Safeguard Policies Specialist in the task
Management)                                     team: Bilal Rahill and Mohammed Hasan


B. Project Objective [from Section B of PCN]

The development objectives of the proposed MWSIP will be: (i) to strengthen the state's
capacity for multi-sectoral planning, development, and sustainable management of the
water resources, and (ii) to improve irrigation service delivery on sustainable basis to
increase productivity of irrigated agriculture and contribute to rural poverty reduction.

C. Project Description [from Section C of PCN]

An initial description of the likely components are listed below. The team envisages the
project to cost about $350 million, with a loan component of about $295 million. The
final size of the project and loan component will be determined during preparation,
keeping in view the state's fiscal situation and ability to meet counterpart-funding
requirements. Specifically, the project would support:

a) Institutional Restructuring and Capacity Building (about $27 million, 8%): (i)
    Establishment and capacity building of "Maharashtra Water Resources Regulatory
    Authority; (ii) restructuring and capacity building of existing Irrigation Development
    Corporations (IDCs) into River Basin Agencies, (iii) restructuring and capacity


                                              1

    building of the Irrigation Department; (iv) strengthening/capacity building of dam
    safety organization and of the existing training delivery organizations, particularly the
    Water and Land Management Institute (WALMI) at Aurangabad, and (v)
    development of an information management system to support improved water
    resources management, planning and decision-making. This will be coordinated
    closely with the proposed Hydrology Project II.
b) Improve Irrigation Water Service Delivery and Management                   (about $300
    million, 86%): (i) Establishment, capacity building and fostering of Water Users
    Organizations; (ii) participatory rehabilitation and modernization of selected
    irrigation systems; (iii) administration of water entitlements; (iv) support completion
    of selected priority ongoing projects with early and high returns; and (v)
    strengthening agricultural support services in irrigated areas.
c) Improve knowledge base of the Water Sector (about $20 million, 5%): Piloting and
    demonstration of new initiatives and technologies, and supporting applied research
    and training (e.g., piloting of groundwater management, commercialization of
    irrigation schemes management, low-cost water saving technology, decision support
    systems and water management models, etc).
d) Project Management and Monitoring (about $3 million, 1%): Establishment of
    Project Management Unit and monitoring and evaluation.

D. Project location (if known)

The project would cover the state of Maharashtra. However, the names of the districts
and project areas within Maharashtra would be decided during preparation.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity

The State has well established institutions dealing with aspects like construction, training,
research, engineering design, resettlement and coordination mechanism etc. The State is
also familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements, as the State has been
engaged with the Bank funded projects in the irrigation/water sector. However, the
project envisages creation of some new institutional arrangements as well as
strengthening/restructuring/ capacity building of the relevant institutions.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

      Safeguard Policy                        If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
                                              [very concise summary]
      Environmental Assessment                Yes
      (OP/BP 4.01)
      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)           TBD
      Pest Management (OP 4.09)               Yes
      Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)      Yes
      Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)            Yes
      Forests (OP 4.36)                       No
      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)             Yes


                                              2

       Cultural Property                                  TBD
       (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
       Projects in Disputed Areas                         No
       (OP/BP 7.60)*
       Projects on International Waterways                No
       (OP/BP 7.50)


Environmental Assessment Category:
A B C  FI  TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category



Safeguard Policies Classification:
 S1  S2  S3  SF                  TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification



III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION

A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard
issues and prepare to mitigate them?

The water sector environmental assessment study will be carried out as part of project
preparation. A social assessment of the project will also be undertaken during project
preparation to assess its social impacts, prepare mitigation plans and develop strategy to
involve stakeholders in the project implementation. However, the project will not address
any legacy issues relating to resettlement in the project areas.

B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?

The consultation and disclosure will be an integral part of the social and environmental
assessment studies to be carried out as part of project preparation.

IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW

Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding safeguards
during project preparation

Will be done as a part of project preparation process

Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: TBD




*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



                                                         3

