Report No. 23344
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/11/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P067606
Project: Uttar Pradesh State Roads Project        Task Team Leader: Guang Zhe Chen
Appraisal Date: December 6, 2001          IBRD Amount ($m): 470.00
Board Date: July 16, 2002         IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI     Sector: TH - Highways
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objectives of the project are to:
Significantly improve the flow of traffic on highly congested corridors in
the State's core road network; and
Enhance the institutional capacities and financial effectiveness of the
government agencies in managing the State's road program, assets, and
services.
I.A.3. Project Description:
To achieve the above development objectives, the project will comprise the
following components:
(i) Upgrading and widening of about 1,000 km of priority state roads;
(ii) Major maintenance on about 2,500 km of state roads, which will
involve rehabilitation of    existing roads within their existing width
(iii) Institutional strengthening of PWD and development of an effective
road maintenance system in    the PWD and
(iv) Road safety enhancement.
The project will be implemented in two phases. The first phase will
include upgrading and widening work on 374 kilometers of roads and major
maintenance on 808 kilometers of roads. In the second phase, which is
expected to commence 18 months after implementation of the project begins,
the remaining upgrading and widening and major maintenance works, as well
as the planned bypasses and bridges will be carried out. For Phase I, all
the detailed engineering, Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) environmental
management plans (EMPs) for upgrading roads and Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) for maintenance roads all have been completed. A
similar process will be conducted for phase II roads, including the
bypasses and bridges, during phase II. The implementation of RAP and EMPs
are included in component (i), and ESMP in component (ii).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project roads are located through out the state of Uttar Pradesh, with
most of the roads selected for upgrading situated in the eastern part of
the state, the fertile Indo-Gangetic Plains. The area is densely
populated, with some parts exceeding 1000 persons per square kilometer.
Many of the project roads pass through several urban and semi-urban areas.



Most of the civil works, except for the bypasses and bridges in Phase II,
will be carried out on the existing Right-of-Way. The majority of the
Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are those who have settled and encroached
on the existing ROW. The Social Assessment (SA) carried out as part of the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for road upgrading found that the project
will affect 1482 families, out of which 838 families will be displaced. In
the case of the bypasses in phase II, private land will be acquired (21.8
hectares) affecting 240 families.
The SA further found that most of the PAPs are likely to belong to Other
Backward Castes, most are likely to be engaged in petty trading.
One-fourth of the PAPs are categorized as "workers", of these, over
one-fifth (mostly women) are engaged in household chores. Nearly two-fifth
of the PAPs fall below the poverty line, defined as annual income below
Rs24,000 per family.
Two project routes are close to some protected areas. the ROW for Route 7
(Bahraich - Faizabad) selected for upgrading in Phase I forms a boundary
with the Parvati-Aranga Bird Sanctuary, and the Meerut-Naziabad route
selected for major maintenance passes through Hastinapur Wildlife
Sanctuary.
The proposed widening of the project roads in Phase I will have limited
impact on common property resources, with only 50 common property
resources within the Corridor of Impact (COI) being affected. These
include 30 hand pump locations and 17 religious structure, all of which
will be shifted in consultations with the affected community. Under Phase
II, there are two important arch gates and a mosque located on Route 4.
Although these are not protected monuments, a mitigation plan as per OPN
11.03 has been prepared as part of the RAP. Approximately, 7800 trees will
be cut within the COI to widen the road during Phase I.
B. Check Environmental Classification: ERROR: Invalid UNID; UNID must be
a 32-digit hex string.
Comments: The project has been categorized as 'A' because of the combined
social and environmental impacts likely to stem from the high population
density in the urban and semi-urban areas where the project roads pass
through, and a similar impact from the construction of the bypasses and
major bridges in Phase II of the project. Most of the social and
environmental impacts identified are, however, local, reversible, and will
be mitigated and minimized through detailed environmental and social
impact management plans.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
-2 -



*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The safeguard issues identified during the EA and SA process include the
proximity of two road links to a Bird and Wildlife Sanctuaries, the
resettlement and rehabilitation of project affected persons mostly settled
on the existing ROW, and the relocation of some common properties.
However, all these impacts are relatively minor, and do not pose any
significant or irreversible impacts.
The road corridors have been selected to cause minimal direct adverse
impacts on the people, land, and cultural property. To this end, the
project is designed to minimize land acquisition and to avoid large scale
displacement of communities by limiting the widening to the existing
formation width of present-day roads. There will be no land acquisition
for Phase I roads, and the land to be acquired for Phase II bypasses are
relatively small (21.8 ha). Environmental and social safeguard issues
have been carefully considered and integrated into the selection of the
alignment of Phase I and II road improvement works and maintenance
works.
Out of 1,482 project affected families, 17 families who are considered
tribal people along 374 km of Phase I upgrading roads. To address the
concerns and needs of vulnerable people, the RAP has special and
additional provision for them to improve their livelihood.
Construction and operation related impacts have been identified, and their
mitigation plans have been designed. The construction impacts, which will
be confined to the to the existing ROW, except for the bypasses and
bridges in Phase II, include:
(a) air and noise pollution;
(b) dust and smoke from material transport, crushers and asphalt plants
during construction;
(c) pollution from spills of oil fuel, lubricants and construction camp
wastes;
(d) operation of borrow pits, quarries and construction camps;
(e) cutting of trees; and
(f) additional traffic hazards.
During the operation period, the possible environmental impacts identified
include increased traffic noise, air pollution, erosion, water pollution
from service areas, induced impacts from undesirable developments, as well
as additional safety risks from increased speeds.
The impacts from construction and operation of the project roads will be
-3 -



mitigated and minimized through:
Providing retaining walls in environmental hot spot areas,
Evolving constricted cross sections in the settlement stretches,
Designing for a lower design speed,
Protecting community giant trees and cultural properties by the
construction of retaining walls and the installation of road side barriers
and signage, and
Providing closed drains in urban areas to ensure proper drainage.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
There are no significant cumulative impacts stemming from the identified
safeguard policies and project components. All the environmental and
social concerns identified are relatively independent and will be
mitigated through corridor specific and detailed environmental and social
management plans and Resettlement Action Plans.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The findings from the EA and SA process indicate that there will be no
major long term impact from the upgrading and maintenance of the proposed
roads. The likely long-term and induced impact will come from the
construction of bypasses in Phase II. The bypasses are likely to induce
changes in the land use patterns of the project area from the resettlement
of people and the loss of agriculture land for road construction and, in
the long-run, for other uses, such as industrial and commercial and
residential use. The induced impact on the land use patterns does
necessary entail a negative impact since Uttar Pradesh is primarily an
agricultural land and needs to balance its productive resources to other
sectors of the economy to support its development goals.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
During the detailed feasibility study and the EA and SA process, several
alternatives were considered for
all the project roads including for the widening component and the
bypasses. For the bypasses, three
alternatives were examined: widening the existing road and two new
alignments. The criteria for choosing
the final option were a composite of the following factors: minimizing R&R
activity, reducing tree cutting,
reducing loss of arable land, minimize vehicle operating cost and travel
time, and reducing conflicts between
through traffic and local activity. Based on the EA and SA assessment and
including public consultation,
four bypasses in the project routes were identified and their construction
will be carried out in the second
phase of the project.
-4-



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The GOUP through the PWD and the assistance of the Project Coordinating
Consultants (PCC) has carried out an Environmental and Social Assessment
to identify, mitigate and minimize and the environmental and social
impacts of the project. The assessment process has produced several
outputs including the following:
Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) Report for the entire project
(Phase I and Phase II)
Environmental Assessment (EA) Report for Phase I upgrading and maintenance
projects
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for 4 stand alone EMPs for each of
the contract packages for phase I upgrading roads
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for Phase I maintenance
roads
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for Phase I road upgrading.
For Phase II, similar assessment and plans (EA, contract-specific EMPs,
ESMP for major maintenance roads, and RAP reports) will be prepared during
Phase I of the project.
An Independent Consultant was engaged by GOUP to review the outputs of the
EA and SA process and to ensure compliance with Bank safeguard policies.
The Reports are consistent with O.P. 4.01, OPN 4.11 and GOI's
environmental assessment policies. The RAP socio-economic and cultural
assessments were carried in accordance with the O.D. 4.30 and OD 4.20,
and the results have been integrated with the project design and endorsed
by GOUP. The R&R policy incudes an entitlement framework, which is
approved by GOUP and endorsed by the Bank and is consistent with the
Bank's O.D. 4.30 and O.D. 4.20 to deal with land acquisition and other
potential adverse social impacts of the civil works program.
In order to achieve effective implementation of the mitigation measures,
the GOUP has established an Environment and Social Management Cell within
the PWD to coordinate and oversee the implementation of environmental and
social components of the project. The Cell is headed by the Project
Director and currently includes two Assistant Engineers (AE), and two
additional officers of AE level will be in place by negotiations. The Cell
will liaise with relevant government departments, contract with NGOs for
assistance with the RAP, and oversee the implementation of EMPs and RAP
and the preparation of EA/SA for Phase II roads. Independent consultants,
as Supervision Consultants (SC), will be responsible for overseeing and
monitoring all aspects of the upgrading component of the project, and
their team will also include inputs from environmental specialists. The
supervision of major maintenance will be undertaken by PWD staff with
technical audit from independent consultants, again to include environment
specialists. Construction and associated environmental mitigation
activities will be implemented by contractors working on behalf of the
UPPWD. The mitigation and enhancement measures will be enforced and
closely supervised by the independent Supervising Consultants for the
upgrading component and PWD staff for the major maintenance component.
Relevant provisions and clauses have been included in the Bills of
Quantities and contract documents. Training of the PWD staff, the SC,
NGOs providing RAP services and the Contractors' personnel will be
undertaken as per the training modules and plan prepared as part of the
EMPs.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
- 5-



potentially affected people.
Extensive consultation was carried out with a wide array of stakeholders
likely to be affected by the project on several stages of the project,
namely, during screening, preliminary design, and design finalization
stages. The public consultation will continue during the implementation
and monitoring and evaluation stages. The consultation was carried out at
state, district, and local and village level.
The main purpose of the consultation process was to inform the
stakeholders on the proposed project and its likely impact, and to solicit
their views and inputs for the design and implementation of the project.
The consultation process uses in-depth interviews with key informants,
focus group discussions, seminars, workshops and meetings. The
consultation program included the following stakeholders:
Heads of households likely to be impacted
Household members,
Clusters of PAPs
Villagers
Village Panchayats
Local voluntary organizations, community based organizations and
nongovernmental organizations
Government agencies and departments, and
Major project stakeholders, such as women, tribal and ethnic communities,
road user groups, health professionals, and others.
A separate consultation forum was given for women to voice their views.
Detailed information on the project was distributed to NGOs, government
agencies, university and research organizations during the State Level
Workshop. Extensive district and local level consultation complemented
this process with different social groups, district administration, NGOs
and other interested groups.
The views of the stakeholders have been incorporated to facilitate the
minimization of negative impacts, and to enhance the benefits through the
design and preparation of the RAP. Moreover, the focus group discussions
with the villagers and panchayats enabled GOUP to develop the R&R policy
and the RAP according to the real needs of the affected PAPs.
The SEA, EIA, EMPs, R&R policy, RAP, and ESMP have been made public
through Bank's PIC and in the project area. To ensure continuous
participation of people, the RAP provides a mechanism for
institutionalizing consultation with the affected people and the
panchayats for the implementation and monitoring the progress of the work
. A series of follow on consultations have been completed in October
2001, to share the EMPs, RAP, ESMP and the designs.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
-6-



[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              10/31/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          10/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           10/31/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)                11/28/2001
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              10/31/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          10/31/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           10/31/2001
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Guang Zhe Chen  12/06/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Mridula Singh, Social Development
Specialist
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Sonia Kapoor, Environmental Specialist
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        12/06/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Vincent Gouarne 12/06/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



