,                        n~~~~~~~~~~~'O
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Frec of Povorty
+lnfoShop
'Mc Werd iank
Report No: AC53
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/01/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                   Project ID: P073776
Project: Allahabaci Bypass Project               Task Team Leader: Zhi Liu
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 21, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 150.00
Bank Approval: September 23, 2003                IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI                             Sector: Roads & highways (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Public expenditure; financial mngmt &
Status: Lending                                  procurement (S); Infrastructure services for private
sector develop (P); Other financial and private sector
development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objectives are: (a) to reduce transport constraints on national economic activity; and (b)
to improve institutional capabilities to manage road programs, assets, and services on a more commercial
basis.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1. Allahabad Bypass construction, including supervision, land acquisition and
resettlement, and environmental management. The bypass is located at the northern outskirts of
Allahabad City and is 82 km long. It is designed as an access controlled, tolled, 4-lane divided
carriageway, with 60 to 70 m right-of-way. There is a I km bridge over the Ganges. The entire bypass is
divided into three construction contracts, including the Ganges bridge contract and two road work
contracts on both sides of the Ganges River.
Component 2. Institutional strengthening, including: (a) expressway route location planning and
optimization; (b) national highways master plan; (c) road user satisfaction surveys; (d) road construction
industry training program; and (e) project preparation and sector studies.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The bypass will be located on the northern outskirts of Allahabad City in the north Indian state of Uttar
Pradesh, passing through the rural areas of three districts, Allahabad, Paratapgrah and Kausambi. The



2
ISDS
terrain across the region is quite homogenous, undulating, fertile alluvial irrigated agricultural land,
dotted with a number of villages. The region has high population density, and most of the population in
the area are farmers, sharecorppers and agricultural laborers (including the vulnerable) who are
dependent for their livelihood on agriculture. In addition to the Ganges River, there are 2 small tributaries
and a number of streams and canals. Topographic, environment and social surveys indicate that there are
no ecologically sensitive and protected areas in the proximity of the proposed bypass alignment.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments' The bypass will be a greenfield project, and is likely to have significant adverse impacts that are
sensitive, irreversible, and diverse.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BI'/GP 4.01)                   * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               * Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BF'/GP 7.60)*                0 Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
[I.D.Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The bypass alignment selection process involved public consultation that revealed the environment and
social concerns of the people in the affected area. Majority of the people were supportive of the bypass,
but they were also concerned with adequate compensation for property loss, road safety, employment
opportunities to affected people, acquisition of fertile agricultural land, and connectivity to markets.
These concerns have been addressed during the detailed engineering design and detailed Envrionment
Assessment (EA) and Social Impact Assessment (SIA). Efforts were made to avoid, to the extent
possible, habitat/settlements fragmentation and acquisition of agriculture land and structures.
Environmental Issues. The alignment will traverse 1 10 villages, one major (Ganges) and two minor
river crossings, 30 stream and 30 canal crossings. The bypass will also involve environmental issues
mainly along the alignment, including alteration of land use, tree loss, induced ribbon development,
vehicle emissions and noise, traffic accident risks, alternation of natural drainage pattern, handling of
earthwork, use of material from quarries and borrow areas, and construction related impacts (such as
large volumes of material excavation, use of potable water, setting up of stone crushers, hot-mix plants
and concrete batch plants, round-the-clock laying of concrete, and spills of oil, fuel, lubricants and



3
ISDS
bitumen). Change in land use is the significant irrevrsible impact which has been addressed by the EA.
Involuntary Resettlement and Inidigenous People. The bypass will involve land acquisition and have
impact on the livelihood of the farmers (including the vulnerable), cultural property and common
property resources. SIA and consultations with the people has been completed based on which
entitlement framwork and RAP has been prepared. A total of 4,343 households will be affected from I 10
villages. Prime agriculture land of approximately 781 ha will be acquired out of which 84 ha is
government land. The project will lead to displacement of people who are mainly dependent on
agriculture land and will become landless or their property will be less than viable holding. Separate
Indigenous Peoples Dvelopment Plan (IPDP) was not prepared as only 3 tribal households will be
affected by the project. By providing new access to the settlements, the project will involve public health
issues such as road accidents (depending on the degree of bypass access control) and the spread of
HIV/AIDS along highway. By diverting traffic to the bypass, the project will also indirectly but adversely
affect the roadside businesses along the existing national highway stretch.
Cultural Property. There are only 4 small religious structures which will be relocated in consultation
with the local community.
Il.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componenl.
There are no significant cumulative impacts arising from the identified safeguard policies. All the
environment and social concerns identified are relatively independent and will be mitigated through
contract specific EMPs and RAPs.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The findings from EA and SIA process indicate that the key long term impacts will include land use
changes, ribbon development, heavy traffic inflow and related air and noise pollution, variations in
settlement patterns and the possible growth of semi-urban and urban townships, development of markets,
and migration of population. In addition potential long-term impact is where affected people will lose
substantial part of their landholding that they need to change their livelihood from land based to non-land
based occupations.
T1.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The existing national highway stretch between the two ends of the proposed bypass is about 75 km long,
with the middle section passing through the historical city of Allahabad. The upgrading of this stretch is
part of the National Highway Development Program. The feasibility study considered 3 upgrading
options along the existing national highway (fully elevated, partially elevated, and at grade) and 6 bypass
alignments (including one southern alignment and five northern alignments). The southern bypass would
have to cross the Yamuna River and Ganges River, and the five northern alignments are associated with
the locations of a bridge across the Ganges River. The three options along the existing national highway
were rejected due to expected adverse environmental impact of growing traffic on the high density city
population. A preferred northern bypass alignment was selected based on a careful alignment analysis
and selection process that included public consultation in the entire project area surrounding all
alignments.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The borrower has carried out a detailed EA and SIA. The bypass is divided into 3 construction contracts:



4
ISDS
two road sections and one major bridge. The outputs from EA and SIA led to the preparation of detailed
Environment Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The EA and RAP
assessed and where feasible, addressed, issues such as gender and child labor in construction
management (including involving women as managers during construction), road safety, potential loss of
roadside businesses along the existing national highway stretch, and the spread of HIV/AIDS. The EMPs
and RAP aims to provide such recommendations that are in the purview of the project and coordinated by
NHAI, such as a health management plan at the construction site, and road safety plan during
construction.
The EMPs includes mitigation and enhancement measures for all identified impacts, integration of the
proposed mitigation/enhancement measures into the bills of quantities as appropriate and contract
conditions for the contractor, implementation schedule, monitoring program, budget, and institutional
arrangements. The EMP measures covers where applicable, road landscape and plantation; preventive
measures for minimizing air/noise/water pollution; protection and restoration of surface water bodies;
conservation and redevelopment borrow areas; use of fly ash; noise enforcement measures and noise
barriers; provision of underpasses for livestock/animals; and pedestrian and other local facilities, etc. The
EMPs dovetails NHAI's Roadside Tree Plantation Strategy which covers all plantation regimes
(compensatory, roadside, median, and possibility of transplantation), and mechanism for coordination of
NHAI with the Forest Department including management of funds.
The RAP documents land ownership pattern from the revenue records prior to initiating the census and
socioeconomic surveys. The census covers all the likely affected people, and the socioeconomic survey
covers 25% of the affected people that represents all categories of communities. Detailed information on
social, cultural, and economic characteristics, and informal sources of earning (especially for women and
if any, tribal households) have been collected. The RAP provides detailed information on the resource
base of the people and the types oi losses, process of public consultation with outputs and arrangements
required for continous consultation during implementation, land acquisition plan, income restoration plan
to improve the livelihood of the people, institutional arrangement for implementation, budget for
compensation and resettlement and rehabilitation and monitoring and evaluation indicators and other
related aspects. The RAP includes entitlement framework in accordance to Bank's OP/BP 4.12. It also
provides appropriate preventive plan for building awareness on sexually transmitted diseases, including
inter-agency collaboration with the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) to provide technical
support.
Institutional arrangements for the Borrower to implement EMPs and RAP: NHAI has set up an
Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU) in its corporate office at New Delhi, headed by a
General Manager Environment and R&R. The PMU for the bypass have been established with dedicated
Environment and R&R Managers. Training of the NHAI staff, NGOs, the supervision consultants (SC)
and the contractors' personnel will be undertaken as per the training plan prepared as part of the EMPs
and RAP. A high-level State Project Coordinating Committee in UP has been functional in facilitating
land acquisition, resettlement, utility shifting, forestry and other issues which may require coordination
between NHAI and the state. NGO have been appointed to assist the implementation of the RAP. District
level committees will be set up to facilitate the acquisition proceedings and R&R related issues.
Grievance redress committees will also be established in each district. Day-to-day monitoring of the
environmental aspects of the project will be the responsibility of the SC. Periodic monitoring by the
PMU and the ESMU is proposed. Monitoring of social issues will be carried out by NGOs and R&R
Managers. Detailed monitoring and reporting formats have been prepared, covering all aspects of the
EMPs and RAP.



5
ISDS
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include rural and semi-urban population in the project area, communities that will be
impacted by increased traffic and safety concerns; hospitals, schools, government officials from the line
departments; local government agencies including village level 'panchayats'; NGOs and community
based organizations working in the region; and experts including forestry, wildlife and environmental
professionals.
The EA and SIA processes were highly consultative. Key stakeholders such as PAPs, opinion
makers, elected representatives and different department personnel were consulted both through
individual discussions and public consultations during the preparation of RAP at village, district
and state level. At the village level, group discussions with different social communities and
especially women agriculture laborers and other vulnerable groups were carried out focusing on
the design options, alternate livelihood, relocation and enhancement of common property
resources, measures for compensation and assistance and other issues. Between July and
December 2001, more than 100 village level consultations were conducted based on which
location of underpasses and over-passes were finalised. The NHAI has also conducted district
level consultations in all the three project districts during January 2002. State level consultation
was held in February 2002. All these facilitated in minimizing social impacts and developing
realistic mitigation plans. For a continued and sustainable participation, the RAP devised a
continuous consultation process even during the project implementation period. To ensure public
access to the EA documents, the EA, EMPs, RAP and the Executive Summary (translated in the local
language) will be made available by project appraisal time in the project affected districts in places
accessible to the public.
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[XI SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/10/2002    2/5/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             5/15/2002     4/17/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/15/2002     4/17/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  5/15/2002     4/16/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/10/2002     3/14/2003



6
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             5/15/2002     4/17/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/15/2002     4/17/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Zhi Liu                                     04/25/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Sonia Kapoor
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Mridula Singh
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Warren Waters                            01/29/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Vincent Gouarne                             01/29/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
I SEARCH   : 1 LFEED!A(;K  - I L  P      - I FHWCASE    .



