ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld rcc on Poveroyt
* ;   z               _ :_  ........ 1lJ , .......
- InfoShop
I .., :' .'. I 11.4.
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2002                               23776
Section I-Basic Information                                        May 28, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                   Project ID: P050668
Project: Mumbai Urban Transport Project         Task Team Leader: A.K. Swaminathan
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 1, 2002      IBRD Amount ($m): 463.00
Bank Approval: June 18, 2002                    IDA Amount ($m): 79.00
Managing Unit: SASEI                            Sector: TU - Urban Transport
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: TRANSPORT
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To facilitate urban economic growth and improve quality of life by fostering the development of an
efficient and sustainable urban transport system (including effective institutions) to meet the needs of the
users in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The main components of the project along with their costs are listed below.
(1)    Rail Transport Component (US$654.27/Bank Financing US$304.90): The component aims
to improve the capacity and performance of the suburban rail system through service efficiency
improvements, (increasing existing track capacity, DC to AC conversion, improving signaling,
electrical and telecommunication systems), procurement of new rolling stock and upgrading of
existing rolling stock, and expanding network capacity. The component would also support studies
and technical assistance, amongst other things, to improve the maintenance capabilities of Indian
Railways for their railway tracks and rolling stock, the financial management and control systems, the
railway safety and Quality Assujrance systems.
2)     Road-based Transport Component (US$183.02/Bank Financing US$150.47):
This component will support increases in the capacity, efficiency and safety of the road network,
better facilities for pedestrians, improvements to the operating efficiency and quality of bus services,
and reductions in motor vehicle emission levels. It will also strengthen the capacity of the responsible
agencies to plan, deliver, mainlain and operate efficiently road based urban transport infrastructure
and services. Subcomponentswill:
(a)    support traffic management programs including Area Traffic Control (ATC) to optimize
the functioning of traffic signals, pedestrian facilities, Station Area Traffic Improvement



ISDS
Schemes (SATIS) and parking control;
(b)    increase the road network functionality by improving two east-west link roads and
eliminating the main road level crossings across railway tracks;
(c)    improve the bus system through support of organizational reforms, efficiency measures
and procurement of environment and user friendly buses; and
(d)    strengthen the capacity of transport agencies in Mumbai in road in traflic management,
road maintenance, road safety, and communication, and air quality monitoring as well as
providing TA for updating of the CTS, review of User Charges, and developing a Motor
Vehicle Emission Control Strategy (MVECS).
3)     Resettlement and Rehabilitation Component (US$100.08/Bank Financing
US$79.00): This component will enable GoM to undertake the timely implementation of the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAI') and resettle those affected by investments under the rail and road
based transport components. 11 will also provide assistance to those displaced to improve their
overall living standards. This component is to be financed through IDA funding. This component
will provide for the procurement of about 19,200 housing units to resettle project affected
households. In response to the Bombay High Court Order to relocate encroachers on the Harbor Line
by March 2001, actions were taken under agreed procedures, with the expectation by CioM of
retroactive financing from the ]3ank. Already built houses were purchased to permanently resettle
3,935 project affected households. In addition some 6,000 transit houses were built as an interim
measure to provide transit accommodation for around three years. Further, 107 petty shopkeepers
were also offered alternative sh,ops in the new sites to re-establish their lost shops.
The other expenses under this component include the acquisition of a limited amount of land for civil
works, reconstruction of some of the basic civic amenities for the left over population and payment of
compensation for increased distance to work place and permanent loss of livelihood opportunities.
The technical assistance under this component includes consultancies for baseline surveys,
preparation of Resettlement Implementation Plans (RIP), supervision consultants, NGO support for
implementation, and training of project stafflNGOs involved with the implementation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) spreads over an area of 4,167 sq.kms. Mumbai is the largest city in
India with a population of more than 14 millions with contradictions of extravagant homes and poor
slums. The nature of the city's geography, essentially peninsular and the existing development of the
older part of the city on southern tip of the peninsula has led to the encouragement of new and diversified
centers such as Bandra-Kurla and New Mumbai. More than 50 percent of the city's population are
staying in slums because of non-availability or unaffordability of housing. It is also the financial capital
of India and a large share of major economic activities of India are concentrated here. T he MMR
generates about five percent of the national gross domestic product and consists of over one-third of the
country's tax revenues. It is the most attractive center for foreign investment in India.
MMR is in the North Konkan region, which lies between 18o33' and 19o31 ' north latitude and between
72o45' and 73028' east longitude. The region consists of mainland of North Konkan and two large
insular masses of Salsettle -Trombay and Mumbai separated by shallow creeks and tidal marshes. It has



3
ISDS
a mean elevation of 11 meters above sea level and experiences a tropical savanna climate with monthly
humidity ranging between 57-87 percent. The annual average temperature is 25.3 OC rising to a
maximum of 34.50C in June and a minimum ofl4.30C in January.
With changing economic struciFture (declining manufacturing activities) and increasing number of
motorized vehicles, the transport sector has emerged as a key contributor to air pollution. Suspended
Particulate Matter has been identified as the worst pollutant, violating the national standards at almost all
locations in the city. The dispersion of air pollution emissions in the region is influenced by wind
conditions (direction and speecl), mixing heights, stability of atmosphere, collectively termed as the
Meteorology of Mumbai's airshed. Increasing population and traffic densities have also led to increased
levels of noise. Noise due to traffic is found to be the predominant source of irritation. Measurements
made near most traffic corridor show levels above the national standards.
The environmentally sensitive locations in Greater Mumbai are mainly the coastal stretches, some of
which have mangroves, and the Sanjay Gandhi National Park, having dense forests. Mumbai's coastline
exhibits beautiful natural mangrove vegetation. The Coastal Regulation Zone Notification (1991) of the
Government of India, also provides for the protection of mangroves. The state also has its own Coastal
Zone Management Plan (CZM P).
The project would displace about 19,200 households. Except for a small number (about 200
householders), they are all slum dwellers and squatters living in poor and unhealthy housing conditions
and lack basic amenities. The housing conditions of the affect population are of poor quality with more
than 75 percent living in houses less than 20 sq. meters with poor quality of roof and walls. Most depend
on stand posts for drinking water, use community toilets, lack storm water drains and solid waste disposal
facilities reflecting the poor and unhygienic living conditions.
The socio-economic characteristics of the affected population indicate that more than two-thirds are
Hindus and speak different languages like Marathi Gujarati, Hindi, Telugu, Tamil, etc., reflecting the
cosmopolitan nature of the population. The average size of a household is 4.47, and average number of
earning members per household is reported to be 1.46. Only about one percent of the total affected
households are tribal who do not exhibit the indigenous characteristics as defined in the Bank's OD 4.20
on "Indigenous People". About half of the workers have regular income who are working with
government and private establi,hments, while another 30 percent engage in petty business and self
employed occupations having steady income and the rest (about one-fifth) work as casual laborers with
uncertain earnings. The average monthly household income is Rs. 2978 (US$62) with 40 percent of the
affected households living below poverty line with monthly income of less than Rs. 2,500.
The main investment project will require only 59 hectares of land and another 40 hectares will be
required for resettlement sites. The risks associated with land acquisition are minimized by acquiring
most of the lands through a matrket-oriented mechanism of Transfer of Development Rights in lieu of
monetary compensation. Under this process the landowner whose land is designated for public purpose in
the Development Plan can surrender the ownership of the land to the public authority without loosing the
development rights. The landowner can use these rights elsewhere or can sell the rights in the market.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability



4
ISDS
Environmental Assessment (Ol'/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes    No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       * Yes   No      TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                Yes *No      :TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   Yes *No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  * Yes C No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       2 Yes * No     TTBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes C No       TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                lYes * No                        TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          C] Yes * No    2 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         2 Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguart Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to otbtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scatle, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12): The project involves large scale displacement of population of more than
77,000 (19,200 households) which is unprecedented in the context of urban situation in India. The World Bank
Policy on Involuntary Resettlement is therefore applicable to the project. In compliance with this policy a
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R & R) Policy has been prepared and adopted by the Government of
Maharashtra (GoM) for the project and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Sub-project specific Resettlement
Implementation Plans (RIP) have been prepared for sub-projects to be implemented in the first year. RIP for
sub-projects in later years will be prepared prior to their implementation. The project is therefore in compliance
with the policy. The R & R policy and the institutional framework for the project has been developed to ensure
an equitable resettlement of the affected population. Through this process the potential adverse impacts could
turn into positive social impact by way of security of title to housing and business units, higher standards of
housing with improved access to basic amenities, cleaner and wholesome living environment, access to credit
thorough community revolving fund and increased empowerment and collective action to access to the municipal
and state services.
Wherever possible the project had explored alternative viable options to avoid or minimize the adverse
impacts of resettlement and other project related activities. For instance the changed alignment as result
of baseline surveys for a Road over Bridge(ROB) at Jogeshwari had avoided the impacts to an industrial
estate. Similarly, the consultatvions with the potential PAPs had resulted in modifying the alignment for
another ROB at Vikroli which r educed the displacement of shopkeepers from 173 to about 20 and
preserved the location of a temple.
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): The project has been classified as category "A" project, largely
on the basis of the large number of people requiring resettlement and rehabilitation. Because of the
large-scale resettlement and the triggering of more than one safeguard policy the project has been given a
safeguard classification of "S1". A consolidated EA including a Sectoral Environmental Assessment
(SEA) and sub-project specific EAs and EMPs have been prepared in compliance with this policy.
Wherever adverse impacts are unavoidable and likely to be permanent, effort is being made to mitigate
and minimize their impacts. For example, emphasis is being given to noise barriers in the case of
sub-projects that are close to sensitive areas such as schools, so that noise pollution is iTmitigated.



5
ISDS
Similarly, the likely deterioration in air quality in the long-term is being addressed by preparation of a
Particulate Matter Reduction Action Plan for Mumbai, which will suggest measures to be taken by
different agencies to arrest the worsening in particulate matter air pollution. The severance of
communities living on either side of a major road was highlighted as an important issue at the public
consultation on the environmental assessment, both in terms of social fragmentation as well as safety of
pedestrians. This feedback has been taken into consideration in the design of investment components
wherever possible, with provision of footpaths and other pedestrians facilities (like subways or
overbridges).
Given the urban context, in all sub-projects emphasis has been placed on good construc.tion management
practices, reporting, and strict supervision, in order to ensure that the resulting environmental impacts are
minimized. Even though there are many similarities across sub-projects, individual Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) have been prepared to mitigate subproject-specific environmental impacts.
Given the large scale resettlement of slum dwellers into built-up housing, Community Environmental
Management Plans (CEMPs) have been prepared for all resettlement sites in a participatory manner to
assist the communities to adjust to their surrounding without adversely impacting the environment and
mitigating risks of health impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP4.04): IM/umbai's notable natural habitat is limited to the 103 sq. km. National
Park at Borivili, which is located in the northern part of the peninsula between the two rail corridors and
the coastal wetlands in the eastern and western suburbs. The National Park is protected under the Indian
Forest Act whereas the coastal wetlands are protected by the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ)
Notification of February 1991. Short sections of two sub-projects pass through these wetland areas. A
short section of the Bhayendar.-Virar Railway line crosses the Vasai Creek and the adjoining highly
degraded wetlands. The area of the wetland directly affected is less than 5000 sq.m. out of a total extent
of wetland of 48 sq.km. Bridges traversing the CRZ are not prohibited but require environmental
clearance under the CRZ notification. MoEF has already been approached for the approval under the
CRZ Notification. A 100 m section of the Jogeshwari-Vikroli Link Road (JVLR) also impacts some
1000 sq. m. of degraded mangroves. The policy on Natural Habitats is therefore applicable. Audits have
been taken and restoration and rehabilitation plans drawn up, implementation of which is covenanted in
the project agreements.
Efforts to provide immediate temporary transit accommodation for squatters, in response to a court order
with stringent implementation ,chedule, resulted in an inadvertent breach of the CRZ notification at the
transit sites of Mankund, and Turbhe Mandale. GoM has now undertaken to move all squatters currently
housed in this transit accommodation to their permanent accommodation on a priority basis by no later
than end 2003. Environmental audit of these transit camps has also been carried out, and restoration
plans to restore the land under CRZ to its original status after the dismantling of transit houses, have
been prepared.
Cultural Property (OP 4.11): Mumbai with its history of nearly three hundred years is rich in cultural
property particularly in the forrn of built heritage. GoM and MCGM are acutely aware of the need to
conserve such heritage. GoM in 1995 with the involvement of NGOs listed over 600 buildings and
precincts as of heritage significance. Development Control Rules 1967 govem the development of these
listed buildings and precincts. GoM has also constituted a Heritage Conservation Committee in 1995 to
advise the Municipal Commissioner regarding development permission to be granted in case of listed
buildings and precincts. No development permission can be granted of the listed buildings or within the
precincts without the consent ofthe Heritage Committee.



6
ISDS
None of the MUTP sub-projects, except the pedestrian subways, directly or indirectly affect the heritage
buildings. Some of the pedestrian facilities in the Island City notably one near the CST would be located
in the heritage precinct. The design consultants have been advised to take cognizance of this fact. In any
case the proposals will be subject to the review of the Heritage Conservation Committee.
During the execution of works if a "chance find" of archaeological significance occurs the contract
requires the contractor to immediately inform the employer and stop further work. Employer will in turn
inform the state Archaeology Department for further investigation.
In addition to the listed buildings there are smaller common cultural properties like shrines, small
temples or mosques within the project-affected communities. Thus this policy applies to the project.
These have been identified during the BSES and the RIPs cover their resettlement. For example, in case
of JVLR Phase 1, there are nine small temples which will be relocated according to the RIP prepared in
consultation with the PAHs.
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20): About one percent of the PAHs belong to the Scheduled Tribes. A
field-based review was undertaken to determine if these PAHs were subject to application of this Policy,
since they might have originally belonged to tribal communities in the distant past, as of now they are
integrated with the city life and do not.have their traditional habitat or follow traditional ways of life.
More particularly: (a) they no longer have close attachment to ancestral territories; (b) they do not
identify themselves or are iden:ified by others as distinct cultural group; (c) they do not speak an
indigenous language; and (d) they no longer belong to customary social and political institutions. There
is also a general reluctance to reveal the caste or tribe particularly pronounced when data is to be kept in
public domain. It was determined by the review that the social impact of the project on such people is
therefore similar to that on other PAPs, and thus the policy does not apply. A separate Indigenous
Peoples Development Plan (IPI)P) has therefore not been prepared.
II.D.Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The main potential cumulative impact issues relate to combinations of safeguard policies such as
Involuntary Resettlement and Elnvironmental Assessment, being triggered in the case of the resettlement
sites. In case of the transit housing both policies are likely to be triggered. Further, these is also the
violation of CRZ notification of the Gol. While Restoration Plans are being made for the sites after
dismantling of the transit housing, the residual environmental impacts will also depend on how the
cumulative impacts are presently managed. Community Environmental Management Plans to address the
impacts while these sites are in operation have been prepared with community participation. While the
overall coordination and supers ision responsibility for all these aspects rests with MMRDA, the
implantation support and management consultants as well as the communities themselves will have a role
to play in addressing the cumulative impacts.
The shifting of squatters (more than 10,000 households) along the safety zone of railway tracks had a
significant impact in the form of increased speed and frequency of local trains in Mumbai, which in turn
is improving the overall efficiency of the suburban train system in Mumbai besides reducing the number
of accidents and improving safety.
lI.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The long term impacts associated with resettlement will translate into positive impacts in the form of
secured housing with improved basic amenities and permanent places for reestablishing the petty
business units and thus improve the overall living standards. One of the long term impact on displaced



7
ISDS
persons could be increased expenditures on recurring expenses of maintenance cost of the housing
societies.
The potential long-term environmental impacts could be further congestion and deterioration in local air
quality because of increase in volume of traffic, despite demand management particularly in the Island
City. Carbon dioxide emissions can be expected to increase with the forecast increase in travel demand,
even with the PT+DM (public transport and demand management) policy adopted. Other long term
impacts relate to possible change in land-use as an indirect impact of better access to areas which till
recently were not as easily accessible.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The GoM formulated a Comprehensive Transport Strategy (CTS) in 1994. The methodology for
formulating the CTS included prediction of travel demand up to 201 1 based on inputs on population,
employment, vehicle ownership, travel behavior, and other socio-economic parameters. Alternative
strategies to meet the predicted travel demand in 2011 were then evaluated based on economic and
financial analysis, as well as environmental and social impacts. The preferred alternative was then
translated into a medium terms investment plan.
In order to meet the projected travel demand the CTS Study identified the four strategic options, as
follows: (a) Do Minimum: This option contained all the committed railway and road projects as
envisaged in 1993; (b) Public 1'ransport: In addition to all the committed projects of'Do Minimum'
option, this option contained many railway projects to increase the capacity of rail transport; (c) Public
Transport with Demand Management: The option contained all the projects of 'Public Transport' option
and demand management measures; (d) Road Investment: In this option, the emphasis was laid on road
projects, which are expected to encourage private vehicle trips. The option also included all the
committed projects in the "Do Minimum' option. The CTS Study evaluated these options on the basis of
economic analysis, financial sustainability, environmental and social (resettlement) impacts and
recommended Pubic Transport + Demand Management in the Island City as the most preferred strategic
option. However, the CTS Study included environmental assessment of strategic options in a very
limited manner. It was therefore necessary to undertake detailed environmental assessment (EA) at the
sector as well as project level according to the OP 4.01 of the World Bank. MMRDA undertook and
completed such an exercise for the first time in 1998, which has been updated as a Consolidated EA in
2001.
The detailed analysis of alternatives of the four alternatives at the sectoral level was carried out as part of
a Sectoral Level EA for the four strategic transport options for MMR. For the purpose of the analysis,
MMR was divided into four sub-regions--Island City, Western Suburbs, Eastern Suburbs and the Rest of
MMR--to assess environmental impacts of transport options with respect to each sub region.
Environmental impacts were assessed with respect to four key environmental parameter: Air quality,
Noise, Ecology, and Social impacts. In addition Transport Service Indicators, such as eificiency and
overcrowding, were also used in the EA. In line with the results of the CTS, this also resulted in
identifying Public Transport + D]emand Management as the preferred option for the island city. The
process of updating the Environmental Assessment in 2001 undertook a qualitative impact evaluation of
the developments that have taken place with respect to development of transport infrastructure since the
sectoral level EA was done in 1998. It has been concluded in that Consolidated EA (2002) that Public
Transport + Demand Management is still the preferred option for the Island City.
Nearly all the rail and road investment subprojects in MUTP involve work on existing alignments. To
that extent the broad Right of Vlay for the subprojects is already defined. However, minimizing the
environmental and R&R impacts has still been a major factor in determining the details of the alignments



8
ISDS
considered. As mentioned earlier the changed alignment as result of baseline surveys for a Road over
Bridge(ROB) at Jogeshwari has avoided the impact to an industrial estate. Similarly, the consultations
with the potential PAPs had resulted in modifying the alignment for another ROB at Vikroli which
reduced the displacement of shopkeepers from 173 to about 20, and preserved the location of a temple.
For speedy resettlement of displaced families, the GoM had adopted three alternative approaches. These
include, (a) construction of tenements for relocation of affected people on the land available with
government or procured throug,h transfer of development rights (TDR) (Option A); (b) Procuring land
and tenements by inviting competitive bids from the developers/owners against TDR (Option B); and; (c)
Purchase of ready-built tenements from Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (Option
C).
In addition to the above options, a two stage resettlement is also followed to respond to the High court's
order for early shifting of people along the safety zone of railway tracks. Under this approach, the people
along the safety zone have first shifted to the temporary houses with minimum basic amenities and within
three year period they will shifted to the permanent houses. The resettlement sites have been chosen in
such a way that it causes minimum disruption to the existing life and livelihood to the affected
households. Given that paucity of land in Mumbai, the alternatives in terms of available sites were rather
limited. In order to reduce the burden of recurring maintenance costs, the construction of tenements
through TDR approach require the deposit of Rs. 20,000 per house towards societies corpus which
well-being down the maintenance liabilities to the PAPs to a certain extent.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established in MMRDA, to handle the preparation and
implementation of all activities, including the safeguards aspects. The PMU is headed by a Project
Director with the rank of Secretary drawn from the Indian Administrative Service cadre and reports to the
Commissioner, MMRDA. The Project Director has full financial, administrative and technical powers
delegated to him from GOM and other implementing agencies for implementation of the R&R
components. The PMU will, in turn, work closely with the Project Implementing Agencies (MRVC,
MCGM, MSRDC, BEST, etc). The Project Director is being assisted by a team of Joint Project Directors
responsible for: (a) Housing and Procurement; (b) Finance; (c) Social Development/Land Acquisition;
(d) Environment, and (e) Public Information and Consultations. While the Joint Director for Social
Development/Land Acquisition is responsible for safeguard issues related to the R&R component of the
project, his/her counterpart on the Environmental side is responsible for the safeguard issues related to
the environmental impacts of the project (including the environmental impacts of the R&R). The overall
responsibility for safeguards lies with the Project Director.
In addition to the above arrangements, an Independent Monitoring Panel (IMP) is in place headed by a
former Chief Secretary and consisting of members from the field of legal, environment and NGO sector
to ensure the policies related to environment and resettlement are followed and monitor the
implementation progress. The IMP would operate and interact at the level of steering committee headed
by the Chief Secretary and will be funded from the resettlement budget of the project.
The active involvement of NGOs during the preparation of policy and RAP/RIP and implementation is
another noteworthy feature of the project. The NGOs who are involved have experience in relocation
and community development in the preparation and implementation of resettlement action and
implementation plans. This has. considerably helped quicker social mobilization, reduced the risk of
delays in resettlement and to ensure the timely implementation of resettlement actions.
In order to address the environmental impacts of the project, environmental assessments (EA) of its



9
ISDS
various components have been undertaken. In addition to the sectoral level EA (SLEA) mentioned
earlier, the process included the preparation of Subproject-specific EA reports by way of Programmatic
level Environmental Assessment (PLEA) and Micro-level Environmental Assessment (MLEA). While
SLEA was a strategic document, PLEAs were prepared for small generic sub-projects like ROBs, and
MLEAs were prepared for larger sub-projects like road widening and extension. The study was
undertaken between June 1995 and May 1997. The study resulted in several outputs including a final
report in 1998.
Since 1998 a number of developments necessitated a review of the environmental assessments. These
included: (i) change in the design of the proposed project; (ii) change in the traffic and environmental
baseline in Mumbai; and (iii) comments by NGOs and civil society on the validity of the assessments
given (i) and (ii).
As a result, the following approach was adopted in terms of further consolidating the environmental
assessment work and risk mitigation: (a) updating of all PLEAs and MLEAs and preparation of MLEAs
for all sub-components; (b) preparation of fresh EMPs for all sub-components earlier covered by PLEA;
(c) EMPs for all sub-components to be implemented in the first year of the project to be made available
before project appraisal; (d) the preparation of a Consolidated EA that takes into account the changed
baseline since 1998 and presents a comprehensive overview of all environmental aspects of the project in
one document; and (e) public consultations following the disclosure of the draft Consolidated EA report,
findings of which were incorporated in the final Consolidated EA report. Given that a number of
sub-components of MUTP are already under implementation, it was ensured that environmental audits
were undertaken, and wherever necessary "retrofit" environmental management plans prepared.
The monitoring and reporting rnechanism to ensure implementation of EMPs has been agreed with the
concerned institutions. Reportinig formats and frequency have been agreed. Information is expected to
flow monthly from the contractor to the Project Management Consultants (PMC) appointed by
MMRDA; from the PMC to the Project Implementing Agency (PIA) such as MSRDC; and from the PIA
to MMRDA. The MMRDA is expected to report to the World Bank on a quarterly basis. The Inspection
Panel is envisaged as having ac.cess to all information as and when needed. MMRDA is to recruit
Environmental Management and Capacity Building consultants to assist with monitoring and supervision
of the project, and capacity building of MMRDA as well as all other implementing agencies.
In order to respond to the large scale resettlement, GoM had adopted a resettlement policy which
includes an entitlement matrix, grievance redressal and implementation procedures. This policy is
consistent with the Bank's policy and it was endorsed by the Bank prior to the approval of the
government. For the implementation of R&R programs the PMU staff are working in partnership with
NGOs and National Slum Dwellers Federation (NSDF) and will be supplemented by management
consultants. In the process of relocating about 4,000 affected families to the permanent houses and
another 6,000 to the transit houses so far, the PMU has demonstrated its capacity to handle the R&R
program for this project.
A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) describing the overall magnitude of land acquisition and
displacement, resettlement policy, institutional framework, baseline socioeconomic characteristics, broad
time table, costs and budgets, has been prepared. Following this, Resettlement Implementation plans
(RiPs) for each of the sub-projects will be prepared. Four such RIPs for those projects to be
implemented in the first year of the project have been prepared describing the details of impacts, payment
of compensation, deliver of entitlements, designs of proposed tenements, and site related improvements,
time-table, costs and implementation arrangements.



10
ISDS
The implementation of resettlement action plans have already commenced and so far 3,935 families (20
percent) have been relocated in 48 buildings in four different locations with an independent flat of 225
sq. ft. In addition, 107 families were also allotted alternative shops enabling them to re-establish their
lost petty business units. Another 6,125 families (32 percent) were shifted to the transit housing who will
eventually be shifted to permanent houses within three years. Thus, all those residing along the safety
zone of railway tracks were shifted away. This has a significant effect in improving the operational
efficiency of running the local trains in terms of speed and frequency. As a result of this resettlement,
the High Court had vacated the Public Interest Litigation (PIL) petition filed in August, 1998 on the
safety of the passengers and removal of encroachers along the railway tracks.
A rapid impact assessment of initial resettlement by the Bank through independent consultants had
revealed that all eligible affected persons were provided with alternative houses and shops and none of
allottes have either sold out or rented out the houses indicating the initial success of resettlement. The
client has initiated the full length impact assessment of resettlement implementation till date. The
findings of the these studies will be used to undertake any remedial measures that my be required to
address any outstanding issues or difficulties experienced by the affected people in the resettlement
process. The findings will proiide valuable inputs for the remaining implementation of resettlement.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultation has been an important input into the process of planning and designing of MUTP so
far. The affected communities have been involved at every stage of the project preparation and
implementation. Continuous involvement of NGOs, consultative committees of different sections of the
society, and recently the independent monitoring panel are important part of managing safeguard issues
in a consultative manner. The consultation process began by carrying out a survey of Public Attitude
during the formulation of Comprehensive Transport Strategy (CTS) in 1994. The draft CTS proposals
were also presented to various lPlAs, Government agencies and NGOs. They generally endorsed the
strategy of Public Transport + I)emand Management recommended by the CTS.
To begin with the R&R policy preparation, a committee consisting of members from government,
private sector, NGOs and civil society was formed. The NGOs and NSDF were closely associated with
carrying out baseline surveys and preparation of implementation plans. MMRDA has also established a
Public Information Centre (PIC) at MMRDA and field centers have also been opened in the areas of
resettlement sites. All documents such as RAP, baseline surveys, list of affected persons, Resettlement
policy, brochure of slated features of the project, Environmental Management Plans etc., are placed in
the PIC for the benefit of affected persons and general public. The executive summary is of the RAP and
Consolidated EA is also available in a local language. MMRDA also put up the executive summary of
the RAP and Consolidated EA on their web site.
With regards to the environmental assessment, a number of consultative meetings have been held, with
the first one being held in June 1997. The participants included the representatives of the government
departments, local authorities, project implementation agencies and the consultants in the transport and
environment field. With the passage of time and substantial developments like construction of flyovers
that had occurred, the process of updating the EA was started in late 2000. A consultation meeting
involving academia, environmental experts, consultants, NGOs and representatives of PlAs and the
World Bank was organized in November 2000 for presentation of the updated EA. A second similar
meeting was organized in December 2000. After the preparation of the Consolidated EA a set of two
final public consultation meetings were organized in November 2001. Most of these consultations were
very well attended, and in addition to providing useful feedback on the project, also highlighted the



11
ISDS
public support for the project.
In addition to the continuous informal consultation process during the preparation of CEMPs and RIPs
for the R&R sites, the first forrnal consultation meeting with project affected persons was organized in
December 2000. A second ancl final meeting with a similar group was in November 2001.
For the final consultation meetings on the environmental assessment in November 2001, it was ensured
that all the leading newspapers carried advertisements well in advance of the meeting, posters and
pamphlets were distributed amongst the project affected persons, the relevant documents were made
available to through the PIC well in advance of the meeting, and invitations were issued to the members
of the media and press. This strategy of disclosure was found to work well with the general public as
well as project affected persons.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               11/12/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/9/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            12/10/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  1/3/2002      3/5/2002
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               10/8/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           10/16/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/9/2001
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShopF
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShopn
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank



12
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             A.K. Swaminathan
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  1. U. B. Reddy/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Sameer Akbar/Person/World Bank           05/30/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                          05/30/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Vincent J. Gouarne                           05/30/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDBACK      L sIe MAP       SHOWCA5E



