                                Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC133
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDIA                                                 Project ID: P079708
Project: India-Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty              Task Team Leader: Ethel Sennhauser
Reduction
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 15, 2004                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 15, 2004                                   IDA Amount ($m): 112.00
Managing Unit: SASRD                                           Sector: Other social services (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Rural
Status: Lending                                                policies and institutions (P); Decentralization (S);
                                                               Other human development (S); Gender (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the project is to improve the livelihoods and quality of life of the rural poor in Tamil
Nadu (particularly women and other disadvantaged groups) through social, economic and democratic
empowerment. To achieve this, the project will build the productive and non productive assets of poor
people and improve the organizational and institutional context which govern the effective use of these
assets by them. The project will improve and expand the key assets of poor and vulnerable people by (i)
meeting their basic needs, (ii) improving income and income security, and (iii) supporting collective
action to improve their social, economic and political bargaining position. The project will improve the
context within which poor people operate by (i) enhancing the performance of service providers,
including financial organizations and local government, and (ii) providing risk mitigation options.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
·       Institutional and Human Capital Development. This would include: (i) forming and supporting
self managed organizations of the poor (SHGs, CBOs and federations at panchayat and block level), (ii)
developing the technical capacity of vulnerable people to engage equally in social, economic and
political life; (iii) strengthening and capacity building of village level elected representatives to improve
their ability to deliver services to the poor (including the introduction of public accountability
mechanisms such as social audits, participatory budgeting and service delivery report cards); (iv)
strengthening the capacity of local governments and village organizations to plan, implement and manage
participatory and inclusive panchayat development plans, (v) reorientation of state and district level
service providers to work with a client driven approach, and (vi) building NGO capacity to work as
intermediaries and change agents.

·       Panchayat support: This component would include activities which will directly benefit those
panchayat which show an interest in developing responsive and accountable governance systems for
public resources, expenditures and service delivery. It will include two subcomponents:
    o Livelihood funds. Grant resources transferred to gram panchayats to cofinance the
    implementation of panchayat development plans. The subcomponent will co finance priority
    investments from these plans, based on cost sharing principles, with upfront contributions from the
    panchayats. This will include support for demand driven community infrastructure and services (such
    as bridle paths and small connecting roads, community irrigation, rural water supply, village ponds,
    village schools and small health centers), and actions needed to eradicate social discrimination. Cost

                                                        2
                                                                                                         ISDS



     sharing principles will be further defined in the preparation phase.
     o Capital Investment for Panchayats. This subcomponent would support the institutional change of
     the panchayats. It would provide assistance for panchayat's own basic infrastructure and technical
     assistance needs (services of financial experts, private providers, contractors and technical support).
     .
·        Enterprise Development This subcomponent would support innovative pilots for small and
medium scale enterprises (operating at and between the panchayat and the block panchayat level) to
improve local level productivity and generate wage employment. The component would enable SHGs,
common interest groups and their federations to undertake initiatives which will assist them to increase
the value added from the products produced by their members and develop new enterprises and joint
ventures. Community groups and federations will also be encouraged to partner with the private sector
and organizations working on commercial activities and at a scale which can satisfy secure wage
generation needs. All business development plans will be expected to include details of activities and
budgets for skill development and technical advisory inputs. Further details on the use of this fund will
be based on the results of a strategy to be completed during project preparation, where the effectiveness
of existing government programs will also be assessed.

·        Vulnerability reduction This component would support activities to address sources of
vulnerability. It would:

     o provide funds to design and implement community based insurance packages to address the main
     sources of risks and income instability, which will be determined by a risk assessment study.
     Preliminary findings indicate that some of the most severe areas of vulnerability include agricultural
     risks (droughts and floods), housing instability, food insecurity and life/accident threats. Processes
     and institutional arrangement for the federations and other local organizations to
     administer/implement these community based insurance packages will be explored during project
     preparation.
     o support to eradicate child/bonded labor and trafficking An ongoing assessment of the present
     situation with child/bonded labor and trafficking is under way and preliminary results indicate that
     this is a major source of vulnerability for rural households. To address this, the subcomponent would
     support social mobilization and sensitization campaigns, bridge education and re-education,
     strengthening of watchdog organizations and targeted health and nutrition interventions.
     o support to people with disabilities. This will be done by implementing a disability strategy to be
     completed during preparation. The strategy will be based on community rehabilitation approaches,
     and will establish processes to provide livelihood opportunities to disabled people. The component
     will also provide direct support to disability prevention programs. It might include sensitization and
     prevention campaigns, support to community based institutions directly involved in working with
     disabled, skill development and support to community based rehabilitation centers.

·        Project management: this component would include provisions for (i) project administration
activities (including incremental operating costs and implementation of a financial management system),
(ii) internal monitoring and learning processes, (iii) third party evaluations, (iv) undertaking special
studies, (v) strengthening of and building partnerships with NGOs and institutions which would act as
facilitators to groups of vulnerable people to organize themselves and access project resources, and (vi)
communications and information to ensure broad dissemination of project objectives and processes to all
potential beneficiaries.



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS



characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in backward blocks of the State. The selection of these blocks will be done
during the preparation phase, according to a set of criteria to measure poverty and disempowerment still to
be defined.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The Environmental Category proposed for the project is B, because of the small size of the
investments to be undertaken under the livelihood and enterprise development funds and its focus on
institutional and human development. The activities and multiple small investments envisaged under the
project will be minor rural infrastructure activities which are not likely to result in significant environmental
impacts both individually or cumulatively.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

     Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No       TBD

     Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No       TBD

     Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No       TBD

     Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No       TBD

     Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No       TBD

     Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No       TBD

     Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No       TBD

     Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No       TBD

     Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No       TBD

     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
To address any potential environmental and social impact derived from the implementation of project
activities, the project team will complete:

(i) the preparation of technical guidelines for the implementation of the most expected project interventions
(subprojects implemented by panchayats or common interest groups). The guidelines will have
mainstreamed in it environmental considerations and best practices which will lead to enviromentally
friendly designs. The guidelines will also include (a) a negative list of activities based on a preliminary
understanding of its environmental impacts, and (b) institutional and implementation arrangements for these
technical guidelines as part of a "Community Operation Manual",

(ii) a procedure for undertaking environmental due diligence of activities not covered under the technical
guidelines.

                                                        4
                                                                                                         ISDS



(iii) a tribal and vulnerable community development plan, which will include chapters on tribal
development, livelihood assessment, cast issues, social risk analyses and studies for special vulnerable
groups, such as child laborers and disabled, and

(iv) a gender strategy and action plan, due to the particular vulnerability faced by women in the State,
irrespective of their income, caste or social status.

Environmental aspects: The most relevant environmental impacts envisaged under the project are
expected under the livelihood funds and the Enterprise development funds.These are however expected
to be minor since investements will not exceed U$ 50,000, would average U$ 5000 and most would cost
less than U$ 1000. These funds will support development of microenterprises, rural infrastructure and
services (such as small conecting roads and bridges, village schools or small health centers, village
ponds, small water harvesting structures). To address this, an important output of project preparation
will be the compilation of technical guidelines for the most expected project interventions to be
undertaken by communities/groups. The guidelines will have mainstreamed into their preparation
environmental considerations based on good practices and envrionmental friendly designs, and will be
pre-cleared by environmental experts before being diseminated to the field. As relevant regulatory
requirement along with the environmental aspects will be integrated into the guidelines, these will have
an additional value to the field implementing agencies in understanding the environmental significance of
various proposed activities. The guidelines will build on good engineering designs from small
infrastructure investments existing in line departments, and will incorporate environmental and social
considerations to ensure safeguar compliance specifically with respect to OP 4.01.

The institutional and implementation requirements of the proposed technical guidelines will be
developed as a part of a "Community Operation Manual", a draft of which will be prepared before the
project appraisal. The operation manual will include an assessment of the existing capacity of the
implementing institutions, and identify resources required for effective implementation of these
technical guidelines.

The applicability of the safety of dams policy will be determined during future preparation, and once the
nature of the potential water harvesting structures is better defined. If OP 4.37 is triggered, the
construction of these structures will draw on lessons and experiences emerging from a similar project in
Andhra Pradesh. The technical guidelines for these activities will ensure compliance with the dam safety
safeguard by preparing a package for small earthen embankments and dams to help beneficiaries
understand the environmental implications and what they need to do and don't at the time of construction.

The pest management safeguard has been triggered based on the assumption that increases in agriculture
production and changes in cropping patterns will occur as a result of improvements supported by the
project, and will likely require increased use of pesticides to contain losses. Project preparation will
undertake an assessment of GoTN's pest management policies and associated implementation
arrangements, and will propose project activities to strengthen when necessary. The technical guidelines,
on the other side, will ensure that project implementation meets the requirements of the Bank's policy in
this regard for any project activity with likely relation to agricultural investments

The guidelines will also include a negative list of activities precluded from being funded due to significant
potential environmental impacts, as well as a process on how environmental analyses should be
undertaken for activities requiring further environmental screening

Social Development aspects: The project seeks to improve the livelihoods and quality of life of the poor
and vulnerable groups in the rural areas through their social, economic and democratic empowerment
with focus on the poor, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups including women ­ especially destitute,

                                                      5
                                                                                                         ISDS



single, those in special circumstances like commercial sex workers; female-headed households;
Scheduled Caste and minorities who face social exclusion and discrimination; Scheduled Tribes; and
special groups including the disabled, child labour, and occupational groups identified during
preparation. Social analyses to be carried out during project preparation will ensure compliance with
social operational directives. They will also help in understanding better the nature of the social aspects
which will be addressed by the project. Relevant studies to be undertaken include:

(a) a tribal and vulnerable community development plan (TVCDP) which will include aspects of caste
and tribal development (as per requirement of OD4.20), livelihood assessments, social risk analyses and
plans for particularly vulnerable groups, such as disabled and child laborers.

(b) a Gender plan (GP). Gender inequality and discrimination is pervasive and not restricted to only the
poorest and vulnerable sections. The project will therefore support all women, irrespective of their
income status, and address gender related issues like malnutrition, school drop outs, and poor sanitation;
and social evils such as female foeticide and infanticide, trafficking, domestic violence, and child
marriages. Women will be considered as the entry point to increase household income and reduce
vulnerability. These areas will be reflected in the GP.

Involuntary Resettlement. The Livelihoods Funds component might support social and economic
development which would require land. It is envisaged that this requirement will be met from the Group's
own land, purchased or leased, or from voluntary donations. Where community infrastructure land
requirements are concerned, these will be met from voluntary donations and/or the government could
purchase this land on a "willing seller - willing buyer" principle. In order to ensure that the vulnerable
groups in the community are not disadvantaged by the process of voluntary land transfer of
privately-owned land, a transparent procedure, based on public consultation will be drawn out during
preparation which will be part of the Operational Manual. There will be no involuntary land acquisition
under the project (any sub-projects where Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is required, would be
disallowed).

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

   The safeguard policy OP 4.01 on environmental assessment and OP 4.09 on Pest Management will be
   applicable with possible applicability of OP 4.37 on Dams. The project has been classified as Category
   B, as it will not have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or
   unprecedented. The potential environmental impacts due to the activities funded under the Livelihood
   Funds are mostly construction-related and are reversible. These impacts will be managed by the
   implementation of the technical guidelines, which will lead to the implementation of good and
   environmentally friendly engineering practices.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The potential long term and adverse environmental impacts at this stage of the project are unclear
but are envisaged to be insignificant due to the small nature of the investments proposed.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

   The economic analysis of the project interventions will be carried out in close coordination with the
   social and environmental aspects, particularly with regards to analysis of alternatives, assessment of
   baseline social and environmental conditions, and affordability. the analysis of alternatives will include

                                                       6
                                                                                                         ISDS



   the screening of project area and criteria for site selection (including social and environmental criteria).
   In case any environmental aspect is envisaged, and that cannot be covered by the technical guidelines, a
   separate environmental assessment will be undertaken. The process for environmental supervision and
   monitoring, and when an activity will need a more detailed environmental assessment, will also be
   included in the technical guideline report.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

It has already been mentioned that to mitigate adverse environmental impacts during planning and
implementing of works envisaged under the project, GoTN will prepare technical guidelines including
environmental considerations. The implementation of these guidelines will be ensured through their
inclusion in form of a contractual package to the implementing agency at village level, and assist them in
clearly understanding the environmental and social significance of various proposed activities. The
package will also describe the update process to be followed for particular cases where the environmental
analysis is not included in the guidelines.
The TVCDP will include a section on Tribal Development, prepared as per the OD 4.20 on Indigenous
People. This section will detail the specific actions to be taken under the proposed project for the tribal
population, to enhance their participation in project planning and implementation, and benefit from the
project. The plan will be based on extensive consultations, whose details will be documented in the Plan.
The draft plan will be widely disseminated before finalization. The plan will also privide for
participatory monitoring of the implementation phase.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders of the project are (i) poor and vulnerable groups in the rural areas either
organized into new Self-Help Groups or from existing groups, and (ii) local governments or PRIs. Both
will engage with a range of other agencies ­ NGOs, line departments, other civil society organizations
and private sector. The project seeks to invest in building linkages and relationship between
communities/local governments and the other stakeholders, as well as linkages between the two primary
stakeholder groups (community groups and local governments). A guiding principle of project design is
to promote a more demand-driven and socially inclusive approach towards identification, design,
execution, and quality assurance of assets at the local level.

During the process of preparation of the technical guidelines, and the TVCDP (including the Tribal
Development Plan), project stakeholders and tribal communities will be extensively consulted. Drafts of
these documents -prepared in participatory and consultative process- will be circulated among the
different stakeholders, consultations documented and the feedback incorporated in the drafts before
finalization.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or

                                                    7
                                                                                                    ISDS



         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            11/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        11/21/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         11/21/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            11/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        11/21/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         11/21/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            11/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        11/21/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         11/21/2003

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            11/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        11/21/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         11/21/2003

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ethel Sennhauser
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Varalakshmi Vemuru                                 May 5, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Sanjay Srivastava/Person/World Bank                May 8, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                                      June 26, 2003
Sector Manager                       Adolfo Brizzi                                      June 26, 2003

