Report No. 23256
Report No: I050647 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/19/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P050647
Project: Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project         Task Team
Leader: Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal
Appraisal Date: March 5, 2001    IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: December 18, 2001    IDA Amount ($m): 149.20
Managing Unit: SASRD     Sector: AI - Irrigation & Drainage
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objectives of Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring
Project (UPWSRP) are:
(i) to set up an enabling institutional and policy framework for water
sector reform in the State for integrated water resources management; and
(ii) to initiate irrigation and drainage sub-sector reforms in the State
to increase and sustain water and agricultural productivity
Fundamental reforms are required in the planning and management of the
water sector and the irrigation and drainge sub-sector to help improve
rural livelihoods in a sustainable manner. Such reforms cannot be
achieved by a single stand-alone investment. A flexible long-term program
approach with a vision covering a 15 to 20-year horizon is needed. This
project, embedded in such a programmatic framework, would initiate the
reform program and develop replicable models of reforms through
demonstrative but large-scale pilots with associated investments in
selected sub-basins of the Ghaghra-Gomti basin, which would improve the
living standards of the poor in these areas.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component A: Creation of Apex Water Institutions and Strengthening
Socially and Environmentally sustainable Multi-sectoral Water Resources
Planning, Allocation and Management Capacity
This component would support the setting up and operationalizing State
Apex water institutions proposed in the State Water Policy. These include:
State Water Resources Agency (SWaRA): This institution would develop
environmentally-and socially-sustainable inter-sectoral water allocation
and optimal water resources management in a basin context throughout the
Stae. it would also serve as the technical secretariat for the State Water
Board.
State Water Resources Data and Analysis Center (SWaRDAC): This institution
would collate, verify, analyze and disseminate information on all aspects
of integrated water resources management and assistance in basin planning.



State Water Tariff Regulatory Commission (SWaTReC): This is envisaged as
the central agency to review and monitor water sector costs and revenues,
and to rationalize and set user fees to enable the sector institutions to
be financially self-sustaining.
Ghaghra-Gomti Basin Development and Management Entity (GGBDME): This would
be set up as a multi-sectoral and representative body that would help
refine and implement environmentally and socially-sustainable water
resources development and management plans for the GGB.
Component B: Irrigation Department Reform, Capacity Building and Business
Process Re-engineering
This component would initiate measures required to rationalize and
streamline the manner in which irrigation and drainage investments are
planned, implemented, managed, operated and monitored. This will involve
the following activities:
Institutional Reform: This envisages the execution of a program to reduce
UPID establishment costs through a phased Voluntary Retirement Scheme
(VRS) and other approaches, undertaking staff awareness, consultation,
training and re-training campaigns, and establishment of a Reforms Task
Force (RTF) to monitor implementation of the reform program and oversee
further institutional studies.
UPID Capacity-building: This includes modernization of the technical,
administrative and managerial capacity of UPID, which would be carried out
through the provision of technical advisory services, training and study
tours in order to equip it with the technical, managerial, social,
environmental, economic and information management skills necessary for
modern irrigation management in partnership with the farmer clients.
Business Process Re-Engineering: This activity involves the setting up of
an extensive management information system and supporting administrative
and water resources databases and associated analytical and communication
facilities to modernize and streamline UPID business processes and provide
the tools necessary for modern technical, financial, operational and
managerial capacity, strengthening inter-agency coordination and
public-private partnerships and piloting participatory irrigation
management approaches.
Component C: Piloting Reform Options in Water Resources Management
This component seeks to operationalize the concept of integrated water
resources management in a basin framework with decentralized basin
development and management institutions. Given the large number of large
river basins in UP, it is would be appropriate to begin in selected
sub-basins supported by demonstration pilots. This would involve the
following activities:
Creation and Strengthening of Jaunpur Branch Sub-basin Development and
Management Board (JBSDMB) and the Imamganj Branch Sub-basin Development
and Management Board (IBSDMB) through support for infrastructure,
technical advisory services and operating costs. These Boards are
expected to be focal points for shared vision water resources planning and
management in the selected sub-basins.
Decision Support Systems development through information systems and
modeling for socially and environmentally sustainable optimal water
- 2-



resources management in the JBS and IBS.
Rainwater Harvesting and Community-based Sustainable Management of Water
Bodies in the JBS and IBS.
Piloting Canal-based Small Hydro Development in the IBS located at Km. 6.5
on the Imamganj Branch Canal accompanied by appropriate institutional
development for participatory management of the scheme.
Seasonal wetlands Conservation and Management in the JBS and IBS by
exploring the potential of seasonal wetlands for sustainable
community-based wetlands management including physical interventions
required.
Component D: Piloting Reform Options in Irrigation and Drainage Operations
(PROIDO)
This component would operationalize the concepts and provide the necessary
investments for (i) reliable delivery of water measured and sold on an
appropriate volumetric basis in the irrigation systems to improve system
performance, cost-recovery and accountability of the service provider;
(ii) effective drainage network operation and management and conjunctive
use to assist in effective water management (ii) an outcome-oriented
approach with integrated sustainable agricultural intensification and
diversification and private sector participation to complement effective
water management; and (iii) unbundled operational management of the
irrigation and drainage systems, including participatory user management
and private sector participation. Given the current state of irrigation
and drainage infrastructure in the state and the magnitude of tasks and
finances required to achieve the above throughout the state, these
far-reaching reforms would be initiated at an appropriate scale to build
confidence and generate lessons in mainstreaming these reforms.
The PROIDO component will therefore involve the following activities:
Rehabilitation and modernization of the irrigation and drainage systems
based on community priorities in about 300,000 ha covering the physical
irrigation delivery systems and drainage infrastructure in the Jaunpur
Branch Command of the JBS and the Bahraich Distributary Command of the IBS
(including electronic and other measuring devices) to enable reliable
systems operation and sale of water on a volumetric basis.     This would
include the development of an appropriate knowledge-base (including
detailed topographic and asset surveys and GIS development), detailed
consultation and environmental and social assessments prior to civil
works, baseline development, and awareness-building and training
activities. The community involvement would be facilitated by formation
and operationalization of WUA, and extensive consultations and joint
walkthroughs.
Agricultural intensification and diversification through support for
extension, study tours and other training, and on-farm trials for
agriculture and horticulture and , promotion of
environmentally-sustainable techniques (including integrated pest
management and organic farming), improvements in livestock management and
knowledge dissemination through village kiosks. This activity would be
coordinated by the Bank-financed Uttar Pradesh Diversified Agriculture
Support Project (UPDASP) and would involve other line departments, NGOs
and the private sector.
-3-



Piloting replicable management options for irrigation and drainage systems
operations and agricultural diversification. This would involve (i)
progressive transfer of management responsibilities to WUAs at the
minor-level; (ii) testing management paradigms at the distributary-level
by leasing to a private sector operator or to a financially-decentralized
UPID entity; and (iii) induce specialized crop zone management by private
sector.
The lessons learned from the implementation of this component would help
shape the rehabilitation and management structures to be adopted in future
investments.
Component E: Feasibility Studies and Preparation Activities for the Next
Phase
This will include initiating topographic surveys and environmental, social
and other assessments and preparation of feasibility studies for
activities to be undertaken in the next phase of the UP Water Sector
Reform Program. Lessons learned during early implementation of the
project will be reflected in this preparatory work.
Component F: Project Activities Coordination
The project activities would be coordinated by a multi-disciplinary
Project Activities Core Team (PACT). This component is designed to assist
the PACT with its role in facilitating and guiding the implementation and
monitoring of all project activities, ensuring synergy and coordination
amongst activities and agencies implementing these activities, preparing
consolidated reports and facilitating training.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project has components that are state-wide (strengthening of Apex
Water Institutions and UP Irrigation Department) and pilot physical
interventions that are targeted to two selected areas (Jaunpur and
Imamganj Branch-basins) of the Ghagra-Gomti basin in Eastern Uttar
Pradesh. The selected areas are very flat and are predominantly under
agriculture, that is dominated by a rice-wheat system. The selection of
Ghagra-Gomti basin for the project interventions was particularly
influenced by its poverty status. The percent of families living below
poverty line as specified by the GOUP is substantially above the State
average, as illustrated in the figure below. This shows that 15 out of of
the 19 districts in the Ghagra-Gomti basin have a much higher proportion
of people living below poverty line than the UP State average. In
addition, a wide range of water management issues are present in this
basin where a highly under-utilized surface water irrigation potential of
nearly 4 Mha has been created. Considerable groundwater resources have
been tapped in the basin by the private sector; however, excellent
potential still exists for groundwater exploitation which could
significantly increase cropping intensities. Impeded drainage results in
- 4 -



substantial yield reductions for the Kharif (monsoon) crop and in delayed
planting of the Rabi (winter) crop, which makes the Rabi crop vulnerable
to pests. The upper part of this basin lies in Nepal, and given the
recurrent flood damages in Uttar Pradesh and the potential to develop
storage in Nepal for flood mitigation, augmentation of dry season flows,
and generation of electricity, opportunities exist in the long-term for
bilateral cooperation as well. Unexploited opportunities exist for
developing small hydroelectric systems in the basin. Poor water quality
due to agricultural, industrial and domestic pollution present major
health hazards. Conservation and effective management of village ponds
and other aquatic eco-systems is lacking. Waterlogging and sodicity are
prevalent in the area and irrigation and drainage management needs
improvement. Therefore, an integrated water resources management approach
and modernized operation and management of the irrigation and drainage
infrastructure would be piloted in two selected areas within this basin
under the project. An initial GIS was made of the project area and this
is to be strengthened in the project to give a strong spatial perspective
to decision-support. The EA and SA have not indicated any critical
natural habitats, protected areas or significant cultural property that
could be impacted by the project. The environmental and social
assessments have indicated that proper implementation of the proposed
interventions are likely to be very beneficial from an environmental and
social viewpoint.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: Although there are no major enviornmental or social concerns
associated with the project, it was decided to classify this project as an
Environmental Category A given the new nature of many of the project
components and given that this is the first project in what is anticipated
to be a series of investments, the project was classified as a Category A
project, and a full Environmental Assessment was carried out in addition
to a Social Assessment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      Yes
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         Yes
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
- 5 -



significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Given that the UPWSRP project is primarily focussed on institutional
reforms and that the physical piloting of reform options is limited to
rehabilitation of existing systems in areas that were not significant
environmentally, the project is not expected to have any major adverse
environmental impacts. However, given the new nature of many of the
project components and given that this is the first project in what is
anticipated to be a series of investments, the project was classified as a
Category A project, and a full Environmental Assessment was carried out in
addition to a Social Assessment. This assessment included an examination
of the institutional and policy issues associated with the proposed
project, an analysis of the regional setting and environmental baseline
focusing on the areas selected for physical piloting of reform options, an
analysis of alternatives and development of an Environmental Management
Plan for the project. Although pesticides are not financed as part of the
project, there are expected to be induced impacts to increase pesticide
use as part of the project and hence a pest management plan was also
developed for the project.
There was extensive consultation with various stakeholders at various
times during the project preparation. The environmental assessment was
carried out in coordination with a parallel social assessment exercise and
joint consultations were held. Information about the project and the
associated environmental issues were shared with various stakeholders
(including verbally and in local language leaflets). Feedback from the
stakeholders (including farmers, government officials, experts, etc.) was
critical in shaping the environmental assessment and the EMP.
The significant issues that were identified by the scoping exercise,
largely influenced by consultations and initial spatial knowledge base
assessment (including through multi-agency data collection and an
extensive Geographic Information System [GIS] development and analysis),
indicated the following key issues to be considered as part of the EA for
the project:
Environmental Awareness: generally weak at the UPID and related
institutions involved with water management and irrigated agriculture, as
well as with client farmers.
Environmental Knowledge Base: the environmental knowledge-base and
information management and analysis is poor, and it is difficult to get a
complete picture of environmental issues in a spatial context is extremely
difficult. Sharing and communicating information to various stakeholders
is limited. There is no focal point institution to act as a clearing-house
of water resources and basin management information.
Institutional Capacity: the capacity of UPID and local stakeholders in
integrating environmental information into decision-making is very
limited. Access to expertise and effective partnerships in mainstreaming
environmental issues into their functioning is poor, although there is
scattered environmental expertise within UPID. The Department of
Environment and its associated UP State Pollution Control Board have
limited strategic interaction with the UPID and other water agencies on
issues relating to the water-environment nexus. There is no focal point
for holistic consideration of water resources in the State.
Lack of a Basin Approach: a basin approach to integrated water resources
management is absent both at the level of river basins as well as at the
- 6 -



irrigation and drainage system level. An integrated consideration of
surface and groundwater quality and quantity, salinization/sodicity of
soils, recharge, drainage, flooding, public health concerns on water-borne
diseases, malaria, etc., conjunctive use of surface and groundwater,
wetland management, fisheries, etc. is absent. Safe water supply and
sanitation coverage is extremely poor in the selected pilot areas. An
apex institution for basin resource allocation and regulation is lacking
in the State.
Irrigation and Drainage Systems Reform: limited exposure to integrated
pest management, appropriate fertilizer use, soil fertility and nutrient
management; low level of recognition of the importance of drainage; little
diversification in crops grown; little modernization in tools and
techniques used. Designs, construction and operations and maintenance
operations can be made significantly more environmentally friendly.
Consultation: Extremely limited consultation in water resources management
and irrigation and drainage activities. Poor consultation culture at
UPID. Little role of farmers in decision-making. Negligible experience
in water user associations and private sector involvement (except
contracting for construction and O&M) in managing irrigation and drainage
operations.
Rehabilitation-related: Lack of a clear R&R policy framework; Need to
address issues of spoil disposal, materials handling, good construction
techniques
A social assessment of the project has been carried out with
representative sample populations on the Nagapur Distributary and
Immamganj Branch canal commands and outside to gain insight into key
social issues, caste and class, gender equity gaps, social dimensions of
water sharing and management, constraints in input and credit
availability, political will and Government policies impacting the market
economy and the lives of the masses. It also included social issues
involved in the formation of WUAs based on hydraulic units (customer
grouping based on canal hierarchy), and the role of women, small farmers
and tail-enders in the formation and functioning of WUAs. The objectives
of the assessment were to:
a) understand the key social issues impacting the irrigated agriculture
and the constraints impacting the lives of the populations living within
the sub-basins of Ghagra-Gomtim Basin and how the issues can be addressed
in the proposed project;
b) assess the farmers perceptions of the issues and problems and analyze
their perceptions to blend into the project design;
c) gain insight into the social dimensions in the irrigation behavior of
the farmers- the causes and effects, the social and cultural value
systems, the dependencies of the economically and socially backward,
impacting production and livelihood systems;
d) analyze the gender gap in the quality of life of the people, women's
time use efficiency in irrigated agriculture, the economic value of their
time used as accepted by the masses and the resultant vulnerability of
women in terms of achieving their strategic needs and a social status,
besides their contributions for the well being of their families;
e) Highlight the institutional capacities, the attitude of the irrigation
officials towards the farmers in irrigation water sharing and the reforms
required to instill a higher degree of mutual trust and respect, through
- 7 -



capacity building, orientation, informed participation and inducing policy
change to eliminate the risk factor.
Capacity building for WUA formation and operation is a key focus area of
the project. In addition, the voluntary UPID downsizing will result in
the need for building social safeguard/protection measures for those
affected. The project would provide for evolving a social protection
strategy and package in consultation with the concerned stakeholders. The
capacity to address social issues would be enhanced in the PACT, the UPID
and the SWaRA.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No major adverse cumulative impacts are expected in this project. The
knowledge base development and environmental and social institutional
capacity building proposed under the project are expected to improve the
cumulative positive impacts of the project. The entire project is aimed
at improving livelihoods of communities in selected areas that are
dependent on the way water and related inputs are managed. The approach
of developing WUAs and the consultation process is expected to contribute
towards outcomes relating to community participation, inclusion of
vulnerable groups and equity.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
It is anticipated that in the two sub-basins selected for piloting
physical interventions, the agricultural productivity would be sustainably
improved. The formation and operation of Water User Associations (WUAs)
are expected to change the paradigm of irrigation and drainage management
in these areas to be more participatory and community-driven. Similarly,
the Basin boards to be piloted as JBSDMB and IBSDMB are expected to help
involve a variety of stakeholders in participation in decision-making on
water resources management.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The analysis of alternatives includes a consideration of various facets of
the proposed investment (sectoral, institutional, project setting,
institutional and implementation arrangements) and the context that it is
being made in. The Ghaghra-Gomti basin has been selected as an initial
focus area due to the high poverty levels there. The approach followed
has thus emphasized a project embedded in a long-term program with a dual
focus on integrated water resources management and irrigation sector
reform with piloting of crucial activities in selected areas. The project
is also designed in a flexible manner to continue an analysis of
alternatives throughout the project depending on the stakeholder views,
technology changes and new information and analysis, as long as they are
consistent with GOI, GOUP and Bank policies. The analysis of alternatives
made for this project are described in detail in the PAD and the EA.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The environmental and social assessments have outlined a framework to both
mainstream environmental and social objectives in the project as well as
ensure compliance with Bank safeguard policies. An environmental
management plan and pest management plan have been developed, costed and
- 8 -



included in the project budgeting. Although no R&R is expected, a Sector
R&R policy has been adopted in UP. A detailed consultation process has
been developed at all levels to ensure adequate stakeholder control over
the proposed investments. A screening framework for the proposed
investments has been outlined. An appropriate institutional
capacity-building framework has been evolved to adequately consider key
environmental and social issues. The UPWSRP proposes an extensive project
M&E system within which various types of environmental and social
indicators will be collected and analyzed for use in planning and
decsion-making. This will include the development, updating and use of
appropriate Geographic Information Systems (GIS) databases on the project
impacted areas and liking this with the overall MIS, Decision Support
Systems and project information infrastructure. This would involve not
only monitoring various service, social, environmental, and other
parameters as part of baseline and regular monitoring studies, but also
develop a system of benchmarking various canal systems from a performance
viewpoint. The WUA formation and operation would also be closely
monitored, especially in the initial phases to allow for flexibility in
approaches. The social outcomes of participation in decision-making,
equity, and improved livelihoods will be closely monitored through
internal and third-party surveys and reported in a comparable and
transparent manner. The information would be integrated as much as
possible into a spatial framework using GIS to allow for integrated
spatial analysis and interpretation.
The project has provided substantial emphasis on community involvement,
including stakeholder participation in decision-making, community
contracting, and consultation of all key stakeholders, including women and
other vulnerable groups, in all aspects of project implementation. The
UPID is also targeted for massive capacity-building to help change their
orientation to an accountable service provider and with the skills and
assistance required for interacting with farmers and other water users.
The project emphasises training, including field and exchange visits,
formal courses and national and international exposure to other systems,
with an emphasis on participatory approaches and modernization.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
A number of consultations have been held during the project
identification, design and especially the social and environmental
assessment phases. The key stakeholders would participate in the project
through a significant consultation process that has been built into the
project. No civil works would be undertaken without adequate
consultation. This is true not only at the branch and distributary-level,
where consultation would be undertaken with relevant stakeholders from the
community, line-departments, NGOs and others, but also at each minor,
where joint walkthroughs would be organized to determine the priorities of
the community, which would be formalized in a Memorandum of Understanding
between the community and the UPID. The water harvesting structures and
other water resource management pilots would also only be carried out with
community-led approaches to design, execution and implementation.
The project will build upon the successful experiences of the UP Sodic
Lands Reclamation and UP Diversified Agricultural Support projects in
their use of NGOs. The project proposes to engage NGOs and other civil
-9-



society organizations in a number of ways. Firstly, they will be part of
the consultation process that is outlined during implementation. Next,
they will also be key players in the mobilization, formation, training and
other capacity-building of WUAs. This would include facilitating public
outreach and awareness campaigns relating to improving agricultural
intensification and diversification, rain-water harvesting, adopting
environmentally-friendly practices and appropriate indigenous technical
knowledge as well as catalyzing stakeholder participation and providing
relevant expertise.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              02/15/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          03/13/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           03/13/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              05/30/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          05/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           05/31/2001
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Srinivasan Raj Rajagopal         11/16/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Shankar Narayanan/Person/World Bank
- 10 -



Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        11/16/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Keith Robert A. Oblitas 11/16/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 11 -



