                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                          Report No: AC151
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/11/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDIA                                           Project ID: P078536
Project: Agricultural Higher Education Reforms Project   Task Team Leader: Shashi K. Shrivastava
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 6, 2004             IBRD Amount ($m): 80.00
Bank Approval: March 30, 2004                            IDA Amount ($m): 80.00
Managing Unit: SASHD                                     Sector: Tertiary education (60%); Agricultural
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)       extension and research (40%)
Status: Lending                                          Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);
                                                         Rural services and infrastructure (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
Agricultural higher education system achieves excellence, enhanced relevance, and high
efficiency; and agricultural universities offer enhanced services of benefit to farmers and rural
women.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project would focus on major reforms in institutional governance, financing, academic
quality and relevance in selected Agricultural universities in India. Governance and financial
reforms will aim at providing greater freedom to universities for improved efficiency,
accountability and private-public partnership. Academic reforms will concentrate primarily on
(a) consolidation and modernization of existing undergraduate programs for greater relevance
and reorientation towards knowledge, skills and attitude demanded by the changing labor market
environment, and (b) promotion of excellence in selected critical/emerging areas at the
postgraduate education and research levels. Extension services would be strengthened not only
for enhanced outreach specially to farmers, unemployed youth and rural women but also for
transferring skills to them that would increase their earning capacity. Closer linkages among
institutions, industry and R&D organizations would be encouraged. Systemic reforms would
focus on improved manpower planning, global technology watch, continued curriculum
upgradation to meet emerging needs, strengthening management capacity, improving quality
assurance mechanisms, increasing systemic efficiency, and strengthening monitoring and
evaluation capacity at different levels.

The Project development objective would be achieved through two components with distinct
modes of funding. Under the first component - Institutional Development - institutions would
be funded through a selection mechanism. Selection criteria will be developed during project
preparation -- these will reflect institutions' willingness to reform, and their potential and vision
for development. This component would support (a) restructuring and modernization of
undergraduate programs in various specializations; (b) promotion of academic excellence in
critical/emerging areas at postgraduate and doctoral levels; (c) increasing scope and effectiveness
of networking with educational institutions and research organizations within India and abroad;
and (d) enhancing reach and effectiveness of institutional extension services to agribusiness,

                                                        2
                                                                                                        ISDS



farmers and rural women.

The second component on Systemic Reforms - funded in a noncompetitive investment mode -
would include (a) enhancement of management capacity and improvements in administrative
processes in institutions and ICAR's Education Division; (b) ensuring compliance with ICAR's
quality assurance policies, criteria and procedures; and strengthening accreditation and quality
monitoring capacity; (c) increasing system internal efficiency; and (d) strengthening Monitoring
and Evaluation (M&E) capacity at different levels.

Efforts would be made to increase public-private partnership in agricultural education through (a)
the increased role of the private sector in curriculum design, research and development and
institute governance, and (b) providing a window for direct project support for specific initiatives
by the private sector in offering training opportunities for agricultural graduates.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Existing State Agricultural Universities and Deemed Universities are located in/near large cities.
Most of these universities are residential. The main beneficiaries would be students. The
universities will also provide technical services to farmers seeking such help. None of the location
is near culturally or socially sensitive areas or any natural habitats.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: No acquisition of land or major construction activity is planned. Only minor extensions
or refurbishment of existing university buildings would be supported under the project. All project
activities would be confined to university campuses and their extension centers. Any
construction-related impacts would be mitigated or managed by the use of specific guidelines or
codes of environmental practice, and careful management of the building activities. The waste
management practices from university laboratories and work stations would be clearly assessed and
improved as necessary. ICAR would also undertake a quick assessment of the pattern and scale of
the use of different pesticides, chemical and pathological agents and mediums in the laboratories
and university research and teaching farms.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No     TBD

                                                      3
                                                                                                        ISDS



    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes    No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes    No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered since the project will be supporting
 construction, laboratories, and agricultural extension activities. The applicability of OP 4.09 on
 Pest Management will be determined during the first project preparation mission after
 assessing the likely use of WHO Class I and II pesticides. O.P. 4.20 on Indigneous People (IP)
 is not triggered because the project is concerned with improvements in the quality of
 educational provision and not with access to that education. However, to ensure the
 inclusiveness of IP and other vulnerable communities in reaching the benefits of the project, the
 relevance of the approach used in the Tribal Development Plan prepared for the earlier
 Technical Education and Quality Improvement Program will be examined and incorporated as
 part of the project design. The project does not involve any land acquisition or involuntary
 resettlement. The project would not cause any large scale, significant and/or irreversible
 impacts.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
 The Borrower would be requested to prepare the following: (a) Environmental Codes of Practice
 (ECOP) to be included in the construction guidelines; (b)Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
 for the safe handling and disposal of laboratory waste; and (c) SOP for the safe storage,
 transportation and use of toxic chemicals and substances, and (d) improved pest management
 practices. (Note: a guideline is already in use for pesticide management, which would be
 evaluated and improved, if required). The implementing institutions would adhere to or
 implement these guidelines/strategies or plans.

 Further, environmental issues and concerns, including integrated pest management and
 improved plant nutrition management, would be reflected in the revised curricula and in
 extension services provided by universities.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on

                                                     4
                                                                                                        ISDS



safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
To be determined during project preparation.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              10/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.




Signed and submitted by              Name                                                 Date

                                                 5
                                                                     ISDS



Task Team Leader:                 Shashi K. Shrivastava    06/18/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: David J. Marsden         06/18/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Tapas Paul               06/18/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                     Name                      Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam         07/11/2003
Sector Manager/Director           Michelle Riboud          07/11/2003

