Report No. 23744
Report No: I077572 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P077572
Project: Chattisgarh Community Forest Management Project          Task Team Leader:
Peter Jipp
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 18, 2003 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 15, 2003     IDA Amount ($m): 50.00
Managing Unit: SASRD     Sector: AT - Forestry; BI - Institutional Development;
FE - ; LE -
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to strengthen participatory systems
of natural resource management and marketing to improve and sustain the
livelihoods of forest dependent people. Specific outcomes of this
objective include: establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment to encourage and facilitate the transition from Joint Forest
Management (JFM) to Community Forest Management (CFM); strengthening
community institutions, developing and implementing mechanisms to ensure
that vulnerable groups (e.g. women, scheduled tribes and castes, and
landless) benefit from and are not harmed by management changes, improving
productivity and financial returns to communities from sustainable forest
use while expanding the natural resource base. The poverty focus of the
project will be ensured by targeting selected districts and forest blocks
with high concentrations of poor households, including many tribal and
scheduled caste members.
This project will develop mechanisms to promote and sustain Community
Forest Management (CFM). The adoption of Community Forest Management
represents an advance over earlier Joint Forest Management (JFM) in that
communities will be empowered to take autonomous decisions regarding the
management of forest resources assigned to them. Just how quickly and
completely communities will be able to take over management authority and
responsibility from forest departments will depend on several critical
factors including; 1) skill acquisition and institutional development at
the community level, 2) a deeper and more comprehensive institutional
change within the forest department (toward greater transparency,
accountability, and decentralization relying heavily on developing
effective partnerships with communities, NGOs, and PRIs) , and 3) a strong
and supportive legal framework. Forest departments are expected to
continue to play a supportive technical and regulatory role and to
facilitate inter-sectoral coordination while fostering explicit links to
ongoing rural development initiatives.
Success of CFM will also depend on identifying and exploiting
opportunities to achieve early economic returns through rational use of



Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) and value addition. Removal of market
distortions will play a key role in ensuring the financial viability of
CFM in the medium and long-term. To ensure balanced and sustainable
development, forest fringe communities must have access to economic
opportunities outside those provided by forests and forest departments.
Such opportunities (employment and micro-finance) will be facilitated by
inter-sectoral coordination, an expanded role for Panchayats, and
functional links to District Poverty Initiative projects (IDA) and Rural
Livelihoods initiatives (DFID) as appropriate.
I.A.3. Project Description:
This is the second stage of the MP Forestry Project completed on December
31, 1999. The first stage aimed at institutional reforms to introduce and
test participatory approaches to forest management in MP. The focus was on
change in the attitude of the FD staff through an intensive human resource
development program which also included joint training for FD staff and
village leaders.
The proposed project would concentrate on poverty reduction and would be
people centered rather than FD centered. The CHFD role would be
transformed to that of a facilitator. It would support a shift from Joint
Forest Management (JFM) to Community Forest Management (CFM) with project
components providing the necessary ingredients for successful CFM. These
ingredients include establishing an enabling environment for CFM;
strengthening community institutions, developing and putting in place
mechanisms to ensure that vulnerable groups (e.g. women, scheduled tribes
and castes, and landless) benefit from CFM, expanding the natural resource
base under CFM, and improving returns to communities from this resource
base (see table below). The sub-components and interventions to be
financed under each component are only indicative at this stage. The
detailed design of project would be developed during preparation.
The project is firmly based on the experience from successful
implementation of recent forestry projects in Chhattisgarh and in other
parts of India; the OED report- "Alleviating Poverty through Participatory
Forestry: An Evaluation of India's Forest Development and World Bank
Assistance" (1999); studies conducted by MOEF and assisted by a team of
consultants; and reports and case studies prepared by the CHFD. Since it
is a follow on project, the lessons learnt from the previous project as
described in the recently concluded ICR have been taken into account.
Proposed Components:
Enabling Environment
n Policy and Planning
n Public institutions capacity building and HRD
n NGO support
n Project Administration
- M&E
- FMIS
- Strategic Communication
Community Development
n Capacity Building
n Participatory micro-planning and monitoring
n Training
n Alternate income generation
-2-



n Value addition and processing of forest produce
n Tribal Development
Community Natural Resources Management
in Forest development
n Non-timber forest product management
n Applied Research & Extension
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in the Central Indian States of Chhattisgarh. The
forest fringe communities consist mainly of indigenous people officially
classified as Scheduled Tribes (ST). The project area has protected areas
such as sanctuaries and National Parks in its proximity but these
protected areas are being excluded from the purview of the proposed
project. While there may be critical natural habitats and culturally
sensitive areas in Chhattisgarh where the project is located, the project
itself would endeavor to enhance the protection to these habitats and
sensitive areas with due understanding of their specific requirements and
not affect them negatively in any way.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Overall the project is expected to have a strongly positive
environmental impact as previously degraded forest areas are restored
through natural regeneration and planting (planting will be concentrated
in areas lacking viable rootstock). The main focus of the assessment will
be to identify landscape level conservation and environmental management
objectives and to propose ways to mainstream these in the site specific
micro-plans prepared at the village level.
A limited amount of pesticide is used in preparing planting stock in
nurseries in each of the states. The environmental assessment will
evaluate current patterns of pesticide use and make recommendations where
needed on shifting to integrated pest management strategies and
introducing less toxic and less persistent alternatives.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    Yes
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      Yes
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
-3-



II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The social safeguard policies related to Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12 or OD 4.30) are triggered by the
project. The forest fringe communities consist largely of indigenous
people
and in order to effectively involve them in the project planning and
implementation process, a separate
indigenous peoples development plan (IPDP) and tribal development strategy
would need to be developed.
Indigenous people (tribals) represent a significant proportion of project
participants. A core objective of the project is to ensure that tribals
participate in and benefit from CFM . Project preparation will include
developing a framework and strategy for the development of tribals taking
into account their special concerns in the context of a process oriented
project design. Site specific decisions are to be made during project
implementation as part of the microplanning process. The work on
Indigenous Peoples will form an integral part of the SEA, the results of
which and the framework and the strategy for the development of tribals
will form the base for the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan.
In Chhattisgarh, there is widespread encroachment on forest lands for
purposes ranging from agriculture to commercial gain depending on the type
of encroacher. Evolving community based methodologies of addressing the
encroachment issue without violating legal provisions of the Forest
Conservation Act and Indian Forest Act at the same time adhering to Bank
social safeguards related to Involuntary Resettlement would be an
important focus area of the proposed project. The proposed Social and
Environmental Assessment (SEA) would be expected to address these issues
in depth.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
As indicated above the application of social safeguards related to
Indigenous peoples and Involuntary resettlement present the possibility of
potential cumulative impact in areas such as violation of customary rights
of indigenous people. These would be the focus of attention in the Social
and Environmental Assessment efforts as well as in the design of the
project implementation methodology.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Long-term impacts are expected to be largely positive both in relation to
environmental improvements associated with forest regeneration and in
relation to tribal development associated with the institutional
strengthening supported by the project. The SEA will address long-term
objectives explicitly and will provide guidance on how best to mainstream
these objectives into site specific microplans.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The Environmental Management Plan will assess treatment alternatives to
- 4 -



evaluate the likely impacts of each. Alternatives that may be considered
include; 1) the no project case (transfer of management authority to local
communities without support for institutional and resource development),
2) Panchayat led forest management, 3) NGO led forest management, and 4)
the present project.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
SEA will be conducted at an overall level for the project as part of
project preparation. In addition, site-specific assessments and
consultation will be carried to assess any adverse impact on the local
people due to the project. The SEA will provide input to prepare an
entitlement framework and guidelines to plan and implement mitigation
measures for sites involving any adverse impact due to the project. The
monitoring and evaluation and other decision-support systems will include
consideration of relevant social issues. The external monitoring agency
will also include review of social issues to ensure compliance.
The project preparation will include developing an Entitlement and
Procedural Framework, to be used as may be necessary, which would be
agreed with the borrower in advance. If, for a particular project site,
R&R needs arise, the extent of resettlement would be identified and a
resettlement action plan (RAP) prepared following the agreed framework.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The entire project is oriented to community driven forest management
activities based on locally developed micro plans. During project
preparation Stakeholder Workshops will be held. Workshops will involve all
project stakeholders in discussion of how to improve the design of the
project. During implementation project interventions at the village level
will be defined by the communities themselves through preparation of their
micro plans. Delegated decision making, facilitated inclusion of
maginalized groups, provisions to exercise options, and implementation of
micro plans by local FPC/VFC themselves will help ensure their full and
active participation. Special mechanisms (to be designed as part of the
SEA) will further enhance involvement of vulnerable sections of the local
population in planning and implementing project interventions.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[XI S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
- 5 -



F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Available
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/15/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/15/2003
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/15/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Peter Jipp      2/21/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Navin K. Rai     2/22/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        2/22/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Constance A. Bernard     2/22/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



