Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 26, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P078550 
Project Name: Uttaranchal Watershed 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Talib B. K. Esmail 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2003 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 65 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (40%);Crops (30%);Animal 
production (30%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Water 
resource management (S) community 
participation, strengthening administrative 
capacity of PRIs, equitable participation by 
all groups – esp. landless and women. 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: David J. Marsden, Sonia Chand Sandhu 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The proposed project development objective is to 
improve the productivity of natural resources 
and increase incomes (largely derived from agriculture) through  institutionally and ecologically 
sustainable approaches in selected sub-watersheds
.  
 
The proposed objective encompasses three themes: (i) community participation in watershed 
development and management aimed at integrating land-water use with the objectives of 
moisture retention and biomass production, while simultaneously enhancing incomes and 
livelihood options; (ii) strengthening administrative capacity of Panchayats (at district, block and 
village levels) to manage project financial resources, implement subprojects, deliver legally 
mandated services (in the context of natural resource management), and to sustain those services 
beyond the duration of the project; and, (iii) ensuring equitable participation by all groups -
especially the landless and women who rely disproportionately on common-pool resources for 
fodder, fuel and other forest products. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
A Sector Investment Credit (SIC) of USD 65 million is proposed. Possible GEF co-financing of 
USD 5 million will be pursued for sub-component 2 (iv) based upon GoUA’s agreement. 
Page  2
 
 
 
The project builds on the successful experiences of the current IDA/IBRD financed Integrated 
Watershed Development (Hills II) project (P041264) which closes on March 31, 2005.  Slight 
modifications are proposed to reflect lessons learned from the Hills II project.  The major change 
in implementation arrangements is that funds will be routed through PRIs instead of the 
Watershed Directorate.  PRIs will also be responsible for implementation of subprojects. 
 
(1) 
Participatory Watershed Development and Management
 comprising of the following 
subcomponents: 
 
(i) 
Social Mobilization and Training
 designed to facilitate local communities to form 
Gram (Village) Resources Management Associations (GAREMAs) that can prepare 
micro-watershed development and management plans, manage funds that will be 
transferred directly to community bank accounts, implement those plans using 
community contracting practices and, operate and maintain investments in partnership 
with PRIs (where appropriate).   
 
(ii) 
Sub-watershed Treatments
 including: entry point activities other than watershed-
treatment related (e.g. upgrading of link roads, bridle paths/mule tracks, potable water 
supply, etc.); development of private arable lands (e.g. soil conservation bunds, 
vegetative barriers, agro-forestry, etc.); development of non-arable communal and 
government lands (e.g. forest regeneration, pasture development, silvi-pasture 
development, soil erosion bunds, vegetative barriers, etc.).  A budget envelop will be 
provided per micro-watershed (based on a formula computing total area and 
population size) to increase transparency and force identification of genuine priorities 
by beneficiary groups. 
 
(2) 
Enhancing Livelihood Opportunities 
comprising: 
(i) 
Farming Systems Intensification
 designed to introduce improved technologies and 
practices for agriculture and horticulture, and silvi-pastoral treatments. 
(ii) 
Fodder and Livestock Development
 designed to reduce grazing pressure on fragile 
lands through improved fodder production and better animal husbandry practices. 
(iii) 
Income Generation Activities for Vulnerable Groups
 designed to co-finance small 
enterprises specifically identified by Self Help Groups (SHGs) of women and other 
vulnerable groups (e.g. landless). 
(iv) 
Incentives for Sustainable Agricultural Practices 
(including markets and business 
opportunities) designed for cultivation and conservation of traditional crop varieties, 
improve organic farming, document and inventory traditional varieties of agricultural 
crops and their wild relatives, demonstrate and apply technologies for sustainable 
management of biodiversity important to agriculture.  This component will be funded 
by a GEF grant.  
  
(3) 
Institutional Strengthening 
comprising: 
(i) 
Local Government Capacity Building
 designed to strengthen their core 
administrative capacities in planning, budgeting, financial management, 
implementation and reporting.  PRIs (district, block and village) will be assigned 
Page  3
 
 
responsibilities in implementation consistent with their legal mandates.  Essential 
training will be provided to enable them to fulfill their assigned responsibilities. 
An incentive framework will be established to reward better performing local 
governments.  
(ii) 
Information, Education and Communication
 designed to implement a 
communications strategy that identifies specific audiences and develops targeted 
communications messages to increase general awareness about the project, terms 
of participation and overall transparency. A human resource development strategy 
will also be implemented under this subcomponent for project staff. 
(iii) 
Monitoring and Evaluation
 that links Management Information Systems, 
Geographic Information Systems and impact evaluation. 
(iv) 
Project Coordination and Management
 that will finance organization change 
management initiatives to realign the Watershed Directorate to the new 
implementation arrangements and the increased role of PRIs. It will also finance 
incremental operating costs.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project is located in the newly created State of Uttaranchal. The project is being developed 
as a state-wide project.  However, due to lack of sufficient staff to cover all districts 
simultaneously, physical parameters (e.g. erosion status, elevation, slope, etc.) will be used to 
prioritize project interventions. In addition, better performing PRIs will be selected within 
districts.  The project would cover 40% of the 116 sub-watersheds in the Uttaranchal Hills 
benefiting the populations of 9,200 villages/hamlets. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Improving institutional capacity at the watershed and sub-watershed levels is central to the 
design of this project.  Managing organizational change in the Watershed Directorate will also be 
important. There is some institutional confusion between roles and responsibilities of Van 
(Forest) Panchayats (VPs) and Gram (Village) Panchayats (GPs).  Strengthening local 
government capacity and re-aligning the Watersheds Directorate are key components of the 
project.     
 
The Bank involvement in the project would assist the Government of Uttaranchal in 
implementing the 2003 Guidelines for Hariyali (Greening) prepared by the Ministry of Rural 
Development, GOI.  These establish simplified procedures to enable PRIs to have a more 
meaningful role in planning, implementation and management of economic activities in rural 
areas.  PRIs have already been endowed with formal legal recognition and also a wide range of 
functions (e.g. land improvement, soil conservation, social and farm forestry, etc.).  These cover 
the entire range of operations that define a watershed management program.  Bank experiences 
from other States in India, as well as international experience in supporting administrative 
decentralization can assist GoUA in operationalizing the new guidelines and helping to evolve an 
effective methodology for fiscal and administrative decentralization of watershed management 
responsibilities to PRIs. 
 
Page  4
 
 
The proposed project will contribute to accelerating rural growth and pro-poor rural development 
through holistic development of rain-fed areas using a community driven and participatory 
watershed development approach, and strengthening local governments to improve service 
delivery, responsiveness and accountability. The project will also support (i) encouraging 
adoption of improved agriculture technologies and diversification to increase productivity and 
rural growth; (ii) adopting a watershed approach to sustainably manage natural resources; and, 
(iii) building the capacity of institutions for the poor through an emphasis on devolution and 
building local organizational capacity. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[x] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[x] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Since this project is scaling-up successful experiences from the current IWDP (Hills II) project, 
the category should also be a “B” category, as no adverse or irreversible impacts of project 
interventions are envisaged.  A comprehensive Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) was 
carried out for IWDP (Hills II) project.  Since this is a second watershed project in Uttaranchal, it 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
is proposed to review the implementation of the REA in the spirit of the community demand 
driven concept of the project.    
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
An update of the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) work
 
will be conducted at an 
overall level for the project as part of project preparation. The lessons learned from earlier work 
during the preparation and implementation of IWDP2 will be taken into account during project 
preparation. Requirements for additional data collection and analysis will be assessed during 
initial phase of preparation. Where necessary the ESA and associated specific safeguard 
documents  will be prepared in consultation with stakeholders and publicly disclosed prior to 
project appraisal. The resulting plans and frameworks would be used as may be necessary and 
reflected in the micro-watershed plans.  The positive and negative impacts will be identified and 
the Action Plan will provide alternatives for the design of the interventions and to mitigate the 
negative impacts and further enhance the positive impacts. 
 
Environmental Assessment
. An updated Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be 
prepared before project appraisal and integrated with the Environmental and Social Assessment. 
The EMP will provide tools for environmental and social screening of subprojects.   
 
Natural Habitats
. The EMP will identify opportunities to enhance expected environmental 
benefits and identify opportunities for financing biodiversity conservation initiatives and the 
identification of commercially-viable opportunities for medicinal plant production. It will also 
analyze the potential for impacts on, or conversion/degradation of, critical and other natural 
habitats from specific project investments and policies, and prepare a screening and mitigation 
mechanism. 
 
Forestry 
issues will be addressed early on to assess whether the safeguard policy is triggered or 
not. Notwithstanding the above, conservation and sustainable use approaches developed by the 
project will apply to all natural resources that are relevant from the stakeholder perspective. 
 
Pest Management. 
The ESA will evaluate current patterns of use and make recommendations 
where needed on introducing less toxic and less persistent alternatives and shifting to integrated 
pest management strategies. The EMP will incorporate conclusions and agreements in this 
regard. 
 
Cultural Property. 
The ESA will include guidelines and other procedures to document the 
characteristics and significance of cultural property through the sub-watershed planning process 
and propose measures to mitigate any likely impacts, including the treatment of chance finds. 
 
Page  6
 
 
Indigenous People. 
Proposals for dealing with migratory and transhumant populations were an 
integral part of IWDP Hills II and the results of efforts to ensure that they are recipients of 
benefits from project interventions will be assessed during preparation. An appropriate 
framework will be elaborated to deal with any potential restrictions of access.
 
Arrangements for 
dealing with tribal and nomadic/transhumant populations under IWDP Hills II will be reviewed. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement. 
The provisions made during IWDP Hills II, together with the results 
during implementation will be re-visited and updated where necessary during preparation
. 
Where 
land is to be acquired for road building this will be voluntary and appropriate memoranda of 
agreement will be drawn up. The experience of IWDP2 with this arrangement will be assessed
.
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The entire project is oriented to community driven watershed management.  Stakeholder 
Workshops will be held during project preparation and implementation.  Direct dialogue with 
different categories of stakeholder will be undertaken at the earliest stage of preparation to learn 
their views and objectives, to understand their assessment of the results of IWDP Hills II project 
in the State and to assist in aligning the different roles and responsibilities of VPs and GPs.  
Workshops will involve key project stakeholders in discussions of how to improve the design of 
the project.  During implementation project interventions at the micro-watershed level will be 
defined by the communities themselves through preparation of their micro plans. Special 
mechanisms will further enhance involvement of vulnerable sections of the local population in 
planning, implementing, and benefiting from project interventions. Prior to appraisal, any 
safeguard documents will be disclosed in Hindi and English. A key element of the project is to 
implement a communications strategy that identifies specific audiences and develops targeted  
communications messages to increase general awareness, participation and enhanced 
transparency. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
To be completed after PCN review meeting. 
 
It was agreed to proceed with the approach outlined above. Two Bank staff covering social and 
environmental issues will take part in the forthcoming Preparation Mission (September 15 to 
October 3, 2003). 
 
 
Minutes cleared by Constance Bernard, Sector Manager, SASRD, 09/04/2003. 
 
Cleared by: L. Panneer Selvam, SASED on 09/25/2003.
 
