Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC205 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 19, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P077192 
Project Name: Jharkhand Participatory 
Forest Management 
Task Team Leader: Peter Jipp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 4, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 40 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (75%); Sub-national 
government administration (15%); 
Agricultural marketing and trade (10%) 
Theme: Civic engagement, participation 
and community driven development (P); 
Rural policies and institutions (P); Other 
environment and natural resources 
management (P); Indigenous peoples (P); 
Gender (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: R. R. Mohan, M. Jansen 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
10 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The primary objective of this project is to improve the livelihoods of poor forest dependant 
communities by strengthening their access to and control over natural resources. The expected 
outcomes include 1) increased capacity of self-initiated community institutions to exercise their 
rights and responsibilities in forest management and decentralized planning; 2) improved 
coordination among service providers (state forest department, tribal institutions/local 
panchayats, NGOs, other line agencies); 3) acquisition by stakeholders of new roles, skills, and 
incentives to support, regulate, and monitor participatory forest management; 4) increased 
opportunities to access and market forest and non-forest products; and 5)  increasing returns 
(usufruct to communities and ecosystem services to society) from expanded forest resources over 
time.
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 This is a livelihood project, but livelihoods of the target population are primarily forest-based 
and therefore the central focus is forest asset management and associated policies and 
institutions. The project will use culturally appropriate, community-driven approaches and 
introduce community procurement methods. The team will explore opportunities to support 
Page  2
 
 
livelihoods of rural poor that come from sources outside forests and complement funds from 
other line agencies and donors operating in the project area. Investments will be tailored to 
individual community needs through a microplanning process and on the basis of a typology of 
groups (low capacity vs high capacity) and the condition of the forest (low productivity vs high 
productivity).  Level and type of investment in a particular community will depend on the initial 
community capacity and local forest productivity. Stakeholders, including several line agencies 
and tribal leaders, have been involved in the evolution of the government's JFM policy that this 
proposal intends to support. Project components will be defined during preparation but are 
expected to include: 
 
Institutional Development at the Community Level
: Local, self-initiated groups will be 
supported with targeted capacity building efforts in community-based planning, financial 
management, natural resources management, and marketing.  The project will support income 
generation activities, increased agricultural productivity  and improved access to micro-finance 
through inter-sectoral coordination, an expanded role for tribal institutions / local panchayats, 
and functional links to other rural livelihoods and poverty alleviation initiatives currently under 
implementation in Jharkhand (International Fund for Agricultural Development - IFAD, World 
Food Program - WFP, others). 
 
Enabling Environment
: 
Support for analytical work and policy dialogue that strengthens legal 
and policy frameworks for community forest management and disseminates information on 
community rights and responsibilities. Project related discussion on tenure and access will be 
carried out in accordance with circulars issued by the central government in 1990. To ensure that 
the State Forest Department and other agencies and actors are well equipped to support 
community forest management and fulfill their designated roles a number of new skills, 
incentives and procedures will be developed and piloted during project preparation.  
 
Asset Creation
: The project will support improvements in the productivity of forest resources 
through improved silviculture, planting stock, water management, rational grazing, and 
monitoring.  Preparation will explore inclusion of agroforestry/outgrower schemes on private 
land. The GEF and WWF Alliance could  support mainstreaming conservation and improved 
environmental management in the areas of project action. 
 
Detailed
 implementation arrangements
 will be developed during preparation. The state forest 
department (FD) is expected to focus on its areas of core accountability and comparative 
advantage – technical assistance in forest management and regulatory functions – to  ensure that 
they play a supportive role as communities develop forest management skills.  FD and 
communities will share responsibility for monitoring and evaluation, with social audits carried 
out periodically by a third party evaluator.  Other activities will be implemented directly by 
communities themselves or through other line agencies or NGOs. Consistent with recent 
experience in other Bank sponsored poverty alleviation projects in India, a multi-sectoral team 
will support the process of community-based planning. 
 
 
A discussion of 
alternative designs
 centered on the possibility of addressing forestry issues 
through a component in a broader watershed development or rural poverty reduction project. 
Given that community livelihoods in the target area are primarily forest-based, it was decided 
Page  3
 
 
that this project be directed largely toward improving forest policy implementation. Benefits of a 
broader rural development project will be achieved through effective incorporation in this project 
of lessons learned from ongoing rural livelihoods projects financed by the Bank and cooperation 
(parallel or co-finance) with similar programs financed by other donors (eg., IFAD’s ongoing 
Tribal Development Program). It was also decided that alternative implementation arrangements 
would be considered at pre-appraisal in light of experience with pilots undertaken during project 
preparation and the outcomes of the institutional assessment. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the state of Jharkhand. The specific project areas within the state are still 
to be determined, but are tentatively anticipated to involve about 3,200 communities in the 
management of about 600,000 ha of forest. Almost 16 m people are estimated to inhabit more 
than 10,000 villages situated in and around Jharkhand's forests and are dependent on these 
forests for their wood and energy requirements. A substantial section of this population also 
depends on wood based as well as non-wood resources from these forests for livelihood. Almost 
7 m people or about 27% of the population are classified by government as belonging to 
“scheduled tribes,” most of whom live in and depend upon forest areas. With a population of 
nearly 25 million, per capita forest area in the state is around 0.1 ha. Jharkhand’s total forest area 
comprises 2.3 m ha or approximately 3.6 % of India’s total forest cover, and almost 30% of 
Jharkhand’s total land area. Jharkhand is home to some of the best sal forests of the country. 
However, over the years, intense biotic pressure, neglect, and occasionally problematic 
regulatory measures have led to the degradation of large tracts of forests in the state. Recent 
surveys show that the closed, open, and scrub forests cover an area of 1.1, 1.0, and 0.16 m ha 
respectively. The project area will have protected areas such as sanctuaries and National Parks in 
its proximity but these protected areas are being excluded from the purview of the proposed 
project. While the project area is likely to include critical natural habitats and may also include 
culturally sensitive areas, the project itself would endeavor to enhance the protection to these 
habitats and sensitive areas with due understanding of their specific requirements and not affect 
them negatively. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Improving institutional capacity at the village level is central to the design of this project.  Many 
self-initiated local community institutions (on the order of hundreds or thousands) currently exist 
in Jharkhand.  These groups have the capacity and authority to take autonomous decisions 
regarding forest protection and marketing of some non-timber forest products. However, their 
ability to plan, manage and market timber resources, ecosystem services, and other forest 
products is limited.  To support local community forest management committees the Forest 
Department will need to adopt new procedures and develop new skills in communication and 
technical extension.  To ensure that community initiated forest management actions are 
consistent with existing policies and regulations at the state and national level the Forest 
Department will need to build additional capacity in data collection and analysis and  
information management.  
 
Page  4
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[x] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[x] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[x] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[x] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[x] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Social and Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
will be conducted at an overall level for the 
project as part of project preparation. In addition, data collection on an indicative sample basis 
representing different agro-climatic and socio-economic areas, and site-specific assessments and 
consultation will be carried out during preparation to assess any adverse impact on the local 
people or the environment due to the project. The SEA will provide input to prepare a framework 
and guidelines to plan and implement mitigation measures for sites involving potential adverse 
impacts due to the project. The monitoring and evaluation and other decision-support systems 
will include consideration of relevant social and environmental issues. The external monitoring 
agency will also include review of social and environmental issues to ensure compliance. The 
SEA and associated specific safeguard documents (the Environmental Management Plan, and the 
Pest Management Plan, the Tribal Development Plan, the Access Restriction Process 
Framework, and the Physical Displacement Policy Framework) will be prepared in consultation 
with stakeholders and publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal. The resulting plans and 
frameworks would be applied on a site-specific basis and be reflected in the micro-plans. 
 
Environmental Assessment
. During preparation the planned SEA will produce an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). This will focus on developing the guidelines for 
identifying and measuring conservation and sustainable use objectives, incorporating them into 
the micro-planning process, and maximizing the intended environmental benefits of the project 
as a whole. It will also provide information and describe processes for monitoring and evaluating 
environmental aspects of the project. The guidelines will encompass both timber and non-timber 
forest products, and environmental services. Separate objectives will be prepared for the distinct 
forest types covered by the project. The EMP will include a review of pesticide use in planting 
material production and recommend an action plan to improve pest management practices. It will 
also include a review of specific considerations related to the Natural Habitats OP 4.04. A draft 
of the SEA and EMP would be prepared early in the preparation period. To the extent feasible, 
key elements of the EMP would be piloted and any lessons learned incorporated into the final 
version of the SEA and EMP.  
 
Natural Habitats
. The EMP will identify opportunities to enhance expected environmental 
benefits of forest restoration efforts on natural habitats. It will also analyze the potential for 
impacts on, or conversion/degradation of, critical and other natural habitats from specific project 
investments and policies, and prepare a screening and mitigation mechanism. 
 
Forestry 
will be addressed by the project as whole. The project will develop and strengthen 
natural resource management and improve livelihoods of rural people through participatory 
forest management. Preparation will undertake identification of high conservation value forests 
in consonance with the revised OP. 
 
Page  6
 
 
Pest Management. 
The SEA will evaluate current patterns of use and make recommendations 
where needed on introducing less toxic and less persistent alternatives and shifting to integrated 
pest management strategies. The EMP will incorporate conclusions and agreements in this 
regard. 
 
Cultural Property. 
The SEA will include guidelines and other procedures to document the 
characteristics and significance of the of cultural property through the micro-planning process 
and propose measures to mitigate any likely impacts, including the treatment of chance finds. 
 
Indigenous People. 
The Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP), commonly referred to as 
a Tribal Development Plan in India, will include a discussion of the legal framework, baseline 
data, land tenure, strategy for local participation, technical identification of development or 
mitigation activities; institutional capacity; implementation schedule; monitoring and evaluation, 
and cost estimate and financing plan at an aggregate and generic level for the project as a whole, 
and describe how the micro-planning process will meet site-specific requirements. The task team 
considers the project itself to be an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement. 
Both an Access Restriction Process Framework (ARPF - consistent 
with a “process framework” described in paras 31 of the OP and paras 26-27 of Annex A), as 
well as a Physical Displacement Policy Framework (PDPF - consistent with a “resettlement 
policy framework” described in paras 26-27 of the OP and paras 23-25 of Annex A) to provide 
guidelines for micro-planning process of designing site specific mitigation measures and to plan 
necessary institutional arrangements for the implementation of the micro-plans. The ACPF 
commits the borrower to a participatory process that would involve affected communities in 
decision making during project planning and implementation, receipt of a share of project 
benefits, and associated monitoring. The design of the project subcomponent focused on 
vulnerable groups is likely to constitute the main element of the ACPF. The PDPF will describe 
policies affecting physical displacement, such as encroachment control. It will define the 
circumstances where a site-specific Resettlement Action Plan would be required. Guidelines for 
micro-planning will reflect the ARPF and PDPF clearly, distinguish between the two approaches 
in defining project affected people and eligibility criteria, and describe arrangements and 
mechanisms for mitigation. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The entire project is oriented to community driven forest management activities based on locally 
developed micro plans. Stakeholder Workshops will be held during project preparation and 
implementation. Direct dialogue with tribal leaders will be undertaken at the earliest stage of 
preparation to learn their views and objectives and to understand their positions on sensitive 
issues such as institutional arrangements, legal framework and others. Workshops will involve 
other key project stakeholders in discussion of how to improve the design of the project. During 
implementation project interventions at the village level will be defined by the communities 
themselves through preparation of their micro plans. Delegated decision making, facilitated 
inclusion of marginalized groups, provisions to exercise options, and implementation of micro 
plans by local committees themselves will help ensure their full and active participation. Special 
mechanisms (to be designed as part of the SEA) will further enhance involvement of vulnerable 
Page  7
 
 
sections of the local population in planning, implementing, and benefiting from project 
interventions. Prior to appraisal, the safeguard documents (the Tribal Development Plan, the 
Access Restriction Process Framework, and the Physical Displacement Policy Framework, the 
Environmental Management Plan, and the Pest Management Plan) associated with the SEA and 
the sample micro-plans (including Resettlement Action Plans to the extent required by the 
PDPF), together with a summary description of the overall project concept will be disclosed in 
Hindi and English. In addition, key elements will be disclosed through means which will 
facilitate understanding by the full range of stakeholders including illiterates, tribals not fluent in 
Hindi, and other vulnerable people.
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
Proposed direct consultation with tribal leaders was agreed. A proposal to have an upstream 
Quality Enhancement Review (followed by a late stage QER for quality assurance purposes) was 
also agreed. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
Upstream – November, 2003; 
Downstream – September, 2004 
 
