THE WORLD BANK GROUP
ln-foShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/27/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                   Project ID: P071250
Project: ANDHRA PRADESH URBAN REFORM &           Task Team Leader: Richard M. Beardmore
MUNICIPAL SERVICES PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 2, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: March 27, 2004                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: SASEI                              Sector: Other social services (50%); General water;
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sanitation and flood protection sector (50%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Poverty strategy; analysis and monitoring
(P); Access to urban services for the poor (P);
Administrative and civil service reform (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to support urban sector reforms and improve city management and
municipal services with a view to addresing urban poverty.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has two main components, one providing technical assistance and training to support state
and local level urban reforms and project implementation and a second devoted to urban investment in
the best performing urban local bodies in the state:
a) Techncial Assistance and Training: Financial resources for technical assistance and training
activities will be provided to both state and local governments for the design and implementation of
reform items on the urban agenda and to support project implementation including the following:
* design and implementation of computerized municipal budgeting and accounting systems
* reform of land planning systems, including repeal of Urban Land Ceiling Act and the Rent
Control Act
* preparation and implementation of capacity enhancement programs at state and local level
* implementation of APUDIDC's business plan
* implementation of the community planning process (MAPP) in up to 20 towns
* preparation of borrowing framework to govern muncicpal access to domestic credit markets
* provide project support for appraisal, procurement and supervision processes
b) Urban Investment: Financial resources for urban infrastructure investment as identified in MAPPs



2
ISDS
would be provided to each participating urban local body and associated low-income communities, after
achieving required eligibility criteria. Items of physical infrastructure eligible for funding would include:
*   area upgrading, including on-site water supply and on-plot sanitationb)
*   secondary and tertiary roads
*   storm water drainage
*   water supply and sewage disposal (under a program of reform for the sector, including
establishing an adequate tariff policy
*   sanitation
*   footpaths
*   solid waste management, including disposal
*   street lighting
*   parks/green spaces
*   serviced areas for informal and formal urban markets
* bus stops
*   off-site infrastructure linking slums to city networks, subject to adequate bulk supply capacity
where required
*   critical city-wide infrastructure.
Sequencing of Implementation Activities. The initial activities to be implemented under the project
would focus on the State and local reforms identified in the URIF agenda. Priority actions areas would
include the introduction of computerized accounting systems, property tax reform, reform of the Rent
Control Act, and expansion of the coverage of computerized registration processes through out the
State. The consultative planning process at the community level would proceed in parallel with the
initial reform process, leading to the identification and design of prioritized local infrastructure
investments for inclusion in the MAPP. Municipalities would also identify additional reforms and
critcial city-wide infrastructure investments to be included in the MAPP. Proposals for managerial
improvement would be assessed by the Directorate of Municipal Affairs. Infrastructure investment
proposals would be appraised by APUDIFC. Once satisfactory progress had been achieved on the
priority reform agenda at the State and local level, additional project funds would be provided to eligible
ULBs to support infrastructure investments approved within their respective MAPPs. A schematic
illustration of the MAPP process is given below.



3
ISDS
V\G1 identifies
r' Mniapal Reform   -
:  Establish                         proposals
.  Establish FAl   ~~~eligiibility based
.  MAPP Cornnittees_  on prious  *  WG2 prepares       lntegration of
MAPP CoMyn4APP                       Strategic Reviewv    mabonx(es) to      V\ proposals
perfmnor ance  af previous MAPP _ +   pnoritse all       by MRC
Perforrnanoe       notifiable poor
.             s r              +               ~~~~~~~~~~~ ~    ~    ~~~~~settlernents  
Stakeholder
meetings
/  Eligible? \  Prepare eligibility
.                              ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~statement for
Ml\1 prepares
.  MSU for                                                Sociad                  rnuruapal reform
. . . support                   to 3 Envirorimental &                             proposals
achievet                                                  Finanaal
eligibility                                               Assessment              Communmties and
N!Didpality prepare
envioriTeal
__________                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~infrastructure
[ Corfnwurication and |proposals
infornation strategy                                           P       ie.flt.
In lmplrentation  ll                       Approvals Jr        pria eot|            rbenietfcto
A   nReporting and  Reporting and        Endorseents                               Mcro planrirxn
I Wnitoring          n rrtaring system   M r* nicipal Coundl                             on arIfst
ReporIing and     S                      l v *  nP             Aprasa              Prepare on and cffte
|etailed design                                                proposals
Selection of Participating ULBs. All interested ULBs would be assisted to achieve improved financial
and managerial performance under the reform agenda outlined above. Only those ULBs which achieved
predetermined levels of performance measured against eligibility criteria would be permitted to
participate in urban infrastructure investment activities funded under the project. Eligibility criteria, to be
refined during project preparation, would include: a measure of the severity of urban poverty of the ULB,
a benchmarked collection level of property tax for both current demand and some proportion of arrears,
adoption of a financial operating plan (positive cash flow), a commitment to maintain an operating ratio
of less than I and a debt service ratio of less than 30%, including proposed investment, and satisfctory
implementation of the priority urban reforms .
Project Development and Advisory Facility. The project would includeS a Project Development and
Advisory Facility (PDAF) governed by an Empowered Committee. Specific guidelines on accessing the
PDAF would be developed and distinguished from the procedures required to access the urban
investment fund. The PDAF would provide finlancial support to ULBs to support project design,
supervision and management, possibly on a matching fund basis. In addition, it would finance consultant
services required to advise ULBs on Private Sector Participation. All ULBs in the state could access
funds from the PDAF, providing they demonstrate a commitment to implement core infrastructure
projects for which land is available and relevant approvals obtained from the Council. The proper



4
ISDS
institutional location of the fund would be determined during project preparation.
Components:
a State and local urban reform measures
b. Urban infrastructure investment
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be located in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh, and will be implemented in a
performance-based selection of urban (municipal) areas. Andhra Pradesh (AP), with a population of 76
million (Census 2001), is the fifth most populous state of India. Its urban population of around 21
million makes up around 27 percent of the total, with a majority of urban dwellers agglomerating in its
Class I towns (urban areas with more than 100,000 population). About 27% of the urban population of
AP is poor surviving on less than US$1 a day.
Several towns are located in tribal districts and even though AP is the eighth most urbanized state in
India, it has the second largest population of slum dwellers (5 million). By all accounts this is an
underestimate because it only includes those who live in what the Census of India (2001 ) categorized as
"notified" slums. It is therefore important to remember that official data on slums excludes large numbers
of the urban poor who live on private and/or disputed lands, or in what are called non-notified (or "not
recognized") slums, and those residing in marginal or environmentally sensitive areas. T The urban poor
exhibit the caste and socio-cultural variations seen elsewhere is India. The poor include concentrations of
schedules caste and tribes, other backward caste, some minorities and female headed households. Slum
populations include large number of immigrants, a male dominated sex ratio, and unemployed youth.
The state has three major river basins viz. Krishna, Godavari and Pennar and five minor ones draining
into the Bay of Bengal. The state on the eastern side has a coastline of 972 km. Based on the topography
the state is divided into three regions - coastal plains, peninsular plateau, and eastern ghats. As in most
urban areas in India, AP too has a large number of heritage structures of cultural / religious significance
in urban areas. There are around 137 protected monuments and sites spread over 18 districts of AP.
However, most of them are located away from urban agglomerations.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)



5
ISDS
Comments: The justification for Category A stems from the fact that a) the large number of sub-projects
envisaged in the investment component could lead to significant cumulative and induced impacts; and b)
some of the infrastructure sub-projects, such as those for disposal of municipal solid waste and sewage, may
be large in terms of their scale and investment needs, and hence may lead to significant though reversible
impacts.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes U No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            C Yes * No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                   G                     Yes * No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    S TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               * Yes i No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes C No    * TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes C No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 CYes *No      'TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         C Yes * No    J TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 C Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental
Given that the project would finance investment in urban basic services, most of the significant
environmental issues would relate to direct environmental impacts. Sensitivity to the environmental
issues will ensure that the investments are properly planned, sited, designed, constructed, and
operated and maintained. In addition, significant environmental issues could also arise over the
long-term due to cumulative / induced impacts of a large number of investments. Potential also
exists for the triggering of safeguards policy related to cultural property, which in the urban context
includes places of worship which are very common in urban areas. As for the reform component of
the project, significant indirect environmental impacts would need to be attended to ensure town
planning and land management, budgets for operation and maintenance of basic infrastructure, the
ability of the urban poor to pay for services, adequate capacity of the municipal bodies and CBOs to
prepare and implement subprojects, etc. All potential social and environmental impacts -- including
induced, cumulative and long-term impacts -- related to the various project components will be
identified and managed as per a Social and Environmental Assessment and Management (SEAM)
framework to be prepared by APUDIFC.
In addition, environmental issues pertaining to potential private sector participation in urban
infrastructure and environmental management - such as municipal solid waste disposal and sewage
treatment and disposal - would need to be examined. Sanitary landfills for disposal of municipal
solid waste and sewage treatment plants for treatment and disposal of sewage are large
environmental infrastructure investments, which if financed by the project, could lead to significant
permanent positive impacts on the environment, if these facilities are designed and operated



6
ISDS
properly.
Social
Important social issues in the project relate to exclusion of the urban poor and vulnerable (especially
women) from municipal services (i.e., their lack of or inadequate access to services and/or
information about them, or constraints in their ability to utilize services); low levels of social capital
due to lack of information, inadequate emphasis on the rights and responsibilities of citizens,
insecurity of assets, or unsafe environments; weak organization of the poor and other urban
residents, resulting in low access as well as inadequate voice and choice; insecurity of land tenure
and property rights (and other regulatory frameworks) that affect the quality of housing and living
environments, and employment/income-earning opportunities; possible adverse social and
economic consequences of land acquisition, upgradation (and consequent gentrification), and
clearance of encroachments/squatters to implement necessary infrastructure investments which
would trigger the safeguard policy on involuntary resettlement; possible adverse consequences for
tribal communities, including impacts on their culture and livelihoods which would trigger the
safeguard policy on indigenous people; and potential conflicts between diverse stakeholders and
interest groups. For example, there would be a need to ensure that 'slum landlords' and local elites
do not unduly influence investment plans to protect their own interests and priorities. [This section
needs to be strengthened]
II.D.l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The safeguard policy OP 4.01 on environmental assessment is may be applicable in conjunction
with OP/BP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement and possibly with OD 4.20 on indigenous people
particularly to the urban investment component. Involuntary resettlement may take place because
of land acquisition (if any), for investment in priority urban infrastructure. The indigenous
peoples OD could be particularly relevant in towns located in tribal districts, depending on the
findings of the Social Assessment.
Potential cumulative impacts could arise from clustering of multiple investment components in an
area or municipality. For example, connecting a large number of slums to the citywide
infrastructure without increasing the capacity of the citywide infrastructure could lead to the
cumulative impact of excessive load on citywide infrastructure.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The economic analysis of the project components will be carried out in close coordination with the
social and environmental assessment, particularly with regards to analysis of alternatives,
assessment of baseline social and environmental conditions, coping costs, affordability and
willingness to pay. Guidelines for analysis of alternatives technical options will be prepared as
part of the Social and Environmental Assessment and Management (SEAM) Framework. A
system would be designed to screen project alternatives for their economic viability, level of
priority, cost-effectiveness, and other social and environmental criteria. Local governments
would be trained in selection of projects based on analysis of alternatives and other criteria.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As part of the SEAM framework, the consultants engaged by APUDIFC would prepare an urban
resettlement and rehabilitation policy (URRP) in accordance with the Bank's OD 4.30 and OD 4.20,



7
ISDS
as well as an urban environmental management policy (UEMP) in accordance with the Bank's OP
4.01 (inclusive of OP 4.09, and OPN 11.03), both of which will be part of the SEAM framework
report to be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance prior to Appraisal and disseminated in
accordance with the Bank's Disclosure of Information Policy.
The URRP will cover at least the following aspects:
*   the process of land acquisition including payment of compensation;
*   a definition of displaced/project affected persons including squatters, encroachers and
vulnerable groups such as female-headed households, the destitute, aged and physically
challenged, and their categorization;
*   an entitlement framework for each category;
*   a strategy for resettlement and restoration of livelihoods (where required), including involvement
of NGOs and other civil society organizations;
*   a strategy for capacity building of ULBs, other Government departments/ organizations, NGOs
and other civil society organizations, and the community of displaced and project affected
persons; and
*   institutional arrangements for participatory planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of Rehabilitation Action Plans (RAPs), and grievance redressal.
As part of the URRP, the consultants/APUDIFC would also prepare generic guidelines, including
methodology and Terms of Reference for conducting 100% socio-economic surveys and preparation
of RAPs by ULBs and other government departments/organizations that are responsible for various
components of the MAPP.
The UEMP will cover at least the following aspects:
*   the overall outcomes that the UEMP is aiming for, such as reducing environmental health risks
(by focussing on municipal solid waste collection and disposal), reducing vulnerability of the
poor to environmental events (such as floods), and increasing security of livelihoods (by
safeguarding space for the unorganized commercial / service sector)
*   the process of mainstreaming environmental considerations in urban policies and planning
exercises and associated guidelines.
* the process of applying environmental screening and assessment of investment projects and
associated guidelines
*   the a strategy for capacity building of ULBs, other Govemment departments/ organizations,
NGOs and other civil society organizations in urban environmental management, and
*   institutional arrangements for participatory planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of urban environmental management plans / initiatives
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project are urban residents and municipal and state officials.
Important groups within the urban population include slum dwellers, women, tribal people, working
children, families potentially affected by land acquisition, NGOs, CBOs and other civil society
organizations. They will first participate in the project through the preparation of the SEAM (described
in section 5.2 above), and then through the MAPP (Municipal Action Plan for Poverty Reduction)
process. Extensive consultations are envisaged as part of the social and environmental assessment. The



8
ISDS
consultants engaged to carry out the work (along with the APUDIFC) would consult potential
project-affected groups, local CBOs and NGOs, and municipal and state officials about the project's
social and environmental aspects and take their views into account in designing the management
framework. The consultative and participatory processes would continue throughout the project as
appropriate. The MAPP process involves government agencies, NGOs and others with a stake in urban
and environmental management. The consultations offer the means to identify and address related social
and environmental problems across sectors, and to mainstream social and environmental objectives and
standards in the activities of the agencies involved. The process provides an opportunity to integrate
social and environmental planning with city development plans.
The preparation of Municipal Action Plans for Poverty Reduction (MAPPs), which facilitate the
preparation of Capital Investment Plans, is a participatory process with an output (the MAPP document
or Action Plan) that in turn specifies further participation. A number of CBOs and NGOs would be
involved in the MAPP process, e.g., helping to identifying issues requiring attention, along with
representatives of the Community Development Societies, formulating strategies and proposals,
micro-planning, initiating implementation, etc. Thus, key stakeholders will participate in all aspects of
the project and sub-projects - policy-making, planning, implementation and post-implementation.
Further, the APUDIFC will engage a consultant to prepare a Communications Strategy that would ensure
a two way flow of information on critical aspects of the project to all project stakeholders, including
important external ones.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            12/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12/31/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  12/31/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            12/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12/31/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            12/31/2003



9
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/31/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Richard M. Beardmore
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Meera Chatterjee (Social)
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Sameer Akbar (Environment)
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  I. U. B. Reddy/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                        01/07/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Sonia Hammam                                02/27/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
__E__           E1 A          SE MAP ,- -    -.  *CASE  -
____     I FEEDDAC~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- 4   -----_  -- _



