23466
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
I-lnfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/05/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                  Project ID: P071272
Project: Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project Task Team Leader: Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 3, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: January 30, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 184.61
Managing Unit: SASRD                            Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (50%); Sub-national government
Status: Lending                                 administration (30%); Other social services (20%)
Theme: Poverty strategy; analysis and monitoring
(P); Other rural development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objectivis to enable the rural poor in Andhra Pradesh (AP). and
particularly the poorest of the poor*. improve their livelihoods and qualitv of life.
The proposed project goes beyond the Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project
(APDPIP) (Cr.3332) and includes: (i) expansion of the geographical coverage from six districts to the
entire state; (ii) a sharper focus on the poorer and more vulnerable members (e.g. disabled people) of
rural communities; (iii) greater convergence of health, education, nutrition, natural resource management
and anti-poverty programs; (iv) emphasis on livelihood issues of the poor with a focus on sustainable
rainfed farming systems and non-farm employment opportunities; (v) adoption of social risk management
instruments to reduce risks faced by the poor; and (vi) inclusion of other stakeholders especially local
governments, private sector and civil society, in the implementation of the program.
The proposed project is the first in a series which would support Government of Andhra Pradesh's
(GoAP) long-term rural poverty reduction program whose aim is to eradicate poverty; promote human
capital development; focus on the welfare of children - particularly girls, women, the old and infirm; and
build an equitable society in which people participate in making decisions which affect their lives and
livelihoods.
* The definition of the poorest of the poor' is provided in section C3. The GoAP's overall
medium-term rural poverty program focuses on all poor.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project builds on the foundations and lessons of APDPIP and the Livelihood



2
ISDS
Assessment study and Sustainable Livelihoods Management Framework developed during preparation.
The proposed project explicitly targets poor and vulnerable members of rural communities. There are six
project components described briefly below:
Component I Institution and Human Capital DevelopmenThis component provides technical
assistance primarily for the following activities: (i) strengthening and building self managed institutions
of the poor - self help groups, federated groups at the village and mandal (block) levels; (ii) building the
capacity of line departments and local governments to focus on the needs of the poor. This would
include ensuring that the program and processes of line departments help empower the poorest of the
poor through joint planning, monitoring, training, and implementation. (iii) convergence of programs of
the Education, Health and Nutrition Departments. This would include: (a) making communities aware of
the need for better education, health seeking behavior, and nutrition security especially for young
children; (b) improving access to basic health and education services; and (c) providing safety nets
during catastrophic illness (pilot insurance programs); and (d) for delivery of preventive services
(immunization, AN Care), SERP and the line departments would train young girls selected by the
communities as ANMs; and (iv) building private sector partnerships. The proposed project would assist
CBOs pursue attractive livelihood opportunities by procuring technical assistance from the private sector.
Component II Community Investment Fund (CIJ) The CIF is designed to transfer financial and
technical resources to CBOs and PRIs to support subprojects in seven main areas: (i) social development,
(ii) early childhood development; (iii) disability interventions which would include livelihood options for
the disabled and their caregivers; (iv) productive physical infrastructure, (v) income-generation and
livelihood improvements; (vi) sustainable rain-fed farming systems, and (vii) land leases and purchases.
Process to prepare, appraise, and implement the CIF proposals would be similar to the experiences under
APDPIP programs and are detailed in Annex 2.
Component III Support to Pilot ProgramsThere are two main pilots envisaged, namely  (a)
Strengthening the role of PRIs and (b) Social Risk Management and Health. The first pilot is designed to
strengthen the capacity of PRIs to respond to the needs of the rural poor. The project will implement two
pilots in six mandals in each of 3 districts that will test two approaches to building PRI capacity -- with
one pilot model more prescriptive than the other. The pilots will include measures to ensure downward
accountability of PRls including measures to significantly improve the participation and transparency in
GP and MP decision-making. Intensive capacity support will be provided to all key stakeholders on
rights, opportunities, roles and responsibilities, and participatory processes. Progress and results will be
carefully monitored. Outcomes will be reviewed at mid-term to learn lessons and scale-up successful
aspects of the pilots.
The pilot programs in social risk management and social protection will test different models of
insurance schemes. The poor are most vulnerable to downslide risks. Though the increased thrift and
credit activities have enhanced their access to economic resources and increased their income levels, the
lack of viable alternatives to risk management has affected the sustainability of their precarious
livelihoods. A major factor in risk management is the size of the "risk pool." A major problem facing
poor households is the limited number and resources available in the risk pool. In such cases, formal
insurance arrangements, supported by a wider risk pool are required. The SHGs and the Mandal
Samakhya's (federations of VOs) are in a unique position to play the role of insurance intermediation.
There will be investments in key pilot programs prior to scaling up, which would include pilot insurance
schemes in life and health insurance. Social safety nets for vulnerable women, girl child protection, and
management of an Emergency Social Fund would also be implemented.



3
ISDS
Component IV: Support.to Reduce Child Labor The approach has been tested under the APDPIP and
involves ensuring that children that work move into regular schools. Communities would be mobilized to
send their children to school, and for those that need bridge camps would be established to prepare them
for formal schools. To retain girl children in formal schools, sixty-four residential schools will be
constructed in the most needy areas.
Component V: Support to Disabled Persons This component will provide for a targeted approach to
meet the special needs of the people with disabilities, estimated to be around 1.5 million in the state. To
ensure mainstreaming disabled persons, the long term objective to empower people with disabilities
within their communities and with service providers. This will require social mobilization and building
people's institutions focused on the needs of disabled persons. Additionally, livelihood opportunities
would be provided for them through the CIF, Community interventions such as community based
rehabilitation (CBR) Centers will be constructed. While training and facilitation of CBR principles and
techniques will be undertaken across the 500 mandals, more intensive project support will be provided
for upto 100 selected mandals, based on the demand generated by communities. In addition the project
would promote convergence of interventions in the health and educations sectors to support disability
prevention and ensure inclusive education for the disabled.
Component VIProject manageme?r     This component would support activities of the main
implementing agency SERP. Activities would include provision of key functional staff at the State
Project Management Unit (SPMU), District Project Management Unit (DPMU), contracting third party
monitoring and evaluation agency, environmental management training, and special studies.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
APRPRP will cover 500 selected mandals in 16 revenue districts of Andhra Pradesh. As the
proposed project would extend the coverage of CIF activities under AP DPIP to all districts of
Andhra Pradesh, all environmentally and socially sensitive areas are of concern. Andhra
Pradesh has 20 wildlife sanctuaries and four national parks. Subproject screening and
mitigation guidelines included in the Environmental Management Framework are designed to
protect sanctuary ecosystems, and to ensure that no subprojects are undertaken within national
parks.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The proposed project will support multiple small investments which cannot be defined in detail
during project preparation. The potential adverse environmental impacts of these subprojects are
site-specific, reversible, and can be mitigated through application of the Environmental Management
Framework.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       G Yes * No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No



4
ISDS
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes C No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                * Yes C No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           in Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         CD Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Indigenous People - Scheduled Tribe (STs):
The STs constitute the poorest and the most vulnerable social groups and constitute 6.4% (3.05 million)
of the total population in the project districts. Five of the 16 project districts namely Vishakapatnam,
East Godavari, West Godavari, Khammam, and Warangal, house a significant proportion of tribal
population.
Various constitutional safeguards, policy regulations and a number of development programs have
improved the socio-economic status of tribals but as compared to others, they continue to remain
disadvantaged and poor. A Tribal Development Plan as envisaged under OD 4.20 has been prepared
which aims at building strong self reliant and self managing institutions of tribals, and through these
institutions enable the tribals to access economic and social opportunities to overcome poverty and raise
their living standards. The TDP incorporates strategies identified by tribals during consultations for
dealing with issues including food insecurity during lean seasons, low Productivity of lands, high
incidence of landlessness especially in plain areas, depletion of NTFP, and lack of awareness on
processing and marketing of NTFP.
In the Tribal Mandals the Integrated Tribal Development Agency (ITDA) offers single line
administration with all departments converging at the district level and at the village/habitation level,
ITDA works through the Village Tribal Development Agency (VTDA). Accordingly, in tribal mandals
the project activities would be implemented in collaboration with the ITDAsNTD and the TDP
envisages dovetailing of all developmental programs. Wherever necessary, the project may finance
additional contract staff or services of NGOs to support ITDA in implementing the project in tribal
mandals. Duplication will be avoided in other similar community-based poverty eradication
projects/programs namely Participatory Tribal Development Project, Sustainable Tribal Empowerment
Project and Community Forestry Management Projectln general, the operational procedures to be
followed would be similar to those in non-tribal areas emphasizing demand-driven participatory
approaches to identification and inmplementation of activities.The M&E agency to be engaged
for the project would also monitor the project in the tribal areas to enable introduction of corrective
measures based on lessons from implementation experience.
Land Acquisition requirement under the project:
Two major areas involving land acquisition are:
Residential Schools. 64 Residential Schools are to be established by APSWREIS under the Girl's



5
ISDS
Education Component. Currently the project has already identified land for 41 schools that are either
government lands or have been donated by philanthropists. Relevant documentation is available
reflecting voluntariness of the donation. The Implementing Agency is ensuring that both the site
identification and finalization processes are open and transparent based on wide-consultations with the
involvement of all stakeholders, especially the poorest of the poor and poor who are the focus of the
project. This process was adopted under the APDPIP where 24 sites were selected and none of these
required any compensation to be paid. Similar process will be followed for the remaining sites as well.
Community Infrastructure: The demand for these is expected under the CIF component. The
experience from APDPIP has shown that such land has been voluntarily donated by either the Gram
Panchayat or even individuals, evidenced in the agreements signed with the Common Interest Group.
The voluntariness of land contributions are being documented based on criteria of (i) open and
transparent consultations and decision-making; (ii) the possibility for people to say "no"; and (iii) that
there is no coercion of poor or vulnerable groups. RPRP will also adopt similar procedures and any
Sub-projects wherein Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30) is likely to be triggered would be disallowed.
A standard compensation as purchase between willing buyer/willing seller, where the gram panchayat or
a similar decentralized body agrees on standard purchase prices, would be provided as an option in the
sub-project guidelines.
Environmental Assessment:
Under the CIF, sub-projects such as income generating activities, physical infrastructure, social
development and watershed interventions are to be funded. In order to determine the impacts
and the mitigation measures that will be required, an environmental assessment was undertaken.
In most cases, these sub-projects will not lead to environmental impacts of any significance. As
the activities to be supported by the CIF cannot be precisely defined ahead of time, an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been developed as an output of the
environmental assessment. The implementation experience under APDPIP has been reviewed
and the findings have been used to refine the EMF for APRPRP. Based on this experience,
particular consideration has been given to the issue of access to grazing and fodder for livestock
sub-projects. The EA report provides a timetable for the development of a Government Order
permitting the allotment of Government-owned wasteland to organized groups of the poor for
the purpose of pasture development, fodder cultivation and regulated grazing. Given the
emphasis of APRPRP on better natural resource and micro-watershed management, pest
management is relevant for some sub-projects. A separate Pest Management Plan (PMP) has
been prepared and integrated into the EMF, which stipulates that support will not be provided to
sub-projects entailing the use of WHO Class I or II pesticides. Although unlikely, there may be
a few sub-projects that have to be considered in the context of their implications on natural
habitats, cultural property, forestry and dam safety. Provisions have been made in the EMF to
ensure that these are addressed.
On the construction of residential schools, a preliminary environmental screening of proposed
64 sites is being carried out and the final decision of the locations will be made using the outputs
of the screening. Subsequently, prior to awarding the contract for construction, an environmental
assessment for each site will be conducted, based on guidelines included in the EA Report. All
the environmental impacts are expected to be minor and standard mitigation measures are
available. A site-specific EMP containing these mitigation measures will be prepared. This



6
ISDS
EMP will form a part of the contractor's bid documents.
II.D. l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Although the project will support multiple small investments, it will not be possible to distinguish
cumulative impacts attributable to the project from the effects of other unrelated local development
activities.  Instead, to ensure that sub-project selection and design takes into account local
environmental conditions, the Environment Agency to be appointed under the project will track
environmental concerns, and will refine and update sub-project screening and mitigation guidelines
as necessary.
II.D. l c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The community-driven development approach will ensure that alternatives will be considered as part
of the process of sub-project selection and design. Procedures for documenting alternatives are
specified in the Environmental Management Framework.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Policy            Compliance Measures and Comments
Environmental   Based on the Environmental Management Framework, CIF subprojects will be screened to
Assessment (OP determine an appropriate level of environmental assessment.  Screening includes
4.01, BP 4.01,  verification against a negative list designed to ensure compliance with all safeguard
GP 4.01)        policies. Following environmental assessment, measures to control environmental risks
and enhance benefits will be built into subproject design.  Separate environmental
assessments will be conducted for each residential school to be constructed under the
project, leading to environmental management plans which will form part of construction
contracts.
Pest Management A Pest Management Plan has been developed and incorporated into the Environmental
(OP 4.09)        Management Framework. No subprojects using banned pesticides or agrochemicals in
WHO classes IA, IB and II will be supported. Crop related subprojects will incorporate
Integrated Pest Management approaches, for which technical capacity will be established
in project districts through training of trainers.
Indigenous       As the Tribal population constitute the poorest and the most vulnerable social groups in
Peoples (OD 4.20) Andhra Pradesh, and the scheduled areas and tribal sub-plan areas a fall under the project
districts, a Tribal Development Plan has been prepared as an integral part of the Project in
accordance with the OD 4.20 on Indigenous People. The TDP was based on secondary
data, field work and consultations. The TDP envisages dovetailing of all developmental
programs and establishing linkages with similar community based poverty eradication
projects/programs namely Participatory Tribal Development Project, Sustainable Tribal
Empowerment Project and the Community Forestry Management Project, with the ITDA
playing the coordinating role.
Involuntary      The project does not envisage any physical displacement. Land requirements under the
Resettlement (OD project would be voluntary donations. Construction of roads and other community
4.30)            infrastructure under the CIF component is to be met from voluntary donations by either the
Gram Panchayat or even individuals, evidenced in the agreements signed with the
Common Interest Group. Any Sub-projects wherein Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30) is



7
ISDS
likely to be triggered would be disallowed. Identification and finalization processes for
obtaining land for residential schools is being done through an open and transparent
process based on wide-consultations with the involvement of all stakeholders, especially
the poorest of the poor and poor who are the focus of the project.
Safety of Dams  No sub-project involving a dam, existing or new, 10 or more meters high, will be
(OP 4.37, BP     supported. To ensure the safety of dams less than 10 meters high forming an integral part
4.37)            of a sub-project, an Operational Manual for small dams has been developed and
incorporated into the Environmental Management Framework.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A combined Social and Environmental Assessment under the Sustainable Livelihoods Management
Framework (SLMF) was carried out and included individual and group interviews, key informant
discussions, stakeholder workshops at state, district and village levels. Consultations were held during
project identification with a broad cross-section of poor communities including women, disabled, tribals,
elected representatives, a number of apex NGOs and intermediary NGOs operating in the state,
Government officials including line agencies, academics and independent researchers. The Tribal
Development Plan (TDP), the Gender Strategy and the Disabled People's Strategy emerged out of
consultations.
Tribal Development Plan: Prior to the consultations, a summary of the draft TDP was translated into the
local language and communicated to the District Collectors, Zilla Panchayat and the Integrated Tribal
Development Agencies so that they would facilitate the further dissemination of the TDP. The summary
was also displayed in the offices of Collectorate, Zilla Parishads, ITDAs, Block Development Offices,
Gram Panchayats and/or communicated to other public among the key tribal stake holders, NGOs,
officials and non-officials to facilitate fruitful discussions during consultation process. Notifications were
also issued in Telugu and English, in the state edition of daily news papers highlighting the main contents
of TDP and inviting the views and suggestions of stakeholders, NGOs, etc. for making necessary
modifications in TDP. Consultations were held with tribals in 19 selected villages of three districts,
representing the three distinct regions of the State viz. Visakhapatnam district in Coastal Andhra region,
Khammam district in Telangana region and Kurnool district in Rayalaseema region. Besides this,
workshops were organized with Tribal leaders, NGOs working in the tribal areas, Government officials
and elected representatives at the respective ITDA offices to invite their views and suggestions on Tribal
Development Plan. A State level meeting was also conducted with NGOs at the office of the SERP. The
feedback and suggestions received were documented and incorporated into the TDP before finalization.
Environmental Assessment Framework In relation to the CIF component, a draft EA report
(including the EMF) and PMP were prepared. Public consultations on these draft documents
were held in 24 mandals in three project districts during the project preparation phase. Villagers
- both men and women - participated in these consultations and the salient points of the EMF
and PMP were explained to them.      In addition, district-level consultations at the district
headquarters - Warangal, Ongole (Prakasham) and Kurnool - were conducted, and one
State-level consultation was also carried out. During project implementation, consultations with
the villagers will necessarily be conducted as the sub-projects are to be developed using a
community demand-driven approach. The community coordinators will be using the EMF tools
to interact with the community on environmental issues during sub-project development.



8
ISDS
In the school construction component, stakeholder consultations will form a part of the
environmental assessment process to be undertaken during project implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to. address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               2/15/2002      7/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           3/15/2002     9/11/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            3/15/2002     9/24/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               2/15/2002      7/29/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           3/15/2002      9/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            3/15/2002      9/25/2002
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/15/2002     7/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           3/15/2002      9/11/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            3/15/2002      9/24/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                7/30/2002     7/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/24/2002
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex               September 26, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Varalakshmi Vemuru                   September 20, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Paul Martin                           September 26,



9
ISDS
2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                           Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Warren Waters                               September 30,
2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Constance A. Bernard                          September 30,
2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEcN           -FEEW^CK     -   FT E MAP    I [      E



