Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: AC464 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 7, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P078210 
Project Name: Tamil Nadu Rural Water 
Supply and Sanita 
Task Team Leader: Ghanasham V. 
Abhyankar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD: 150 
Estimated Board Date: October 5, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Water Supply and Sanitation 
(100%) 
Theme: Rural Services and infrastructure 
(P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sanjay Srivastava, Suryanarayan Satish 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Government of India  
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Communities 
($m.) 
 
125 
300 
50 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The project’s main objectives are  : 
• 
increasing rural communities' access to improved and sustainable Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation (RWSS) services, and  
• 
to scale up decentralization of RWSS service responsibility to local governments-- 
statewide.   
 
The proposed program will build on the success of the DANIDA and GoI assisted sector reform pilot 
projects in Tamil Nadu.  The project will also have spin-off benefits of improved health and environment 
for the rural population, empowerment of women and disadvantaged sections of the communities.  
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
Page  2
 
 
The proposed operation would part finance GoTN’s 5-year medium term RWSS improvement program 
(along with GoI).  GoTN has tentatively identified two main components for inclusion in the Medium 
Term RWSS Program.  These are:   
 
(a) Investment subprojects
 including local capacity building, construction/upgradation of RWSS 
schemes; and 
 
(b)  TA for institutional development 
 including program management,  monitoring and evaluation 
systems, strengthening of sector agencies, and  future sector planning.  
 
The investment subprojects will have two categories of investment, one involving simple technologies 
(small water systems, ground water recharge schemes and sanitation schemes) and the other involving 
complex multi-village water supply schemes to address the issues of water scarcity and unacceptable 
water quality (mainly salinity and fluoride).
   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Rural areas of Tamil Nadu state of India. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
This would be the first attempt in India to scale-up the reform approach to the state’s entire RWSS 
program.  Although there is now significant experience with demand responsive and decentralized service 
delivery approach in various states, this marks a significant deviation because of the scale.  The project 
will especially draw from the experiences of the World Bank assisted pilot projects implemented over the 
past six years (UP, Uttaranchal, Kerala, Karnataka I, II), and DANIDA and GoI assisted Sector Reform 
Projects in Tamil Nadu.  The project will design robust capacity support vehicles as well as implement the 
program in annual batches to learn and strengthen implementation mechanisms for addressing the social 
and environmental issues.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[* ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
The EA will identify the environmental issues related to the project and recommend 
appropriate measures to address these.  The SWAp also provides an opportunity for 
reviewing rural drinking water and sanitation sector related policies and institutions and 
recommending appropriate environmental policies/institutions for addressing the 
environmental concerns in this sector.  
T
yp
icall
y,
 the rural water sector related environmental issues currentl
y
 existin
g
 in Tamil 
Page  3
 
 
Nadu are: (i)
 
Water Quantity Issues -
 declining groundwater tables and drying up of 
drinking water sources (especially in the summer months) due to high abstraction from 
groundwater sources and unmatched recharging of aquifers; over-exploitation of 
groundwater resources impacting drinking water supply sources; (ii) Water Quality 
Issues
 - fluorides, brackishness, nitrates in drinking water sources; point and non-point 
sources of pollution of drinking water sources, including contamination from agricultural 
and surface runoffs; industrial effluents, etc.; inadequate monitoring of drinking water 
quality; inadequate and irregular disinfection/chlorination of drinking water supplies; and 
washing/bathing and other domestic activities around the sources of water supply and 
water points; and (iii) Household and Environmental Sanitation Issues
 - personal 
hygiene, health, household environment and sanitation issues; extremely low coverage of 
the state household latrine program; improper and indiscriminate disposal of household 
solid waste, garbage etc;  internal village roads without proper formations or pavements; 
inadequate/non-functional sullage and storm water drains.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
[ X] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)    
 
Identification of IPs:
  Discussions made during the identification mission has brought to 
the fore that the Government of Tamil Nadu accords special attention to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Denotified Communities.  Separate habitations inhabited 
by these three groups will come under the purview of the OD 4.20 .   
 
Scheduled Castes
: There are 10.71 million persons belonging to Scheduled Castes (who 
are called Adi Dravidars) who constitute 19% of the state’s total population.  Reportedly, 
there are about 30,000 Adi Dravidar habitations, distinctly different from that of the main 
village/habitation.  This apart, there are 23 denotified groups (with a population of about 
1.64 million) who (1980 onwards) are declared as an integral part of the Backward 
Classes list and consequently, the term Backward Classes includes denotified 
communities. 
 
Scheduled Tribes
: There are 36 ST communities in the state with a population of 0.574 
million (1.03%) living in 1,441 habitations (2% of the total) and are concentrated in 13 
districts.  Major tribal groups in the project districts are  Palliyan, Kanikkar, and 
Kuurichchan.  
 
O D 4.20 Application
:  While the  project interventions will not affect adversely the ST/ 
SCs, these groups do require special attention from the view point of ensuring inclusion 
and equity.  Discussions with the Department of Anthropology, University of Madras 
reveal that the tribal (Palliyan) habitations in Kodaikanal Hills of Dindigul do warrant 
triggering of the Bank’s policy on Indigenous Peoples, outlined in Operational Directive 
4.20.  Similar would be the case in respect of tribal groups in Trichy and Thanjavur.  The 
Department of SC/ST, Government of Tamil Nadu, however, maintains that special 
attention needs to be paid not only to STs but also to SC habitations.  This essentially 
would mean, thou
g
h OD 4.20 is a
pp
licable in the case of STs, the  
p
ro
j
ect needs to desi
g
n 
Page  4
 
 
a separate component to address both STs and SCs. 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [* ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
OP/BP 4.01: A Sector Environmental Analysis (SEA) will be carried out to assess the safeguard issues 
and prepare an Environment Management Plan and Performance Indicators, according to the Bank 
guidelines (OP/ BP/GP 4.01).  RWSS is expected to bring about positive health and environmental 
benefits by supplying ‘safe’ drinking water from sustainable sources, and creating sanitary conditions in 
villages.  However, if the projects are not designed/implemented properly, they could result in some 
adverse impacts and for this reason an environmental management plan will be prepared and 
implemented.     
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
OP 4.11
 is not triggered because project will not damage (both replicable and non-replicable) cultural 
property.  In the unlikely event of some non-replicable cultural property cropping up in between, due 
procedures, including the authority to handle funds required for the purpose, will be drafted.  
 
OP 4.12 – Involuntary Resettlement
  OP 4.12 is not triggered because project need not acquire lands 
involuntarily.  Land availability will be through either alienation or gift/purchases. To this effect, the 
Program will develop specific rules, as detailed below: 
 
1. 
Program’s water supply facilities broadly include: hand pumps, mini power pumps, 
individual power pumps (IPP) (serving a single Village Panchayat/Habitation)  and 
Combined Water Supply Schemes (CWSS), meant to serve many habitations/VPs.  Land 
requirement arises both in IPP and CWSS. 
 
2. 
In IPPs, land requirement arises for two purposes: (i) for water source (deep borewells in 
most cases); (ii) for the construction of  ground level or overhead tanks or cisterns.  Water 
transmission and distribution pipelines as well as sullage/storm water drains are laid in public 
land or along public streets and no land is required.  In a few cases pipelines  may have to 
pass through private agriculture fields.  Since the pipeline are laid  at least 90coms below 
ground  elevation, no lands are needed, but  permission from the land owner is taken.  If such 
permission is not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used, even if it is  more 
expensive to do so. 
 
3. 
When plots of lands are required for project installations,  their ownership could be  either 
public or private.  While it is easier to access public land, arrangements will have to be made 
for securing privately owned land.  The prevailing normal practice in the state is obtain such 
land plots either through voluntary donation or by outright purchase.  The discussions with 
the communities and experts as well as the  experiences from the previous projects reveal 
that, (i) almost all villages do have an existing water supply system and the project 
intervention will be restricted to improving/rehabilitating/augmenting the existing supplies 
which would mean land requirement will be  limited; (ii) most villages do have sufficient 
public/Panchayat lands; and (iii) in case it becomes inevitable, the local community will 
secure lands either through voluntary donations or outright purchase. 
 
4. 
In case of CWSS (in particular, surface water based schemes), whether single village or multi 
village, land  requirement arises for three additional purposes: (i)  intake structures, (ii) 
intermediate balancing reservoirs and (iii) water treatment plants.  Normally, public lands are 
available and selected to house storage and treatment facilities as well as for  water treatment 
plants infrastructure.  In some cases land may have to be transferred from one government 
department to the GPs.  In case of private land  availability, the same procedure as above will 
be followed.
 
 
5. 
An example of the case of Vellore District, where GoTN is implementing, GoI's Sector 
Reform Project for the last 3 years is provided to corroborate the above.  A total of 2,900 
schemes have been planned, constructed and operated by Village Panchayats and local 
communities.  Of this, 512 IPPs required lands; 509 were public lands; and only in 3 cases, 
lands were gifted.  In each case, maximum land required was about 65 sq mtr -- 4 sqm for 
water source; 9 sqm for pumping house; and 49 sqm for over head tanks.  Thus, IPPs pose no 
problem on land availability. 
 
6. 
For CWSS, again, while land availability is met mostly through public/Panchayat lands, some 
purchases are also made.  However, in  the last 3 years, only 126 CWSS have been 
Page  6
 
 
constructed in Tamil Nadu.  And, it is likely that  the number of CWSS are likely to go up 
under the Bank assisted S-SWAP (Program).  Hence, the following stipulations will be made, 
to ensure that lands need not be acquired:  
 
• 
 
number of habitations covered by a single scheme will not normally be more than 50-70 
viz., this would mean it will cover about 5- 7 Village Panchayats;  
 
• 
schemes will be to a large extent rural, as combining with urban leads to complication;    
 
• 
responsibility for making lands available for in-village facilities will rest with the 
respective communities;  
 
• 
transmission lines designing will be made such that no lands will be acquired 
involuntarily, rather differential routings will be done  even if it becomes more 
expensive.  
 
 
Rules of taking possession of land for project purposes
.
   
 
7. 
Rules governing  taking possession of land for program purposes (both IPP and CWSS) 
will be developed based on the experiences of the Bank assisted projects: Kerala Rural Water 
Supply and Sanitation Project, Karnataka/ Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Project; and U P Sodic Lands Reclamation Project.  These rules will be binding on the part of 
GoTN and chief elements of it will include the following:  
 
• 
The project will not resort to any involuntary land acquisition.  
 
• 
All donations and purchases will be voluntary.  Mechanisms will be developed 
not only to ensure the voluntariness but also that it will not involve any 
significant adverse impacts  upon incomes or physical displacement.   
 
• 
All voluntary land transactions will meet the following criteria: (i) the land in 
question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of encumbrances; 
(ii) lands will be chosen (by the community) after ensuring that water indeed will 
be available in that particular piece of land; (iii) verification of the voluntary 
nature of land  donations in each case; (iii) due transparent measures will be in 
place; (iv) land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested in the 
community; and (v) provision will be made for redressal of grievances (ROG) if 
any.  
 
• 
All voluntary transactions will be documented and signed by both the parties. 
Agreements on the above will be reached during appraisal and legal documents 
will include the necessary clauses. 
 
Indigenous Peoples
  
A comprehensive Social Assessment study will be initiated for identifying  all the  
stakeholder groups and develop a framework for their participation in, and enable/solicit their 
contributions towards the program intervention’s design and delivery mechanisms.  Main elements of the 
social assessment study will include beneficiary assessment, stakeholder analysis, social impacts and risk 
analysis.  In particular, the study will also cover Panchayat Raj Institutions, TWAD Board and  other 
concerned departments/agencies.  Consequently, in accordance with OD 4.20, an Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan (IPDP) christened, “SC/ST Development Plan” will also be prepared. 
Page  7
 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultations
:
 
Since March 2002, apart from undertaking field visits to villages, several rounds of 
consultations are being held with a variety of
 
 stakeholders from among the spheres of local communities, 
women self help groups, Panchayat Raj Institution members, Water and Sanitation Mission, TWAD 
Board, government, non-government, academia and consultants.  These consultations have enabled 
identifying major issues in the RWSS sector.  Further consultations and disclosures will be planned as 
described below.  
 
OP/BP 4.01. Public consultations will be carried out in representative project districts, as part of the 
environmental screening process for the preparation of the SEA.  Preparatory meetings to organize the public 
consultations will be held with field officers of TWAD, CEOs and district officials of various departments, 
including RDD, Health and Family Welfare, Groundwater, Watershed, Irrigation, etc., as well as target groups 
at the village/panchayat level.  Advance notices in local language, including details of the proposed project 
components will be distributed to the rural public, elected representatives and other functionaries at GP and 
district levels.  The notices will be displayed in local panchayat offices and public places like village temples, 
schools and bus stops.  Representative stakeholders will be invited for the public consultations. 
 
OD 4.20  Several rounds of consultations will be held with relevant stakeholders as a part of the Social  
Assessments and preparation of IPDPs. 
 
Disclosure
:
 
. Both the Social and Environmental Assessments and IPDPs will be summarized and 
translated in to Tamil (local) language.  Copies of these will be shared with PR institutions at the three 
levels – DPs, BPs and Village Pancnhayats – and local government and non-government agencies 
including NGOs and academics.  Once the project becomes effective, special campaign towards creating 
awareness on the IPDP provisions will be made through NGOs among the tribal communities and PRI 
representatives.  The summary (in local language) of the draft EA report, including environmental issues, 
proposed mitigatory measures and performance indicators will be placed at GP offices of the districts, 
public health sub-centres, bus stops and big shops
.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
Around January 2004 
 
 
