                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC152
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/12/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDIA                                                Project ID: P081991
Project: India Immunization Strengthening Project -           Task Team Leader: Jagmohan S. Kang
Supplement
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 21, 2003                    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 16, 2003                              IDA Amount ($m): 83.41
Managing Unit: SASHD                                          Sector: Health (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Fighting communicable diseases (P); Child
Status: Supplemental Lending                                  health (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The proposed supplementary development credit is consistent with the original development objective
of the Immunization Strengthening Project, i.e., to (a) eradicate poliomyelitis; and (b) reduce
vaccine-preventable diseases by strengthening the routine immunization program. The project
anticipated to have two phases that the ongoing three-year project would represent the first phase of
support for immunization, with a second project expected about two years after this project becomes
effective, provided that performance is satisfactory. The second project is now expected to be in
operation from about mid-2004. Therefore Government of India has applied for a supplemental
credit.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

This proposed supplemental credit will further intensify the polio eradication activities under the
ongoing Immunization Strengthening Project (Cr. 3340-IN) and will assist in eradicating polio from
India. This supplemental credit will finance the procurement of oral polio vaccine (OPV) to meet
this challenge. The Immunization Strengthening Project (ISP) does not involve any significant
environmental risks and the Environment Category is given as "C".

The Project has three components: (a) polio eradication; (b) strengthening routine immunization; and
(c) strategic framework development.

The polio eradication component finances about 50% of polio vaccine and social mobilization
activities for National Immunization Days (NIDs), including information, education, and
communication (IEC), training, transport, and house-to-house mop-up campaigns. The type and
extent of activities and quantum of financing required is determined each year by the summer
surveillance data on polio transmission and the support mobilized from other sources.

The strengthening routine immunization component addresses, selectively, critical management
constraints and finances replacement of cold chain and injection safety equipment nation-wide.
Management capacity strengthening focuses on filling critical vacancies, rebuilding training in
immunization, and improving program monitoring and vaccine logistics. Lessons in micro-planning

                                                          2
                                                                                                          ISDS


from the highly successful mobilization efforts for polio eradication would be captured at national,
state, district, block, and village level to strengthen the routine immunization program. In eight weak
performing states, activities are implemented under the Reproductive and Child Health Program to
improve regularity of, and physical access to, community clinic sessions, that would provide
immunization within a package of reproductive and child health services, improve information to
local communities and mobilize communities to utilize the available services, and subsidize private
and NGO hospitals or clinics to provide services to urban slum communities.

The strategic framework would articulate medium-term goals and strategies for dealing with
vaccine-preventable diseases. This component supports studies to inform further development of
policies and guiding principles, and workshops and conferences to develop national consensus on
those policies and guiding principles.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The national program covers the entire country.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                       Policy                                          Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or

                                                       3
                                                                                                           ISDS


due to multiple project component.
None.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project will contribute in a significant way to the eradication of wild polio virus from the environment.
Oral vaccination with the attenuated virus, has no significant negative environmental impact which would
need to be addressed under this project.

16. The project addresses the social issues for polio eradication by developing specific strategies and by
using surveillance data to reach the "hard-to-reach" populations. The Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (MOHFW) is implementing a Tribal Reproductive and Child Health strategy and action plan to
promote health in tribal areas, covering approximately 518 distinct groups located in five major tribal belts
across the country. The action plan includes measures to improve communities and utilize tribal youth as
community mobilizers and communicators. It places high priority on mobilizing communities and other
key stakeholders to partner with government staff in the preparation of micro plans for polio eradication
activities and their implementation. Traditional and religious leaders have been sensitized over the last few
years and are now committed to the cause. Rejection of polio vaccination now concerns only a small
percentage of the population.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Stakeholders participation process was conducted during the present project preparation. Since 1994,
India's Polio Eradication Initiative has been a major national effort supported by several donors including
CDC, DANIDA, DFID, EC, Japan, Rotary International, and USAID among others. WHO and UNICEF
are the lead technical partners. Important mechanisms for on-going consultation are the national and state
level Steering Committees for Polio and the Inter-Agency Co-ordination Committee (ICC).

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                    4
                                                                                                     ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Jagmohan S. Kang                                   November 11, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: David J. Marsden                                        July 9, 2003
Sector Manager/Director               Anabela Abreu                                      November 11, 2003

