Report No. 23452
Report No: I071033 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA Project ID: P071033
Project: Karnataka Community-Based Tank Management Project        Task Team
Leader: E. V. Jagannathan
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 28, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 25, 2002    IDA Amount ($m): 98.90
Managing Unit: SASRD     Sector: AI - Irrigation & Drainage; VM - Natural
Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to improve rural livelihoods and
reduce poverty by developing and strengthening community-based approaches
to improving and managing selected tank systems*.
The project proposes to cover approximately 2,000 existing tank systems*
in the south Indian state of Karnataka. The project aims to demonstrate
the viability of a community-based approach to tank improvement and
management by returning the main responsibility of tank development to
village-level user groups. If successful, the project would provide a
useful model for scaling up this programmatic approach statewide. The
poverty focus of the project is based on geographic targeting of
sub-districts (i.e. taluks) across the state with a high incidence of
poverty.
* Tanks are small, man-made bodies of water that historically have served
a wide range of village water needs across India. Tank systems include
the catchment, tank structure, and the command (which is the area designed
to be irrigated by the tank).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project adopts a programmatic approach to community-based tank
management and covers the first phase of this program - 2,000 tanks of the
estimated 37,000 minor irrigation tanks in the state or 72,000 ha of the
685,000 ha (11%) of the estimated command area irrigated by tanks. The
project consists of three components: (a) establishing an enabling
environment for the sustainable, decentralized management of tank systems;
(b) strengthening community-based institutions to assume responsibility
for tank system development and management; and (c) undertaking tank
system improvements. The third component is further sub-divided into: (i)
improving the operational performance of selected tank systems through a
menu of physical interventions identified and executed by local users and
(ii) facilitating technical training and on-farm demonstrations in water
management, agriculture and horticulture development, fisheries, forestry,
and fodder production to help ensure that improved water storage and
efficiency is translated into increased household incomes. (refer to Annex
2, Detailed Project Description)
Components
A. Establishing an Enabling Environment for Tank Development



B. Strengthening Community Development
C. Undertaking Tank System Improvements
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in eastern and northern Karnataka and aims to
rehabilitate about 2,000 out of about 3,500 tank systems in 34 taluks of 9
districts. The areas fall into six agro-ecological zones, ranging from
areas of heavy precipitation on the west coast to very arid areas of the
east (where the project is primarily concentrated). Karnataka has the
second-largest arid area after Rajasthan in India. No National Parks or
Wildlife Sanctuaries are located in the 34 taluks and therefore the
project will not negatively impact any critical natural habitats.
The proposed project area targeted for tank improvements has been
determined by selecting taluks that exhibit the following attributes: a)
high incidence of poverty; b) female illiteracy; c) high level of SC/ST
population; d) high level of non-working population; and e) a significant
number of minor irrigation tanks. Tank systems located in the Cauvery
Basin are excluded from the project due to an unresolved inter-state river
dispute.
The tanks are of varying sizes, with different institutional controls for
each (e.g. tanks irrigating less than 4 ha are managed by village local
governments or Gram Panchayats; those from 4-40 ha are managed by the
Zilla Parishad or district local government; and those greater than 40 ha
are managed by the Department of Minor Irrigation) prior to the project.
Many of the tanks were central to the village economy and have been in
existence for hundreds of years but have deteriorated over time due to a
host of institutional, technical, and demographic reasons. Some tanks
also have informal stakeholder groups and a community-employed regulator
to help manage its operation. In the context of landownership patterns in
the tank command area, the preparatory studies have indicated that it is
usually members of the dominant caste who now own a major portion of the
command area. However, other castes and weaker sections of the village
may depend on the tank system in other ways (e.g. groundwater recharge,
fisheries, livestock, washing, etc.). Some of the villages have
significant tribal populations; preparatory exercises have indicated that
the tribal population in the project area have often merged within
mainstream society and have similar socio-economic characteristics as the
rest of the village population. Some small cultural properties (places of
worship, sacred trees) are located within the tank system and often relate
to rituals associated with the health of the tank and the prosperity that
tank water may bring to the village.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is expected to be beneficial overall from an
environmental and social perspective. Although no significant adverse
impacts are anticipated in the project on any critical ecosystems or
culturally or socially sensitive areas, a screening framework has been
developed as part of the Social and Environmental Assessment to ensure
that GOI, GoK, and Bank safeguards are in compliance.
- 2-



C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      Yes
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      Yes
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Partially because of the tight intertwined relationship between tanks and
villages, the project has triggered six safeguard policies as indicated in
the previous section.    Despite the application of several safeguard
policies, the community-based approach to the project should help ensure
that most of the issues are discussed and resolved within the community
itself. Moreover, the physical interventions of the project are limited
and focused on rehabilitation of existing tanks. A screening framework
has been designed to screen out tanks in which safeguard issues would be
overly problematic (e.g. severe, contested encroachment). The screening
framework would also be used to assess the application of each safeguard
policy for each tank system.
Resettlement: The most important safeguard issue relates to involuntary
resettlement. The project involves the rehabilitation of existing tanks -
and not the construction of new tanks. Therefore, acquisition of private
land and physical displacement are not envisaged under the project
although there may be a few exceptions. However, encroachment of tank
beds is a major issue. During planning and implementation at the tank
level, efforts will be made to minimize the effect of the project on
encroachment. Given the nature and extent of encroachment (and reinforced
by the Social and Environmental Assessment and pilot initiatives), it is
expected that most encroachers will voluntarily surrender the encroached
land. Principles for assessing the 'voluntary surrender' of land have
been developed. Based on the findings of the Social and Environmental
Assessment (SEA) carried out for a sample of tanks, GoK has prepared a
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy and a model Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) as envisaged under OD 4.30, for a selected sample of
tanks. The RAP contains mitigation measures to ensure that those affected
are helped in restoring their livelihoods to existing levels.
It should be noted that GoK has reiterated the illegality of all
encroachment in tank beds and has voiced its desire to prevent further
-3 -



encroachment in the future. The project however recognizes that not all
encroachment affects the functioning of the tank system and has therefore
attempted to minimize the extent of displacement to those whose land
practices impede the operation of the tank. Details are provided in the
R&R policy and model RAP.
Environmental Assessment: The major environmental issues identified in the
EA include inter alia: (i) degraded nature of the tank system (e.g. loss
of an important common property resource; land degradation in the
catchment); (ii) the spatial and sectoral context of the systems (upstream
soil erosion and downstream siltation - both in single tank systems and in
cascades - with silt accumulation reducing storage and groundwater
recharge and increasing the need for expensive desiltation); (iii) the
physical characteristics of the tanks (inadequate dead storage, tank
safety concerns due to weak bund structure, damaged sluice and
surplus/waste weirs leading to shortages, waterlogging, and poor water
efficiency); (iv) encroachment (of tank bed, foreshore area, streams and
feeder channels) and potential effects on cultural property; (v)
inefficient use of water in the command (ill-defined irrigation
distribution systems and damaged main and field canals lead to low
productivity of water and distributional inequities); (vi) increasing
fertilizer and pesticide use and declining use of organic
manure/compost/green manure; and (vii) contamination of tank water
including poor hygiene and possible contamination of drinking water and
associated public health concerns.
The impacts of the project on the environment and rural livelihoods are
expected to be overall positive. In the Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) measures, have been incorporated to enhance the activities that
could have a positive impact on the environment, such as: improving tank
ecology; improving environmental awareness and general tank water use
hygiene to improve water quality and associated public health (e.g. mixing
of village wastewater runoff into tank, protection of drinking water and
drinking water recharge areas, management of waste and manure on tank
beds, etc.); promoting the holistic planning of tank systems (catchment,
tank, command) for individual tanks and cascades; improving cropping and
input practices to reduce chemical pesticide and fertilizer use; and
improving tank safety. The project will, however, have some negative
impacts for which mitigation plans (e.g. EMP, PMP) have been developed.
Possible adverse environmental impacts include proper disposal of silt;
uncertain impacts on groundwater; introduction of fish and trees to the
tank system; potential induced impacts of increased pesticide use in the
area due to command area rehabilitation (although the project will not
finance pesticides); and potential adverse impacts on public health
through impacts on the local hydrology and induced pesticide and
fertilizer use. These issues and impacts have been addressed as part of
the combined SEA and in the design of the EMP.
Tribals: Scheduled Tribes (ST) constitute around 4t of the state
population and in the nine project districts account for 1.3t to 14.6t of
the population. The study concluded that STs in the project area are
generally not distinct in terms of social, cultural, and economic
attributes from the rest of the population. Their social and political
rights are often adequately represented and protected by various
legislations. However, there are some groups which are currently not
- 4 -



categorized as STs but are distinctly different from a social and cultural
perspective. Since tribals are an important stakeholder under the
project, there could be a situation of differential access to project
benefits both by the tribals and other vulnerable groups (including
scheduled castes). For this purpose, based on the findings of the SEA and
the detailed study of six tanks, a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) and model
tribal development plans at the tank level have been prepared which will
cover both ST and SC groups. Broadly, the TDP will help ensure that: (i)
STs, SCs, and Vulnerable Groups are effectively represented in TUG-related
decision-making; (ii) priority is provided to them in terms of (a) wage
labor; (b) small tank-related enterprises such as tank-based fisheries,
forestry, and livestock; and (c) agricultural extension and capacity
building for other income generation activities; (iii) they are able to
access existing Government schemes focused on tribals and other vulnerable
groups; and (iv) they are able to access agricultural markets and
financial services provided by banks. Based on the TDP, the client has
prepared a 'model' TDP for the six tank systems examined in greater detail
in the SEA.
Other Safeguard Policies: Pest Management, Cultural Property, and Safety
of Dams are also triggered by the project. Separate assessments and
action plans have been developed for each of these safeguards and are part
of the EMP. It should be noted that the Natural Habitats policy is not
triggered since no critical natural habitat (i.e. National Park nor
Wildlife Sanctuary) is located in the 34 taluks of the project area and
the project activities are not expected to cause any significant
conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Furthermore, the EMP
supports measures for improvements to tank system ecology.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Given the nature of project activities, there are not expected to be any
significant adverse cumulative impacts. However, potential cumulative
impacts may include uncertain changes in the local hydrology (including
groundwater) and associated changes with pollution impacts (induced
increase in pesticide and fertilizer use).    Many of the tanks are in
cascades and activities in an upstream tank may have impacts on the runoff
and siltation to downstream tanks in the cascade. These impacts may be
positive or negative - for example, controlling erosion upstream may
reduce siltation downstream; however, activities such as desiltation may
reduce runoff to downstream tanks. In addition, the activities on any
particular tank may impact groundwater recharge - for example, desilting
(even limited desilting) has been shown to increase recharge into the
groundwater. This is expected to be generally positive as groundwater
levels are low in the area (although data on the hydrology of small tanks
is practically non-existent), but local waterlogging may increase in the
immediate tank area. Detailed monitoring would be carried out (using
digital water level recorders) to monitor these impacts, especially in the
initial tank batches to evaluate the impacts and design any additional
mitigation measures. These potential changes in hydrology, combined with
induced increase in pesticide and fertilizer use and any pre-existing
pollution (e.g. from village sewage) into the tank, may change the quality
of water in the tank and the groundwater and could potentially have
adverse impacts on public health. These changes in hydrology will be
- 5-



closely monitored, especially in the initial stages. The weak knowledge
base on environmental issues in tank systems is to be strengthened and
related environmental management capacity built as part of the project.
This may also improve the mainstreaming of environmental issues in such
tank systems in the region.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The proposed project is developing a new approach to transfer
responsibility for tank development and management from the state back to
people (via user groups). The project may result in demand for safeguard
issues (especially resettlement) to be treated similarly in non-project
areas. The Government of Karnataka has agreed to adopt a similar approach
to tank development across the entire state. Therefore, the project
treatment of safeguard issues - specifically approaches to address
encroachment, tribal participation, tank safety, and pest management --
may set an important precedent for non-project areas now and in the future.
More generally, the project envisages that communities would take a more
active role in the development, operation, and management of tank systems
in the long term. The role of the government would therefore
progressively decline to one of a facilitator. The institutional
arrangements for community-based tank management involve Tank User Groups
(TUGs) and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). These institutions
contribute to the decentralized management of natural resources and are
expected to improve collaboration across line departments, non-government
organizations (NGOs), and local communities for the sustainable management
of tank systems.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The preparation process considered various project alternatives. On the
institutional level, the project made a choice to reject a "top-down"
approach (centralized) in which the government would take a lead role in
the management of the tank systems with some community participation in
favor of a (decentralized) community-based management of tank systems in
which the government acts as a facilitator in the process with active
involvement of NGOs. The project design also empowers TUGs to select from
among different local institutional arrangements (to link themselves with
PRIs).
Analysis of Alternatives - Based on Independent SEA
Alternative      Key Observations (Reasons for Rejection/Acceptance)
Tank Desiltation Project         n Desiltation of tanks without integrating the treatment
of catchment area would not be sustainable as the degraded catchment would
continue to erode.
n Desiltation is expensive and needs to be done sparingly and in
accordance with the expected benefits. Investments on other components of
the tank may be more efficient.
n Poor community involvement and management after desiltation.
Rejected option: Targeted, appropriate and cost-effective desiltation is
to be considered.
Project to increase the crest level of the surplus weirs          n The submergence of
foreshore area would lead to crop loss, waterlogging and increase in
- 6 -



conflicts between the foreshore area/catchment farmers and the command
farmers.
n Evaporation losses would increase due to increased waterspread area.
n Recharge benefits or dead storage benefits would not accrue
significantly.
Rejected option.   May be considered in particular cases.
Project with all other interventions except Desiltation           n Water capture in
the tank may not increase
n Some targeted desiltation may derive water storage and recharge benefits
given the significant siltation of the tanks
n Lack of improvement of dead storage could result in continued problems
to water users (e.g. for drinking, livestock, fisheries, irrigation)
Rejected option. Targeted, appropriate and cost-effective desiltation is
to be considered.
Integration of tank project with watershed development n A combined project would be
complex and involve many more implementing agencies
n Appropriate for cascades of tanks in particular microcatchments
n Tanks would probably not get much attention
n Priority areas for watershed development may not coincide with
prioritized tanks
Rejected option. It may be better if both projects are implemented
separately but with a strong synergy between the two where possible.
Community-based Tank Improvement and Management Project n Approach was selected to
provide more community-based ownership and sustainability of interventions
that are designed to incorporate social, environmental, technical,
institutional and economic aspects in a holistic manner.
n Approach would provide the benefits of catchment treatment, targeted
desilting, tank safety improvement, increased water availability and
recharge, command area improvement and introduction of new tank management
techniques.
n Develop and implement an integrated tank development plan for a holistic
approach with community ownership
n Provide clear action plans for resettlement, tribal development, gender,
environment, cultural property, dam safety, and pest management to ensure
adequate safeguards while enhancing the positive outcomes.
Selected Option
No Project Scenario      n Comparison against the no-project scenario is described fully
in the SEA.
Rejected option
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Specific Action Plans have been developed to mitigate against adverse
environmental and social impacts and risks and to enhance the potential
positive benefits. These plans include the EMP, RAP, IPDP, Pest
Management Plan, Cultural Property Plan (as part of the EMP), and Tank
Safety Plan (as part of the EMP). The plans have been designed to be
mainstreamed into each tank-specific Integrated Tank Development Plan
(ITDP) as an integral part of the preparation, capacity-building,
implementation, and monitoring and learning. Each Action Plan includes
monitoring and learning indicators and estimated costs that have been
incorporated in the overall project costs. The plans are summarized as
follows:
Plan    Mitigation/Enhancement Measures for project impacts on    Primary Provisions
- 7-



Environmental Management Plan    AGeneral (Environmental Awareness, Natural
Habitats, Pesticide and Fertilizer Use, Water Quality and Public Health)
ACatchment Area, including foreshore areas (Land Degradation, Limited
Encroachment of natural streams and feeder channels)
ATank Structure/Bed/ Waterspread Area (Silt Accumulation / Disposal, Dead
Storage, Weak Dam/Bund Structure, Damaged sluice and surplus/waste-weirs,
Encroachment of tank bed from foreshore area, Cultural Property)
ACommand Area (Damaged main and field channels, Soil Biota/Decline in
Fertility / Induced Pesticide Use, Extraction of Groundwater, Equitable
Distribution of Water) A Screening/information management framework for each tank
by proposed project activity to be included in rapid and detailed
assessment surveys
A Measures outlined by project component, impacts and by key physical
interventions to enhance positive environmental impacts and mitigate
against potential adverse environmental impacts
A Coordination and synergy with the Karnataka Watershed Department is to
ensure sustainable catchment protection and management - the measures and
safeguards for physical interventions would be consistent with those for
the recently-approved Karnataka Watershed Development Project
A Cultural Property Plan to protect cultural property as applied to burial
grounds, very small temples of worship on tank bed, place of worship in
embankment, temples close to waste weir, and trees/plants with religious
significance on tank bund
A Tank Safety Plan to ensure that the tank structures rehabilitated meet
adequate safety standards (a Task Force for structural assessment of Tank
structures has been constituted to assist in this task); a dam safety
awareness program for stakeholders to be implemented as part of this Plan
A Institutional arrangements (including an EMP consultant), training and
other capacity-building, additional studies, M&E strategy, and budgetary
resources required to mainstream the EMP into the project design have been
defined
Pest Management Plan     AInduced impacts of increased pesticide use in project area
ALack of awareness in project area of biological and cropping practice
alternatives to chemical plant protection chemical use A Demonstrations and
training for farmers on integrated pest management in selected tank
commands will be supported by the PMP.
A Synergy with the PMP for the Karnataka Watershed Development Project
A Additional capacity-building / integration into agricultural extension
for intensification and diversification
A Institutional arrangements, M&E and budget implications are mainstreamed
into project design
Resettlement Action Plan         APotential adverse effects or impacts of project
activities on households in the form of losing a primary livelihood source
AThis includes issues relating to minimizing adverse impacts, encouraging
an adequate framework for voluntary surrender of lands encroached, removal
of encroachments, and adequate information dissemination
A Although minimal physical displacement and new land acquisition is envisaged, a
major issue addressed in the RAP is the issue of encroachment, particularly in tank beds
- 8 -



A An R&R policy has been formulated by the Government of Karnataka,
embodying the principle that no one will be worse off because of the project, and, if this
appears inevitable, the person(s) will be supported with R&R assistance with specific
entitlements to the identified affected families as provided under the policy. The R&R
policy contains an entitlement framework that provides entitlement assistance based on the
loss incurred.
A The R&R issues have been included in an overall safeguard screening
framework to assess project interventions in each tank
A The detailed mitigation measures, procedures, agencies responsible,
capacity-building requirements, M&E framework, and budget implications have been outlined
in the RAP Indigenous Peoples Development Plan: (IPDP) and tank-specific TDP
APotential adverse project impacts on tribals (not envisaged)
AEnsuring tribals and other vulnerable groups benefit from the project in
a fair and culturally-compatible manner A Ensure adequate representation and
active involvement of tribals (and other vulnerable groups) in Tank User
Groups and Tank User Committees
A Ensure that tribals (and other vulnerable groups) receive priority in
terms of certain tank-related improvement programs (e.g. fisheries,
livestock)
A Facilitate access to existing Government programs that target tribal
groups
A Provide comprehensive capacity-building and training for leadership
skills, community-action, agricultural and irrigation practices, and other
support services
A Mitigation/enhancement measures, institutional and capacity-building
arrangements, M&E, and budget implications are all outlined in the IPDP
The institutional arrangements for implementing these Action Plans have
been outlined in the SEA and have been incorporated into the project
design and implementation arrangements. The Cluster Facilitation Team
(CFT) - which is the frontline institution responsible for project
implementation - consists of five specialists in the area of participation
and social development, engineering, gender and training, agriculture and
environment, and resettlement and tribal development. The inclusion of a
specialist to focus specifically on social safeguards will help ensure
adequate treatment of the more sensitive issues related to encroachment
and tribal development. The state implementing agency, Jala Samvardhane
Yojane Sangha (JSYS) has also strengthened its staff at the state and
district levels in the following areas: resettlement, tribal development,
environment, gender, agriculture, hydrology, and other skills relevant to
the successful implementation of these action plans. The costs and
implementation arrangements have been mainstreamed into the project design
and are described in the SEA, Project Implementation Plan (PIP) and other
project documents. At project negotiations, the critical importance of
capacity-building and training, especially on social and environmental
safeguard aspects for JSYS, other implementing staff and the TUGs was
emphasized. The Annual Action and Procurement Plans would also include a
special emphasis on capacity-building and training, especially as regards
safeguard aspects. The quality control mechanisms being implemented for
overall ITDP preparation and implementation would also address
safeguards. An independent agency would also review RAP implementation on
a sample basis. Close monitoring and supervision is proposed, especially
in the initial stages to ensure compliance with all relevant national,
-9-



state, and Bank policies.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The stakeholder analysis (as part of the SEA) indicated that the main
users of tank systems have changed dramatically with time. The original
stakeholdership of tanks have narrowed over time and new stakeholders have
emerged who do not necessarily have interests entirely consistent with the
objectives of the project. This leads to a complex institutional
environment in which the project has to operate. In a rough sense, the
main stakeholders at the village level include command area farmers
(differentiated by where in the command they own land and by the
alternative irrigation tools they may possess), catchment area farmers,
tank bed cultivators, water spread encroachers, other users of tank water
(e.g. women, fisherfolk, etc.), and non-command farmers with and without
wells.
Consultations were carried out with a variety of village-level
stakeholders (including farmers, representatives from the PRIs, women and
other vulnerable groups, affected households, and other local
organizations), government agencies, researchers and expert groups, NGOs,
and the World Bank. These consultations were held in all fifty tanks (and
in more depth for six tanks) surveyed by the SEA team. Moreover, JSYS
also conducted extensive meetings with tank users as part of their pilot
interventions in about 30 tanks.
The main messages emerging from these consultations are the importance of
documenting properly the voluntary surrender of land; persuading
encroachers (those who are large farmers) to surrender encroached land
voluntarily and not be provided compensation; providing adequate
representation and participation of tribals and scheduled castes in
decision-making; dovetailing existing government schemes to support
vulnerable groups; and disposing of silt in an equitable and appropriate
manner.
With respect to disclosure, JSYS has adopted a transparent approach to
safeguards - especially with respect to resettlement and the entitlement
framework. Consultations with tank users was preceded by disclosing the
main elements of the resettlement and tribal development action plans. A
major feedback workshop was organized at the state level to help evolve
the safeguard action plans. JSYS has translated all of the Action Plans
into the local language (i.e. Kannada) and disseminated these plans to all
Taluk Panchayat headquarters, NGOs, and potential host organizations for
the CFTs. These Action Plans are also being shared with the TUGs formed
as part of the pilot initiatives. During implementation, CFTs will share
the Action Plans (in the local language) with all potential communities
interested in participating in the project. These Action Plans have been
written in a simple way so that they are meaningful and easily understood
by the local population.
A strong consultation framework has been developed to govern project
implementation. The community-based development of an ITDP by the TUG
and facilitated by the CFT will be used as a basis for all project
interventions in each tank system. The participatory processes to form
- 10 -



the TUG and develop the ITDP will employ participatory rural appraisal
(PRA) tools and approaches. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) would be
developed for each tank to ensure that the ITDP reflects the understanding
and priorities of the TUG. The ITDP would indicate inter alia the nature
and prioritization of activities to be conducted, the labor and cash
contribution of the communities to demonstrate ownership, and the proposed
schedule and responsibilities for implementation. The initial ITDPs are
also being reviewed in workshops to further streamline and standardize
where possible the ITDPs, further clarify capacity-building requirements
and quality control mechanisms.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[XI S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/26/2001       11/26/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/26/2001        1/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/4/2002         1/4/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/26/2001       11/26/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/26/2001        1/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/4/2002         1/4/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/26/2001       11/26/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/26/2001        1/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/4/2002         1/4/2002
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      11/26/2001       11/26/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 11/26/2001        1/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/4/2002         1/4/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      12/14/2001       12/14/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 12/21/2001        1/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/4/2002         1/4/2002
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
- 11 -



Task Team Leader:        E. V. Jagannathan       March 25, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Mohammad Hasan/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         L. Panneer Selvam        March 26, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Constance A. Bernard     March 26, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 12 -



