Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC229 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 21, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P071160 
Project Name: Karnataka Health Systems 
Task Team Leader: Paolo Belli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 16, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 150 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance 
(P);Child health (S);Population and 
reproductive health (S);Fighting 
communicable diseases (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Ruma Tavorath, Environment 
Specialist, Meera Chatterjee, Social Scientist
 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
Increase utilization of high quality public and private PC services, particularly for the poor.
 
Indicators of success would include increased immunization and antenatal care coverage, and 
improved priority health outcomes in the poorest districts.     
Enhance financial protection against health risks by contributing to develop risk 
management and health insurance schemes.
  Indicators of improvement would include 
increased coverage with health risk management and insurance, and a lower number of households 
who need to borrow or sell assets to fund their health expenditure.  
C.  Project Description 
1. 
Following is a description of the three strategic areas for the proposed operation to improve 
quality and accessibility of services, particularly focusing on the poor. 
(i) 
Overcome key supply bottlenecks in the poorer districts, such as lack of emergency obstetric care 
services
. The proposed operation will contribute to shift resources in favor of the 
poorer districts, and at the same time support innovative service delivery 
initiatives, characterized by higher transparency and accountability, and better 
incentives for good performance, including competitive allocation of resources. 
Page  2
 
 
(ii) 
Enhance the department of H&FW’s capacity to oversee/steward the whole sector.
  The key 
dimensions that need to be strengthened include the following: 
\01\02
Partnership between the public and private sectors. The private sector is made of a wide array of 
providers, and means of involvement will be defined by type of providers, including incentive 
mechanisms to improve quality and control of rural medical practitioners, contracts with formal 
private providers, and output/outcome-based payment systems. The public sector should 
acknowledge and upgrade the private sector providers’ contribution to achieve the MDGs, 
through participation in National programs (MCH, TB, etc.).  
\01\02
Governance.  The proposed project will promote more effective disease surveillance, monitoring 
and evaluation systems, and key reforms in governance, particularly human resource 
management. 
1
  The effort initiated under KHSDP, SAL, and the Task Force to increase 
transparency in recruitment of staff, reduce corruption, and to increase the voice of consumers 
of health services will be supported. 
\01\02
Coordination between various “parts” of the health sector. The proposed project will aim at 
creating  a greater integration between centrally and state funded schemes, and between health 
and other related sectors, such as water and sanitation, through greater coordination between 
local and health authorities at the grass-root level, and through enhanced community 
participation and control. 
(iii) 
Strengthen Health Financing.
 
This component will include two dimensions. First 
improve efficiency and equity in financial management, by moving from input to 
population and need based resource allocation formula. Second, strengthen 
protection against health risks. The proposed project will support implementation of 
a pre-payment scheme, which will include a smoothing mechanism through savings 
and credit, and a health insurance component for catastrophic coverage.
2
  
Given the innovativeness of the project, a rigorous independent evaluation (pre/post, with/without, 
random assignment) will be built alongside it
. 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The proposed operation would cover the whole State of Karnataka, and focus on poor and 
underserved areas in the North and East regions. 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
1
 These measures to improve human resource management include: (1) transparent needs-based recruitment, transfer 
and promotion process; (2) service agreements, which clearly define role and responsibilities of each worker); (3) 
contracting in managerial capacity from the private sector (4) reward/penalty mechanisms, which could include 
career incentive schemes, as well as financial incentives; (5) demand side control/incentive mechanisms, such as 
vouchers for maternity services. 
2
 Insurance involves exchanging the uncertain prospect of large losses for the certainly of small, regular premium 
payments 
Page  3
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ]  
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ]  
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
Government of Karnataka would carry out a partial environmental assessment, building upon he 
assessment under KHSDP, an identifying gaps in the past assessment, which was mainly focused on 
secondary care facilities.  In addition, GoK would also undertake a social assessment, which aims to 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
better understand how to improve health services for the poor in underserved areas and tribal 
populations, to reduce  gender inequities in accessing services, and to build capacity and empower 
communities to improve service delivery and monitor results.  (it will include the Tribal Health Plan, 
which is a part of the Indigenous Peoples O.D., a safeguards trigger) 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
Workshops and/or discussion groups will be organized to review the findings from the 
environmental and social assessment. These workshops will be attended by government officials 
from Health, Environment, Infrastructure Services and City Corporation and other relevant 
agencies, health providers and personnel from various representative private and public health 
facilities, media, non-governmental organizations and community groups to discuss and provide 
inputs for the proposed HCWMP.  Electronic and print media will also be used for disclosure. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  TBD
 
