I 
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Free of Poverty
1AfoShop)
Report No: AC52
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDIA                                   Project ID: P073651
Project: Integrated Disease Surveillance Project  Task Team Leader: Peter F. Heywood
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 22, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 1, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 75.30
Managing Unit: SASHD                             Sector: Health (40%); Sub-national government
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  administration (20%); Central government
Status: Lending                                  administration (20%); Information technology
(15%); Other industry (5%)
Theme: Fighting communicable diseases (P); Health
system performance (P); Other human development
(P); Decentralization (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the project is:
*   to contribute to improved health outcomes by providing specific, timely information on
selected priority health conditions and risk factors in order to plan and manage programs to
prevent them.
The project will assist the Government of India and the states and territories to
* surveill a limited number of health conditions and risk factors
* strengthen data quality, analysis and links to action;
* improve laboratory support;
* train stakeholders in disease surveillance and action.
* coordinate and decentralize surveillance activities
* integrate disease surveillance at the state and district levels, and involve village
populations and other stakeholders, particularly the private sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
This five-year project will assist the central and state governments to shift from a centrally driven,
vertically organized disease surveillance system to one which is coordinated by the center and
implemented by the states, districts and communities. The project has 4 components:



2
ISDS
Component 1. Coordinate and decentralize disease surveillance activities. This component will address
the constraints of lack of coordination despite central control of surveillance activities and the need for
changing the diseases included in the system. Effective coordination (as compared to control) of disease
surveillance activities depends on establishing the appropriate processes and institutional arrangements at
the central level. This will be done through the creation of a small disease surveillance unit to support the
states' disease surveillance efforts.
Component 2. Integrate and strengthen disease surveillance at the state and district levels, and involve
communities and other stakeholders, including the private sector. This component will address the
constraints imposed by lack of coordination at the sub-national levels, the limited use of modern
technology and data management techniques, the inability of the system to act on information and the
need for inclusion of other stakeholders.
Component 3. Improve laboratory support. This component will address the constraint imposed by
inadequate laboratory support for surveillance through provision of equipment, minor renovation of
laboratories and state level programs for quality assurance of laboratory data.
Component 4. Training for disease surveillance and action. The changes envisaged under the first 3
components will require a large and coordinated training effort to reorient health staff to an integrated
surveillance system and provide the new skills needed.
The core set of communicable diseases, non-communicable disease (NCD) risk factors, and
environmental factors included in the surveillance system are: malaria, acute diarrheal disease (cholera),
typhoid, tuberculosis, measles, polio, plague, meningoencephalitis, hemorrhagic fevers, HIV, road
accidents, water quality, outdoor air quality and NCD risk factors (height, weight, physical activity,
blood pressure, tobacco, nutrition and blindness).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project will cover all States and Union Territories in India with the objective of establishing
surveillance systems down to the Community Health Centre levels. Project will be implemented in
existing buildings/land and there are no new structures planned under this project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: To address the environmental and health risks associated with the handling of active/live
biological agents in the disease surveillance laboratories, the project will facilitate the MOHIFW in
developing Standard Operating Procedures to ensure good practices and efficient waste management sysems
in laboratories.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No



3
ISDS
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment
Disease Surveillance Laboratories carry out testing for infectious and contagious diseases, such as
malaria, typhoid, cholera and hepatitis, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. These laboratories therefore
generate waste which includes infected human tissues and blood samples, microbes, discarded chemicals,
sharps, etc. Such waste, if not managed properly, carries the risk of infection for waste handlers and to
the larger community and is also a potential environmental hazard, through pollution of land, water and
ground water. While it is recognized that the quantum of waste generated from such laboratories is
small, its varied and hazardous cornposition requires comprehensive management of the waste lifecycle,
from source to disposal, to prevent adverse impacts on the environment and public health.
Indigenous People
Owing to the variable and largely weak presence of public health infrastructure and personnel in the
tribal areas, there is sub-optimal interaction and service delivery for tribal communities. The project
seeks to strengthen the linkages between the tribal communities and the health system by brining into its
fold the less reached and unreached areas where tribals live. The tribal volunteers, community and
health workers implementing different disease control/elimination programs are to be trained and
motivated to work closely with tribals to increase disease identification and reporting. Culturally
sensitive IEC material based on successful initiatives underway in each state, would form the basis for
reaching out to tribals.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not Applicable
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not Applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Management Plan:
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) includes a outline Standard Operating Procedure for good
practice management and mitigation measures for the various types of wastes expected to be generated in
laboratory operations and construction sites. The EMP also includes an implementation framework for
introducing the appropriate SOP at various state levels, and a monitoring framework. The
implementation details will be developed under the project. To refine the implementation arrangements,



4
ISDS
all states will conduct a baseline assessment in the first year of the project, to assess the type of waste
generated at each laboratory and its management from source to disposal. The MOHFW is developing
Operational Manuals which will incorporate the SOP.
Tribal Development Plan: The project specifically aims to involve and benefit the indigenous
populations. The national and state-level PIPs identify tribal populations as a target group which are
generally hard to reach due to their unique problems of physical and social access, requiring special
culturally-sensitive strategies. The project's tribal strategy is aimed at increasing outreach to the tribal
areas, provide culturally compatible IEC to promote health education and case definitions of diseases,
train volunteers in tribal communities, utilize tribal youth as community mobilizers and communicators.
The plan has been developed based on extensive interactions with tribal communities, with specific focus
on women, NGOs working with tribals, other stakeholders including Health Department officials,
medical professionals, medical colleges, and private providers. The plan seeks to build upon existing
successful initiatives at community involvement and IEC initiatives of other disease control/elimination
projects.
The project will benefit vulnerable groups and tribal groups and be in full compliance of safeguard
policies. The project will strengthen the institutional network involved in disease surveillance in areas
which include tribal populations. Training will be provided to tribal community health agents for
improved disease surveillance and facilitating community monitoring.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are health workers, laboratory staff, communities, NGOs and private sector
providers who will be involved in project implementation.
Extensive interactions were held with tribal communities, with specific focus on women, NGOs
working with tribals, other stakeholders including Health Department Officials, Medical
Professionals, Medical Colleges, and Private providers. Focussed discussions were carried out in
tribal areas and specific projects being implemented by different agencies dealing with tribal
health were visited and discussions held. National level workshops and state level consultations
were held in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to elicit suggestions and views for
reaching out to tribal communities. The consultations had representation from the grassroots
along with the NGOs, Block and district level administration, representatives of the IMA, state
level program staff and state health secretaries. Draft TDP was shared in these consultations and
the same was finalized based on feedback.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. -No safeguard issues
L  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address



5
ISDS
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 8/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              8/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                               8/30/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  8/26/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              8/26/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                               8/30/2002     4/28/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Peter F. Heywood                             04/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists l:  David Hanrahan/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Varalakshmi Vemuru/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Ruma Tavorath
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                         04/28/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Anabela Abreu                                04/28/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
L5EA    4CH    LEPERAMD8_ Z   LSrEM    AP    LSqHWsCASE     



