Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC182 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 21, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P055459 
Project Name: ELEMENTARY EDUCATION 
Task Team Leaders: Venita Kaul / Kin Bing Wu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 2003 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 500 
Estimated Board Date: July 22, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Meera Chatterjee (SD) Tapas Paul (EN) 
Other financing amounts by source: TBD 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The key project objectives are to improve access, equity and quality.  During the first APL (2004-05) the project is 
expected to achieve near 100% enrolment in schools of the 6-14 year age-group by 2005.  During the second APL
 
(2006-07), the project is expected to improve quality. The key performance indicators would be “at least 80% of the 
2002 in-take to complete Grade 5 by 2007” and “demonstrable learning gains in Grades 3 and 5 by 2007.   
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The Government of India (GOI) is committed to universalizing access to elementary 
education (grades 1-8) of satisfactory quality, with special attention to gender, economic and 
social equity.  The recently enacted 86
th
 Constitutional Amendment (2002) makes elementary 
education a fundamental right of every child.  To provide a comprehensive policy and budgetary 
framework to achieve these goals, GOI launched the National Program of Universal Elementary 
Education (UEE), known as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), in 2001.  The Tenth Five-Year Plan 
(2002-2007) aims to achieve the following: (i) all children in schools or alternative centers by 
2003; (ii) all children to complete five years of primary schooling by 2007; (iii) all children to 
complete eight years of schooling by 2010; (iv) elementary education of satisfactory quality with 
emphasis on education for life; (v) all gender and social disparities in primary education bridged 
by 2007 and in elementary education by 2010; and (vi) universal retention by 2010.  These 
targets go beyond the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which aim at gender parity in 
enrollment by 2005, and universal primary school completion by 2015.  With the Bank 
Page  2
 
 
committed to supporting efforts aimed at accelerating progress towards the MDGs, this becomes 
a shared agenda.  
 
The SSA builds on the earlier Bank-assisted District Primary Education Program (DPEP).  
Program interventions include revision of curricula and free distribution of textbooks to all girls 
and SC and ST children, setting up of new schools and school/classroom construction, provision 
of teacher grants and school improvement grants to teachers and VEC to enhance quality, 
training of teachers and community leaders, setting up of decentralized resource centers for on 
site support to schools and specific interventions for SC/ST working children and the disabled, 
with still more focused interventions for girls in difficult circumstances.  The scope of 
interventions will vary across states and is defined through a district-level strategic and 
implementation plan (perspective and annual plans) designed to achieve SSA goals, appraised 
and endorsed by the Central Government.  The program envisages a comprehensive monitoring 
and evaluation system involving national and state research institutions. 
 
In addition, the program has the following characteristics:   
 
\01\02
It covers the whole country, and shifts from a project to program mode. 
\01\02
It is comprehensive, encompassing other Centrally-sponsored schemes (such as Operation 
Blackboard, Education Guarantee Scheme/Alternative Innovation Education), and is 
complemented by the Mid-day Meal scheme, revamped Teacher Education Program, 
National Program for Education of Girls at the Elementary Level which raises consciousness 
and provides intensive monitoring of girls’ education, and the Kasturba Gandhi Swatantra 
Vidyalaya program which builds special schools for girls in specific areas with low female 
literacy.   
\01\02
It extends universal enrollment from lower (Grades 1 to 5) to upper primary education 
(Grades 6 to 8) and focuses on school completion in both levels. 
\01\02
It supports decentralized school management through devolution of funding and autonomy to Village Education 
Committees (VECs) for teacher recruitment and school management. 
\01\02
It relies on micro-planning from the habitation level and up, using data on education status of 
children collected from household census to guide planning, costing and monitoring. 
\01\02
It disburses to states on the basis of approved strategic and implementation plans, and the 
pace of disbursement is linked to performance.  
\01\02
It is already in its third year of implementation, and addresses sustainability issues beyond 
the Tenth Plan through the Eleventh Plan. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Any part of India, including tribal states and areas.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The Government of India and the state governments of 17 states have been implementing 
the Bank-supported District Primary Education Program, which has been operating in 273 
districts in the 17 states since the  mid-1990s.  The India CAS (2001) highlights the success of 
Page  3
 
 
the DPEP and recommends it for scaling up.  The SSA builds on this experience.  Thus, the 
Borrower has demonstrated and tested institutional capacity to manage the program, including 
planning and implementation of actions to meet safeguards and other social and environmental 
needs.   
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
The environmental issues in this project will relate to 
site location and planning (natural hazards, sensitive ecological regions, arsenic and fluoride 
contamination of groundwater, site drainage); building design and construction (indoor air quality 
and daylight factor inside the classrooms, sanitation facilities and waste management, water 
supply); and maintenance during operation period (site cleanliness and hygiene, prevention of 
enteric infection). Some of these issues are already addressed by the on-going SSA program, but 
the processes would need to be augmented.     
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
).
 The possibility of impacting cultural properties 
is very small, and will be addressed through chance-find procedures.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [x] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
The relevant environmental issues will be identified through a Desk Review of the on-going SSA and the 
DPEP programs. An Environment Management Guideline will be prepared describing how feasible and appropriate 
environmental mitigation and enhancement measures would be identified and implemented. An Environment Code 
of Practice (which could be made a part of the existing Standards and Guidelines of the SSA) will provide user-
friendly specification and implementation procedures for execution of the environmental mitigation and 
enhancement measures, environmental monitoring and audits.  
 
The project would carry out a 
Social Assessment
 to determine the status and needs of disadvantaged groups, 
including tribal communities, Scheduled Castes, girls and disabled children.  It would prepare a 
Tribal 
Development Plan
 (TDP) and disclose this prior to Appraisal.   The Bank will reach agreement with the Borrower 
to ensure that there is no involuntary resettlement in the project.  Schools and other civil works would be on 
government-owned land or on land donated voluntarily by communities.  In the unlikely event that other land is 
needed for construction, adequate procedures would be put in place to ensure compliance with 
O.P. 4.12
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultations.
  The Social Assessment would include a summary of consultations already carried out under 
the on-going SSA program and earlier Bank-financed DPEP program, and of mechanisms for on-going 
consultations.  It will also determine whether further consultations or mechanisms are  needed. The Environment 
Management Guidelines and Codes of Practice will be developed based on extensive consultation with the 
stakeholders, including building construction experts involved in the on-going SSA programme. 
 
  
Disclosure:
  The Environment Management Guidelines, the Environmental Codes of Practice, and the TDP 
would be disclosed through Bank, Government of India and state government mechanisms such as project 
documents and web-sites.  
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
Page  5
 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 
