                                Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)


Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2001
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDIA                                                 Project ID: P050653
Project: Second Karnataka Rural Water Supply and               Task Team Leader: Ghanasham V. Abhyankar
Sanitation Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: August 3, 2001                    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 18, 2001                               IDA Amount ($m): 151.60
Managing Unit: SASRD                                           Sector: WR - Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: WATER
Status: Lending


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The project will assist Government of Karnataka (GOK) in: (i) increasing rural communities' access to
improved and sustainable drinking water and sanitation services; and (ii) institutionalizing
decentralization of Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) service delivery to Gram Panchayats
(village governments) and user groups.

The project will be a major step towards scaling up reforms statewide. It will build on the success of the
recently closed first RWSS project (Cr 2483) and carry forward sector reforms initiated under it. The
proposed RWSS II project is, therefore, intended to be the first phase of Karnataka's new programmatic
approach to the sector aimed at improving the quality of life in rural areas by raising RWSS service
standards. A Programmatic approach will be most suitable for this community-based project, as it
involves sectoral policy changes and some degree of experimentation and piloting. Learning and
adjusting will take place as the project implementation progresses and statewide scaling up of the
program will be done as successes are confirmed.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Components:
1.       Community Development and Infrastructure Building (village level)
2.       Institution Building (project level)
3.       Sector Strengthening Programs (state level)

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

Based on human development (attributes: education, health and poverty) levels, GOK has identified the
11 northern Karnataka districts as the project area. These are Bagalkot, Belgaum, Bidar, Bijapur,
Dharwar, Gadag, Gulbarga, Haveri, Koppal, Raichur and Uttara Kannada. The project area covers the
Karnataka state portion of Krishna river basin including its Bheema sub-basin and a part of Tungabhadra
river basin. It is largely in the rainfed area.

GOK has selected these districts on the basis of their having severe problems of drinking water

                                                      2
                                                                                                          ISDS



availability and a large proportion of poor and socially disadvantaged people. GPs will be included in the
project by adopting a self-selection process, a pre-requisite of demand driven development. The Project
area covers 2322 GPs (8271 villages) and its estimated present population is about 15.5 million (40
percent of the State's rural population). Considering the project policy of self-selection of GPs and
habitations as well as its demand driven approach, some 2500 villages are expected to demand project
support.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                         Applicability

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Social Safeguard Issues

Land Availability/Contribution: Very small plots of land are required for most rural water supply
schemes (1 or 2 plots of size less than 10 Sq.M. for borewells with pump houses and 1 plot of size less
than 100 Sq.M. for water storage tank). Water transmission and distribution pipelines as well as
sullage/storm water drains are laid in public land or along public streets and no land is required. In a few
cases, pipelines may have to pass through private agriculture fields. Since the pipelines are laid at least
90 cms below ground elevation, no land acquisition is needed, but permission from the landowner is
taken. If such permission is not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used, even if it is more
expensive to do so. In case of surface water schemes, land requirement arises for three additional
purposes: (i) intake structures, (ii) intermediate balancing reservoirs, and (iii) water treatment plants.
Normally, public lands are available and selected to house storage and treatment facilities as well as for
water treatment plants. In some cases, land may have to be transferred from one government department
to the GPs. Land required for institutional or public latrines is also small (2 plots each less than 20 Sq.M

                                                       3
                                                                                                        ISDS



per village).

When plots of lands are to be acquired for project installations, their ownership could be either public or
private. While it is easier to access public land, arrangements will have to be made for securing privately
owned land. The prevailing normal practice in the state is to obtain such land plots either through
voluntary donation or by outright purchase. The discussions with the communities and experts as well as
the experiences from the previous project reveal that: (i) almost all villages do have an existing water
supply system and the project intervention will be restricted to improving/ rehabilitating/augmenting the
existing supplies, which would mean land requirement will be limited; (ii) most villages do have
sufficient public/Panchayat lands; and (iii) in case, it becomes inevitable, the local community will
secure lands either through voluntary donations or outright purchase.

Indigenous Peoples: The Bank policy on indigenous peoples outlined in its Operational Directive (OD)
4.20 stipulates that they: (i) benefit from development projects, and (ii) avoid or mitigate potentially
adverse effects on them, if any caused by Bank-assisted activities. Special actions are required where
Bank investment affect whose social and economic status restricts their capacity to assert their interests
and rights. The OD's reference to IPs is quite broad, meant to describe all those social groups with a
social and cultural identity distinct from the dominant society that makes them vulnerable to being
disadvantaged in the development processes. The OD advocates for the development of an agreed
processes for identifying indigenous people (IP) (to be covered under it) rather than prescribing a
definition for them. Once the identification is through, the OD stipulates developing a separate
Development Plan to enable project reach the IPs. In line with these, attempts made through Social
Assessment study identifies: (i) Lambanis (from among Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Groups),
an erstwhile nomadic tribal group, currently residing in exclusive habitation called, "Thanda"; and (ii)
Siddhis, who are of African origin, as groups requiring special attention.

Environmental Safeguard Issues

The project is specially designed to bring about positive health and environmental benefits through
supply of `safe' drinking water from sustainable sources and creation of sanitary conditions in the
village. As a result, the environmental and health conditions in the rural villages are expected to improve
considerably as compared to the without project situation. However, if the appropriate mitigation
measures are not planned, designed and implemented properly the project could result in some adverse
impacts and for this reason the project has been classified as Category B project. The potential adverse
impacts are summarized below.

(a) Water quantity related issues: Water supply schemes under the project will involve extracting water
from ground/surface water sources thorough deep borewells or intake structures. The associated
environmental issues are:

         Risk of lowering ground water level.
         Risk of hydraulic interference between existing and new dug / bore well sources.
         Risk of affecting ground water quality.

(b) Water quality problems: The drinking water quality in the project area is affected by a mix of
parameters, mainly fluorides, nitrates, iron and TDS in the ground water. According to GOK estimates
for 2000, 66% habitations in the project area have potable groundwater, 12% have excessive fluorides,
5% excessive nitrates, 8% excessive iron and 9% excessive TDS. The practice of routine water quality
monitoring and surveillance needs to be strengthened.

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS




 (c) Poor operational performance of existing RWS facilities: Inefficient management of existing water
 supply infrastructure by GPs is a major issue : overflowing of overhead tanks and cisterns, inadequate
 preventive and break down maintenance, leakage and wastage and non-use of chlorination equipment.
 The performance improvement will demand creating community ownership, awareness and
 accountability.

 (d) Water distribution systems: The project interventions will include providing water transmission and
 distribution systems, delivery points, treatment and dis-infection facilities and strengthening water
 quality monitoring programs. Related environmental issues will be:

          Risk of leakage from the pipelines and ingress of sullage water
          Risk of supplying unsafe water to the users due to inappropriate design or use of water treatment
          and disinfection units
          Risk of improper handling of water by the households leading to water contamination and
          increase in waterborne diseases

 (e) Household Sanitation systems: The project will undertake installation of household sanitation
 systems/ownership based group latrines/institutional latrines. The project also includes provision of
 bio-gas plants, smokeless/improved chullhas and community compost yards. The only associated
 environmental issue will be:

          Risk of ground water contamination from household and other latrine systems.

 (f) Environmental Sanitation: The project will undertake construction of road side drains, and sullage
 disposal systems. The associated environmental issues will be:

          If the internal village drainage system is not properly designed, it will lead to accumulation of
          water and result in unsanitary and unhygienic conditions and increase in water-borne diseases.

 (g) Health and hygiene Practices: The project will have a major sanitation and hygiene promotion
 component, which should lead to improved sanitation and hygienic behavior and will not have any
 adverse impact on the beneficiaries, but will benefit them.

 II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
 due to multiple project component.

Many of the project components will have complementary positive impact on the environment. For
example, a combination of ground water recharge measures, greater ownership by local communities and
integrated management of local water resources by local people will improve sustainability of
drinking water sources. Selection of safe drinking water sources coupled with water quality monitoring
programs and hygiene education will contribute to reduction in water borne diseases and lead to better
health of rural people.

 II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.


 II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
 Not required

                                                             5
                                                                                                                     ISDS



 II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

Rules of taking possession of land for project purposes acquisition. The project will not resort to any
involuntary land acquisition. All donations and purchases will be voluntary. Mechanisms will be
developed not only to ensure the voluntariness but also that it will not involve any significant adverse
impacts upon incomes or physical displacement. All voluntary land transactions will meet the following
criteria: (i) the land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of encumbrances; (ii)
lands will be chosen (by the community) after ensuring that water indeed will be available in that
particular piece of land; (iii) verification of the voluntary nature of land donations in each case; (iii) land
transfers will be complete and land title will be vested in the community; and (iv) provision will be made
for redressal of grievances, if any. All voluntary transactions will be documented and signed by both the
parties. Agreements on above will be reached during appraisal and legal documents will include necessary
clauses.

Indigenous Peoples ­ Lambanis. The preliminary investigations have revealed that there are some 0.4
million (2% of the project area population) Lambanis (formerly nomadic tribal people) residing in over
350 settlements in the project area. Research work done by Karnataka University is believed to report that
Lambanis were classified as a denotified criminal tribe during 1920s (vide Criminal Tribes Act , the
Government of Bombay, 1928). Characteristically, a large number of them tend to live in groups away
from the main village. These Lambani settlements/hamlets are known as Thanda (synonymous to Group).
While Lambanis are scheduled as "Tribes" in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa, they are `scheduled castes' in
Karnataka (SC). Government of Karnataka has a number of special programs aimed at benefiting SCs.
Despite such efforts, Lambanis do face incidences of poverty, illiteracy, poor health and unhygienic
sanitation facilities. This means the Thandas should be accorded special attention vis-à-vis the
non-Thandas. Some adjustments will necessarily have to be made in the design of the delivery systems so
as to ensure that project benefits do reach them.

Indigenous Peoples ­ Siddhis. Siddhis are of Negroid origin who are believed to have been brought to the
Western coast of India from Abyssinia (now Ethiopia) and other East African countries as slaves and
domestic servants by merchants, traders and Portugese. While Siddhis are spread across the states of
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Karnataka, they are mainly concentrated in Uttara Kannada district in
Karnataka. In Gujarat, they are classified as Scheduled Tribe (ST), and in Karnataka, Backward Castes.
Total population of Siddhis in India is estimated to be about 14,000. Of these, 10,622 (or 76%) live in
Uttara Kannada district (Obeng, Pashington., Survival Strategies: African Indians of Karnataka, South India.Winter 2000,
Vol 4, No. 4, Princeton Theological Seminary, August 2000). Within the district, they are confined to the Taluks of
Yellapur, Haliyal, Ankola and Mundgod. Siddhi population in the district accounts for 0.5% of the total
population and are completely Indianized ­ they speak local languages, practise local religions including
Hinduism, Islam and Christianity. Economically and educationally, they are easily one of the most
backward groups. Land ownership is very low. Most eke out their living through wage labor. They live in
small thatched roof huts in and around forest areas. Accessibility and communication facilities are very
poor. Efforts are underway by some awakened youth to mobilize the Siddhis. Their main agenda has been
to canvass and ensure that Siddhis are recognized as Scheduled Tribe and thus be entitled to all the
benefits enjoyed by the STs in India. The district administration has made a strong case to the state
government in this regard. The state, too, on its part, has taken up this issue with the Government of India.
It is over two decades that this demand has emanated, and the case is still under examination.

A separate IPDP has been prepared to enable project reach Siddhis and Lambani Thandas. This is
designed based on two guiding principles: inclusion and institutional development. Towards adopting this,
in contrast to the project's main principle of self-selection, IPDP will resort to selective targeting and
prioritizing. Changes have been made to institutional arrangements. The project has agreed to Lambanis'

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS



request for a direct intervention from ZP by-passing the GPs. That is, unlike in the case of the main
project, GP will not be a focal point. Towards educating Lambanis on this institutional arrangement,
special IEC campaigns will be designed and implemented. In respect of Siddhis, all those settlements
which have a Siddhi population of 25% or more are considered as Siddhi settlements and will be accorded
priority. All other stipulations including cost sharing regulations will remain the same as worked out for
the project's main villages. Special professional technical (engineering and community development)
assistance through Zilla Panchayat Engineering Division will be provided. Emphasis will be more on local
level human and institutional development and sanitation and hygiene promotion. Additionally, special
efforts at building the capacity with emphasis on gender will be ensured. Towards capacitating women,
they will be mobilized into self help groups. The groups will be enabled to plan for micro-enterprises
(associated with WSS) and will be financed on a priority basis. Thus, the IPDP will chiefly support in
fostering and empowering autonomous and inclusive grassroots Indigenous Peoples Institutions. The
project will also support a consulting study in Uttara Kannada, aimed at developing
socio-economic-cultural profile of Siddhis and other 5 backward communities. It is hoped that this will
help in making a strong case with the Government of India for recognizing Siddhis as Scheduled Tribes.
Separate provision has been made in the project which would finance civil works contracts and
consultancy contracts for community development and infrastructure building in about 400 settlements
(200,000 people) inhabited by the identified IPs (Lambanis and Siddhis) in the project districts. The civil
works include water supply and sanitation schemes and the consultancies relate to providing community
development support and a special anthropological study. The project has designed a four-fold monitoring
and evaluation system with a set of measurable indicators.

Environmental Safeguard Measures

Following studies have been carried out in the preparatory phase of the project, to better understand the
environmental issues related to the project area and propose specific mitigatory measures:

(i) Environmental Analysis ­ to assess the environmental issues in the project area, based on secondary
sources of information and public consultations; prepare an Environmental Management Plan and related
Performance Indicators.

(ii) Water Quality Analysis ­ to assess water quality issues including chemical and bacteriological
parameters, based on a sample of existing drinking water supply `sources' and `end' points in the pilot
project area.

(iii) Water Quality Mapping ­ to get a better assessment of the Taluk wise water quality situation of the
project area and use the information to design drinking water schemes. The available water quality
information is being added onto the GIS maps already under preparation for the Community-based Tank
Management Project in Karnataka.

An inventory of `hotspots' related to the water quantity and quality issues was prepared; appropriate
strategies and hierarchy of technical options to tackle the environmental issues were developed;
institutional arrangements for addressing these issues and related performance indicators were agreed
upon; and cross links to components and programs in the PIP have been made (details are in EA Report).

Following are the proposed mitigatory measures:

Water quantity related issues

              Proper selection of sites for drilling of borewells using scientific methods; input from the

                                                       7
                                                                                                          ISDS



             State Department of Mines and Geology regarding classification of watersheds as safe and
             unsafe for extraction of ground water
             Ground water recharge at the source point to promote sustainability of source
             Periodic review of water level fluctuations based on information from Mines and Geology
             Department
             Groundwater Bill, on regulation for protection of sources of drinking water, has been passed
             by the Karnataka Legislative Assembly in July 1999. The bill on being implemented, will
             prohibit sinking of any well within 500 m of public sources of drinking water, without
             obtaining a permission.
             Construction of a well planned network of drains for safe disposal of sullage water

Water quality problems

             For quality affected water sources: use of alternate local or distant ground/surface sources for
             single/multi village schemes as appropriate.
             Effective and continuous chlorination programs of existing and new water supplies, along
             with regular `residual chlorine' water quality testing at local levels.
             Extensive water quality monitoring: water quality testing at source development, routine
             testing by GPs and user groups using field kits, statewide water quality surveys of existing
             sources by KRWSSA with focus on hotspot areas and independent water quality surveillance
             by district health officers.

Poor operational performance of schemes

             Preparation of a detailed technical manual on standard design and construction practices and
             specifications for each work and installation that will be provided under the project.

Household Latrines and Environmental Sanitation Schemes

             Selection and installation of `safe' sanitation systems to suit local soil types and
             hydro-geological conditions. Low cost sanitation systems such as the single/two pit pour
             flush (TPPF) latrines could be provided for individual households. Wherever there is a
             constraint of household space, `group of latrines' could be considered on individual
             ownership basis.
             Using existing/developing new codes of practices for various technology options of
             household latrines, drainage schemes, smokeless chullahs, biogas plants and manure pits
             Developing various codes of practices in regional language and user friendly presentations
             for use by GPs and households.

Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion (SHP) Programs

             To promote a "total sanitation" perspective and achieve sustainable health and hygiene
             benefits, the project will foster the understanding of complementarity between water,
             sanitation and health. It will increase awareness of the benefits of improved water supply and
             sanitation facilities and hygienic behavior and strengthen local capacities for a self-sustained
             and gender sensitive SHP. To achieve this, the project will include developing and
             dissemination of IEC material, both interpersonal and mass media. Reputed consultants have
             been recruited to develop a detailed SHP strategy for the project. Experience from the
             previous project will be fully utilized.

                                                       8
                                                                                                        ISDS



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

(i) Village level -- The direct beneficiaries include: the benefiting households in the habitation and the
sub-groups thereof ­ landless laborers; marginal farmers; backward castes, scheduled castes; Lambani
Thanda; women, in general, and women headed households, in particular.

(ii) Gram Panchayat level -- The direct beneficiaries include: elected representatives (men/ women;
SC/ST/others), non-elected government personnel, and employment seeking youth and other skilled
workers. Indirect beneficiaries include: contractors, consultants, NGOs, social and religious groups and
traders.

(iii) District/Taluk/State level -- Zilla Panchayat/ Taluk Panchayat members and staff;
state government departments of rural development engineering, agriculture, watershed, mines &
geology, health; manufacturers; traders; consultants; and researchers. State level stakeholders are,
mainly, the department of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj; and other associated state government
departments.

Consultations and Disclosure: Social Issues

Number of consultations held:
         Second preparation mission (January 2001): 4 teams, 12 consultations, each meeting with at least
         20 participants. Total participants ­ 240; State level meeting: 15 participants.
         Third Preparation Mission (May 2001): Participatory Demand Assessments, 3 villages each;
         total ­ 9 meetings; 50 persons each ­ 450 participants.
         By social Assessment and SHP study consultants during February-May 2001: (a) Village level ­
         19 villages ­ 140 meetings ­ 776 participants, (b) Taluk level ­ 7 meetings ­ 73 participants; (c)
         District level ­ 7 meetings ­ 83 participants.

Main issues identified: (i) Primary Management Unit, Gram Panchayat Vs village: welcoming the
project's design to have GP as the focal point, it was expressed that all project decisions necessarily have
to be made village-wise and that GP can only be an intermediary but not a primary management unit; (ii)
Village vs Habitations: all habitations (small, poor and the Thandas) have an opportunity to participate in
the project; (iii) Inclusion within a village: ensuring that all sections, including Scheduled Caste and
Janata Colony households derive benefits; (iv)Accountability, Transparency and Quality Assurance:
communities were eager to know mechanisms in the project to address these issues. Related questions
were: who will plan/design, how decisions are made on who will construct, will it be tendered, who will
prepare the tender, how will it be evaluated, who will supervise the works, who will certify for quality
and quantity etc. (v) Women participation: women are the primary providers. Their participation is
critical to the successes; (vi) Inadequate GP/Community Capacity; (vii) Community contribution towards
capital cost ­ questions on this included: why, how much, how will it be mobilized, should it be cash
alone or cash and kind are allowed, can cross subsidization be done across the community etc.(viii)
Operation and Maintenance ­ financial, technical and institutional implications if community themselves
are to undertake O&M; (ix) Role of other PRIs and GOK; (x) Mechanism for smooth funds flow.

Disclosure : Both Social Assessment (SA) and Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) have been
summarized and translated in to Kannada. Copies of these have be shared with all ZP, TP and GPs. Once
the project becomes effective special campaign towards creating awareness on the IPDP provisions will
be made through NGOs among Siddhis, Lambanis and elected representatives.

                                                      9
                                                                                                        ISDS



Consultations and Disclosure: Environmental Issues

For EA, eight public consultations have been held, two in each of the pilot districts (Belgaum, Dharwad
and Gulbarga) and two in Gadag to identify the environmental issues related to the project. The districts
and the Gram Panchayats selected for public consultations are representative of the environmental issues
pertaining to the entire project area. To carry out the public consultations, preparatory meetings were
held with the district level government officials and panchayat level Gram Panchayat members. The
public consultations were organized with the help of local NGOs, consultants and PPMU. The main
issues arising from the public consultations are: (i) Acute scarcity of potable water in summer months;
(ii) Difficulty of movement of people, vehicles and cattle, due to unpaved and badly maintained internal
village roads; (iii) Poor environmental sanitation conditions due to stagnation of sullage in lanes/streets
and stagnation of water around public water points; (iv) Lack of household sanitation facilities; space
constraints in houses for construction of household latrines; (v) Recurring incidence of water-borne
diseases; (vi) Indoor air pollution problems due to smoke emissions from the cooking area and very poor
ventilation; and (vii) Excessive concentration of fluorides in areas of Gadag district, manifested by
fluorisis in small children.

Disclosure: Summary EMP along with the performance indicators (in Kannada language) have been
displayed at the six pilot GPs and 2 GPs in Gadag District.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               7/20/2001        7/20/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           7/17/2001        7/17/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            8/1/2001         11/1/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               9/18/2001        9/18/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           9/1/2001         9/1/2001

                                                   10
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of submission to InfoShop                                         11/1/2001        11/1/2001

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ghanasham V. Abhyankar                             11/20/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Suryanarayan Satish/Person/World Bank              11/20/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Smita Misra/Person/World Bank                      11/20/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                                      11/21/2001
Sector Manager/Director              Keith Robert A. Oblitas                            11/21/2001

