ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorid Frce of Poverty
InfoShop
1".,  . V .. A l 11 .
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/08/2002                                   24658
Section I - Basic Information                                        August 8, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDONESIA                                Project ID: P060668
Project: Urban Water Supply Project               Task Team Leader: Vijay Jagannathan
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 28, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m): 60.00
Bank Approval: November 11, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASUR                              Sector: Water supply (50%); Micro- and SME
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  finance (20%); Sanitation (10%); Sewerage (10%);
Status: Lending                                  Sub-national government administration (10%)
Theme: Legal services (P); Access to urban services
for the poor (P); Municipal governance and
institution building (P); Water resource management
(P); Other human development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the Indonesia Water Supply Project is to assist GOI implement policies and investment
programs that enable consumers in Indonesian towns and growing urban areas receive sustainable water
supply and sanitation services.
The program will finance water supply and sanitation investments targeting urban communities that
express demand for improved services, with special focus on low income communities living in these
urbanizing centers. For this to take place on the massive scale that is required PDAMs will be provided
incentives to function as commercial enterprises, induce private sector participation, and partner with
local governments to improve wastewater collection and treatment. In addition, as a part of project
preparation the GOI will also be assisted in developing financing mechanisms through which low income
communities can participate as full-fledged paying customers of piped water supply systems. Bank
financing will also support and strengthen existing entrepreneurship in the water sector, and encourage
Indonesian and international firms to bid for design, build and operate water supply systems in the
participating local governments.
The project's development objective, therefore, aims at consolidating the long term gains of FRAP
implementation in PDAMs that have completed the rescue program, expanded sewerage infrastructure in
local governments, facilitated private sector participation in operating and maintaining constructed
facilities, while designing specific instruments to ensure inclusion of low income communities residing
in the service areas.



2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will be implemented through the office of the Directorate General, Urban and Rural
Development, Ministry of Settlement and Regional Infrastructure. Based on the identification
mission's doscussions with GOI the following components will be included:
1.    Water supply expansion component: This component can finance investments in
expanding water supply services in PDAMs in one of two ways, with the loans guaranteed by
Local Governments. First, in PDAMs that have either successfully implemented FRAPs or do
not require FRAPs because they are commercially viable (assuming that both are unlikely to
attract private financing in the current macro-economic environment), the project will finance
investments through the existing PDAM organization. Second, in other urban areas where the
Local Governments want to immediately expand services, public-private partnerships will be
promoted through project financing. The Local Governments can borrow the investment funds,
and private operators can be invited to construct and operate the water supply systems through
design-build-lease (DBL) contracts. Project preparation of the former subcomponent will be
undertaken by the PDAM, and for the latter subcomponent by the PHRD grant.
2.    Water supply asset optimization component: This component will assist PDAMs that
have successfully completed FRAPs with small loans that enable them to expand services
through investments in piped networks, house connections, meters etc. The size of an individual
loan should not exceed $180,000 for goods that will increase the PDAM's cash flow, and
procured through national competitive bids. Payment needs to be coursed directly to the PDAM
through a public sector Bank, that will assume the credit risk, with guarantees from the
concerned local government.
3.    Sanitation component: This component will pilot a sewerage and sanitation program
based on demand from local governments, and best practices in pilot areas in other cities. It will
test out an appropriate incentive structure that encourages local governments to invest in
collecting and treating sewage and septage within their urban communities.
(ii)  Project Eligibility Criteria and proposed project rules
Water Supply expansion component:
*     Investments in water supply infrastructure should be fully recovered from users and/or
local governments.
*     Any area or cluster of IKKs (subdistrict capitals) not served by a PDAM can be included
in the program, proposed by local government.
*     Expression of interest submitted to the PMO should be signed by Bupati/Walikota and
endorsed by the DPRD, as required by MOF.
*     Land and water sources required for the project will either be provided or acquired by the
local government/PDAM using procedures consistent with Bank guidelines.
*     Financial projections utilizing the FINPRO model will present financing options to
Walikotas/Bupatis and their DPRDs by project preparation team in order to determine borrowing
capacity.
*     Beneficiaries will be consulted at the level of RW/RT or equivalent on proposed service
levels and tariffs.



3
ISDS
*     Procurement will follows World Bank Guidelines for goods, services, works and
selection of DBL operators.
*     In DBL contracts operator will provide equity as required by GOI, and any additional
equity as,  determined at appraisal.
Water Supply Asset Optimization component:
*     All applicants must be implementing FRAPs, prepared prior to submitting the
application.
*     Water supply capacity must exceed 1.5 times present production in the system.
*     Subloans will not exceed $180,000 for each year, provided that procurement package
does not exceed $200,000, and the subsequent loans conditional on successful implementation of
the previous subloans.
*     The local government will guarantee the subloans
*     A national or regional development Bank will conduit the loan to the PDAM
*     The Bank will directly pay suppliers for the goods procured for this component
Sewerage and Sanitation component
(a) Sewerage component
*     Application must be received from local government
*     Pilot sewerage already implemented in other cities should be used as reference
*     PDAM will be responsible for operations, maintenance and bill collection
*     Incentives from GOI level in terms of financial and technical support will be developed
by project  appraisal.
(b) Sanitation sub-component:
*     Any household with a house connection can apply for financing to improve in-house
plumbing and improving on-site wastewater disposal arrangements
*     Proposed investment will be reviewed by PDAM/local government staff
*     Loans will be amortized through the water bill
*     Community organizations (such as BKMs and NGOs) will be consulted in the selection
process.
Components:
Water Supply Expansion component
Water Supply Asset Optimization component
Sewerage and Sanitation Component
Project Management Consultant



4
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments:
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        C Yes * No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                C Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/1P 4.37)                                  0 Yes 0 No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    C Yes 0 No    C TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 * Yes C No    QTBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 C Yes * No    CTBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            C Yes 0 No    CTBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No    C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Il.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



5
ISDS
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Operational Manual, which includes detailed guidelines on environmental assessments,
Compensation and Resettlement guidelines will be completed by appraisal.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project-supported activities will involve the participation of primary beneficiaries (households
willing to secure a water supply connection and ready to pay user fee) in improving the network of water
supply through community mobilization. This will be done through the establishment of Water Users
Groups (WUGs), and the empowerment of these groups to speak on behalf of the communities at the
kelurahan level. Capacity building support will enable the WUGs to (i) target the needs of especially
vulnerable groups such as poorer households, children and women in their participation in the project
cycle; (ii) promote greater participation and transparency in planning and decision making at the grass
roots; (iii) create a sense of community ownership and-responsibility over infrastructure by establishing a
dialogue and information dissemination mechanism with water utility operator, and (iv) enhance their
basic understanding to maintain oversight over the system operators. A Community Mobilization Process
(or Outreach Program) will be used to assist WUGs to engage in a dialogue with the provincial project
office of the PMU and the selected private operator, be engaged through the project cycle, and oversee
the implementation of the sanitation component of the project. In addition, the community mobilization
process will serve to guide the larger community involvement in decision making by linking the above
outputs with activities of information dissemination, consultation, collective decision making, and
delegation of responsibilities. In this way, residents will be the main interlocutors with the private
operators, and will directly coordinate with him/her.
Simultaneously, the institutional capacity of other key stakeholders (such as the BAPPEDA Tingkat 11
level), and local NGOs intending to work on water-related issues to respond to priorities expressed by the
households will also be improved through interaction with the WUGs.
In support of the project's emphasis on community participation and sustainability of the water supply
facilities to be created, the PMO will be responsible for overseeing the following efforts:
*          Provide the beneficiary communities with close guidance at the time of preparation, selection
of the operator and during implementation of the project;
*          Enable community representatives will participate in the bid evaluation committees for
selection of the operator;
*          Ensure that community oversight of the private operator is recognized in the regulatory
framework that is currently under development, and
*          Engage in regular post-hand over monitoring visits, so that the lessons learned are observed
and utilized to strengthen project design in APLs 2 and 3.
During the project preparation stage, four steps will ensure beneficiary involvement in the project. These
are:
Step I (June 2002): A letter of intent signed by the Bupati, submitted to the Chairman of the PSC
signifying the interest of the province and community to participate in the proposed project;
Step 2 (August 2002): Selection of 20 subprojects by GOI;



6
ISDS
Step 3 (August-September. 2002): Mobilization of consultant team to prepare the feasibility studies and
preliminary designs in project towns
Step 4 (December 2002-March 2003): Results of the feasibility study and socioeconomic surveys i.e.
technical options, management options, financial assessment and cost recovery options will be presented
to the kelurahans and districts to inform them of the technical and pricing options available. The
agreements and decisions made will be embodied in a formal resolution, confirming the local
administration's willingness to:
(i) delegate the day-to-day management of the water utilities through supervision contracts to
professional water management organizations;
(ii) adopt water tariff rates to levels that will ensure system sustainability;
(iii) undertake specific investments to ensure that there are no adverse environmental impacts from
augmented water supply, and
(iv) borrow from the project funds on terms and conditions specified by the GOI.
Step 5 (April 2003): The provisions of the Community Resolution will be presented and discussed in a
series of meetings at the kelurahan that will be served by the project. The result of the commune
meetings is the signing of the Willingness-to-Connect (WTC) form by individual households. The WTC
is a clear measure of demand at the household/community level. At least 60% of the target households to
be served by the water supply project should sign and submit this document so that the project will
proceed to implementation. If a number below 60% is reached, the project will not be implemented
even if there is a demand at the provincial or district level. The results of the commune meetings, WTC
and the detailed engineering design will be presented to the district and provincial level for final
approval
All of the four activities mentioned above will undergo an iterative process of (i) information
dissemination; (ii) discussions; (iii) decision-making; and (iv) commitment and responsibility,
summarizes the participatory process adopted by the project team.
Indigenous People: Proposed sub-projects that affect the customary rights of indigenous people are not
eligible for financing and it will be included in the Project Operations Manual as one of the subproject
criteria. In other situations where indigenous people live in participating towns, the Operational Manual
requires that decisions of service levels and tariffs are taken after adequate consultation and participation
of households at the community level. A strategy for the informed participation of and consultation with
indigenous peoples will be included in the Operations Manual.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements



7
ISDS
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Vijay Jagannathan                           6/25/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Jitendra J. Shah/Person/World Bank     7/01/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Cyprian F. Fisiy/Person/World Bank     6/28/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          7/0102
Sector Manager/Director:      Keshav Varma                                6/25/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAViCN__ |    CEEDBACK 5- SlIaHP YHOWCA5Ei



