Report No. 23701
Report No: I072852 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDONESIA       Project ID: P072852
Project: Community Driven Urban Development Project       Task Team Leader:
Aniruddha Dasgupta
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 28, 2002 IBRD Amount ($m): 75.00
Bank Approval: May 28, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 75.00
Managing Unit: EASUR     Sector: UY - Other Urban Development
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objectives of this project are: (i) to empower urban communities to
address poverty through strengthening community organizations; (ii) to
improve the capacity of local government agencies to work with community
organizations for poverty alleviation; amd (iii) to improve the welfare of
the urban poor.
These objectives will be achieved through: (i) building community capacity
for the formation and institutionalization of democratically elected
kelurahan (neighborhood) level organizations that are accountable to
communities; (ii) provision of grants to communities directly and
transparently through these kelurahan organizations to finance poverty
alleviation activities; (iii) provision of a Poverty Alleviation Fund at
the local government level for cross-kelurahan activities, accessed
through joint proposals from these kelurahan organizations and local
government agencies; and (iv) strengthening the capacities of local
governments to work with community organizations.
This project is a follow-on from an existing project in Indonesia, the
Urban Poverty Project (Cr. 3210-IND), approved by the Board in April
1999. Significant lessons have been learned from this first Urban Poverty
Project (UPP1) which have been incorporated in the design of the second
project.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project Principles
The project is based on the following principles:
That there are people within communities that are concerned about poverty
alleviation and willing to devote time and energy voluntarily to take
actions for reducing poverty
That if elections are held in a participatory manner, a community
organization can be created that can be relied on to make decisions on
allocation of funds to the community and manage such funds in a more
accountable and transparent manner than the traditional
government/administrative apparatus
That such organizations need to partner with local governments, and at the



same time, remain independent, transparent and accountable to communities
Project Components
The project is divided into four components:
support for the formation and institutionalization of democratically
elected kelurahan level organizations that are accountable to communities
and the provision of grants to support kelurahan "Community Development
Plans" which may include various types of poverty alleviation activities
(such as basic infrastructure, training, revolving funds for economic
activities, etc.);
the provision of grants for a Poverty Alleviation Fund at the local
government level to support cross-kelurahan activities and thereby
facilitate a partnerships between local governments and communities;
capacity building for communities, as well as central, provincial and
local governments to strengthen their ability to work together; and
technical assistance for project implementation and management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover the islands of Kalimantan and Sulawesi and southern
parts of provinces of South Java that have not been covered by UPP1 (West,
Central and East Jave). A total of 12 provinces will be covered, and it
is expected that approximately 3000 kelurahans will participate. The
project will cover mostly urban areas, and is not expected to affect any
protected areas, natural habitats or other culturally or socially
sensitive areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Category "B" is appropriate because impacts from any one
subproject are expected to be small and can be readily mitigated through
the project's negative list, or through standard operating procedures and
guidelines developed under the project. Adverse environmental impacts are
expected to be limited and highly localized (e.g. environmental pollution
from small scale enterprises financed through microcredit). This approach
has been used for both the Village Infrastructure Projects and the
Kecamatan Development Projects. Sub-projects are not expected to require
any acquisition of land.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
-2 -



*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is expected to finance largely two types of activities:
microfinance for income generation and small scale physical
infrastructure. Specific activities will be demand driven, based on
proposals that will be vetted by a committee consisting of NGOs,
academics, leaders of community organizations, and government officials.
Microfinance activities will be small in scale, and though the size of
physical infrastructure proposals may vary, these are also not expected to
be large. Neither of these types of activities is therefore expected to
have any large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None anticipated
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None anticipated
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Different levels of environmental assessments (EAs) and screening
procedures will be developed during project preparation for different
sizes of sub-project proposals--with more rigorous environmental screening
for larger projects. This will include guidelines for EAs and proposals
for mitigation measures. Manuals and guidelines developed under KDP will
be adopted for this project to ensure consistency. If any schools are to
be renovated, special mitigation measures to address any issues with
asbestos will be developed and applied.
The menu for the Poverty Alleviation Fund is open, and kelurahan
organizations and local governments will choose the types of activities
they want to finance. Since activities are not restricted, it is possible
that OPs regarding natural habitats and cultural property might be
applicable. During project preparation, an analysis will be made
regarding the types of activities that may be financed, and measures
developed and incorporated in the project manual and in the Environmental
Assessment procedures and guidelines to ensure that the relevant OPs are
followed. Since the ceiling for individual sub-projects under the PAF is
low it is unlikely that any of these OPs will be a critical factor.
- 3 -



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key goal of the project is to achieve greater community participation
in decisionmaking and to empower communities by providing funds directly
to them. Choices about the allocation of kelurahan grants are entirely up
to the communities through kelurahan organizations and community groups
(with very few limitations). Allocation of funds under the PAF will be
based on proposals that will also originate from community groups in
conjunction with local government dinases, and proposals will be vetted by
a committee consisting of NGOs, academics, government officials and
community organizations. The committees will be required to follow the
guidelines for safeguards included in the project manuals prior to
allocating funds. These guidelines will be made available to the public
during a public disclosure workshop during project preparation, and also
be made available to the community organizations/dinases preparing
proposals. Kelurahan facilitators from the project will be trained in the
understanding and application of the guidelines. Communities will be in
charge of deciding all implementation and procurement arrangements, and
follow-up on guidelines and approved proposals will be monitored by
kelurahan facilitators and other project staff.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
- 4 -



Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Aniruddha Dasgupta      January 17, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Farida Zaituni/Person/World Bank     January 17, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Thomas E. Walton/Person/World Bank   January 22, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank    January 22, 2002
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan February 14, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Keshav Varma    January 22, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5-



