                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                              Report No: AC165
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDONESIA                                           Project ID: P079753
Project: Catchment Protection Project                        Task Team Leader: Geoffrey Spencer
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 9, 2003               IBRD Amount ($m): 3.20
Bank Approval: November 3, 2003                              IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASRD                                         Sector: Forestry (50%); Crops (50%)
Lending Instrument: Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL)       Theme: Water resource management (P)
Status: Lending


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
Development of participatory and community-based public forest land conservation modalities and
sustainable income-generating incentives for
selected pilot areas in the Java upper watersheds.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The pilot would focus on 3-4 selected river basins on in three provinces on Java with each pilot area
typically being about 200 Ha each. Selection of the pilot areas would be done on the basis of: (i) A
demonstration by District government that it is proactive in promoting good governance by empowering
farmers; (ii) a clear recognition is arising among the main stakeholders (and notably the Balai PSDA and
downstream water users) about the externalities of poor management of the upper catchment; (iii) the
social, geographic and physical attributes of the upper catchment suggest that an approach connecting
basin management and upper catchment management through community-based forest management is
likely to contribute to mitigation of the water system-related problems; (iv) The pilots would support the
formation and fostering of community based organizations of agro-forestry farm families based on a
genuine demand from farmers. Each organization would be supported by a facilitating NGO and
technically through an extension team at sub-district level to assist them to design and implement their
own watershed management plan, which is likely to include agro-forestry activities. As an integral part
of the community planning process, piloting of different land-lease, extension and produce marketing
arrangement for example would be trialed. This would lead to a major output of the LIL, the production
of operational manuals, samples of Regional Decrees etc.


The project would have three components:

A.      Empowering Community Groups

1. Establishment and piloting of land-lease/licensing arrangements and allocation of plots after land
potential survey completed.

2. Establishment, capacity building and technical/extension support of community groups

3. Development of upper watershed participatory planning system and preparation of 3-4 plans based on
Agro-Ecological Zoning (AZ) maps.

                                                           2
                                                                                                               ISDS



   The project would finance small scale civil works for soil conservation (terracing), drainage, the
   production of AZ maps, appropriate planting materials, technical assistance and training for
   capacity building.

   B.       Institutional Strengthening

   1. Establishment of a coordination group at district level (Dewan SDA WS) and its capacity building for
   upper watershed issues.

   2. Capacity building of River Basin Management entities (Balai SDA) for watershed program activities.

   3. Capacity building and program support of kabupaten dinas agencies (regional government) for
   watershed program activities together with establishment of Upper Basin Task Force (Pokja DAS K).

   The project would finance technical assistance and training, demonstrations and appropriate
   research.

    C.     Monitoring and Evaluation
   1. Establishment and funding of an effective independent M&E process.

   2. Establishment of hillside farming system and applied agro-forestry trials in each pilot area.

   3. Establishment and operation of runoff & sediment monitoring areas.

   4. Establishment of procedures for monitoring group/social, environmental economic impacts.


   5. Preparation of operational manuals and preparation framework activities for scaling up the
      pilot.

   The project would finance remote sensing and aerial photography data acquisition and analysis and
technical assistance.

   I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
   characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
   or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

   The LIL pilot schemes will be limited to about 4 all on Java of about 200 ha. each. The project area (pilot
   schemes) will all be on degraded public forest lands in the upper watershed. The population of communities
   immediately adjacent to these areas will be targeted. This population would be engaged directly in
   developing sustainable management plans and practices on these public lands. Pilot areas will be chosen so
   that they are not close to any protected areas or sites of critical natural habitat or and other cultural or
   socially sensitive areas.


   B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

   Comments: The overall objectives and the learning to be derived from the LIL include a strong environment
   and social emphasis. Both the PIP and the M&E component will address the environmental and social
   issues that attach to a participatory watershed management approach.

                                                      3
                                                                                                       ISDS




C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                         Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Social and Environmental Risk
        The social risks are dominant and mitigating these risks is at the center of the outcomes of the
        pilot. Project design and particularly the PIP would take into account and ensure against the
        following risks. In this regard, the M&E component will be monitoring and evaluate the success
        or failure of the social oriented objectives. Successful results will be a key determinate about
        replicability. The following specific social risks have been identified at this stage:

            Moral hazard: More illegal logging or deforestation to create degraded areas that are
            therefore eligible for acceptance in the scheme. This risk could be reduced by
            disqualification of any areas deforested in the years of implementation.
            Property claims: Invite property claims in state lands, especially where there are nearby
            areas of widespread agricultural encroachment. Program participants, however, stand to lose
            more from this practice than from holding legal leases or permits which would give them
            more certainty into the future. BPN does not and would not grant freehold title in land
            formally classified as state forest areas.
            Elite capture: Local influential groups may gain access to the project land. Elite capture is
            less likely than in conventional approaches. Transparent and inclusive development
            processes have been shown to be effective in preventing elite capture and in ensuring that the
            most land-needy farmers are more likely to be chosen as participants.
            Opportunistic farmers: Some individuals may not change their behavior and adopt proper
            longer term cropping system and land use practices that will be conditions of leases.
             Social jealousy: Social conflict may arise from the envy of those who are unable to
            participate in the project. Similar schemes have managed to avoid this problem through
            transparent and equitable selection processes.
            Subtle subversion by conservative forces within government forestry agencies, who

                                                   4
                                                                                                    ISDS



             would frustrate efforts to give tenurial certainty to community agroforesters, e.g.,
             interminably slow down the process, burden it with an unreasonably wide array of
             bureaucratic hurdles. Counter with effective transparency and participation revealing
             these negative tactics for what they are and thereby reducing their likelihood.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The objectives of the pilot are heavily oriented towards the environmental and social issues associated
with the sustainable management of upper catchment water sheds. Pilot scheme outcomes are expected
to provide answers to the social and environmental issues as a prerequisite for scaling up. The PIP will
address through a check list/framework, the environmental issues associated with likely project related
activities, the most common one being terracing of existing cleared steep slopes. Proper attention to
mitigating environmental concerns would be an integral part of each approved watershed management
plan.

                                                      5
                                                                                                        ISDS




Pest Management
The adoption of sustainable farming practices will include the proper management of pests and an IPM
approach. Each pilot scheme will include the development of an IPM plan.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
If the outcomes of the LIL are successful, the long term impact will be that the upper watershed treatment
programs for public /protected forests and private lands on Java are socially & environmentally
sustainable providing increasing control of watershed degradation and reduced adverse impacts in the
downstream basins.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The LIL approach will allow the develop of different approaches and alternatives for a given set of
    circumstances.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As a strong feature of the LIL M&E component would be the production of operational manual(s) that will
    include framework social and environmental assessments.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
At the local level, the members of the Communities in each of the pilot schemes, members of downstream
    communities affected by degradation of upper water sheds, NGOs, local government and ministries
    operating at a local level.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

                                                   6
                                                                                                  ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            5/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Geoffrey Spencer                                   1/29/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Cyprian F. Fisiy                                       03/28/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Mark D. Wilson                                     7/07/2003

