                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC292
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/17/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDONESIA                                            Project ID: P064728
Project: Land Management Policy Development Program           Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 14, 2003                 IBRD Amount ($m): 30.00
Bank Approval: April 1, 2004                                  IDA Amount ($m): 31.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                                          Sector: Central government administration (50%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Sub-national government administration (50%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Personal and property rights (P); Land
                                                              management (P); Administrative and civil service
                                                              reform (S); Decentralization (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the government programs in achieving poverty reduction,
economic growth and promote full utilization of land resources in a sustainable manner. The proposed
objectives of the project are: (i) improve land tenure security and enhance the efficiency, transparency, and
improve service delivery of land titling and registration; and (ii) enhance local government capacity to
undertake with great efficiency and transparency land management functions. These objectives will be
achieved through: (a) development of land policies and related laws and regulations to bring coherence
and consistency of laws and regulations related to administration and management of land affairs; (b)
institutional development and support to the central and local institutions responsible for              land
administration and management with a focus on improving service delivery of land offices through
establishment and monitoring of minimum service standards; (c) accelerating and expanding the systematic
land titling program and developing Land Information System (LIS); and (d) review the experience of local
government management of land affairs, provision of training and capacity building to all local
governments in standard operating procedures, and support to selected local governments (around 5) to be
a model of how local government can efficiently and effectively undertake their new functions on land
affairs.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
         Component 1: Development of Land Policy

                 Subcomponent 1.1 Development of Government Capacity to Formulate Land Policy
                 Subcomponent 1.2 Development of a National Land Policy
                 Subcomponent 1.3 Formulation of Specific Land Policy/Regulatory Instruments

         Component 2: Institutional Development, Capacity Building, and Training

                 Subcomponent 2.1 Development and Implementation of BPN Long-term Strategic Plan
                 Subcomponent 2.2 Re-Engineering of Land Offices
                 Subcomponent 2.3 Overall Project Management

                                     2
                                                                                       ISDS


Component 3: Implementation of An Accelerated Land Titling Program

     Subcomponent 3.1 Community Awareness and Participation
     Subcomponent 3.2 Systematic Land Titling
     Subcomponent 3.3 Support for Sporadic Registration
     Subcomponent 3.4 Development of the Private Surveying Sector

Component 4: Development of Land Information System

     Subcomponent 4.1 Development of a National Land Information Strategy
     Subcomponent 4.2 Establishment of LIS Infrastructure
     Subcomponent 4.3 Develop LIS Pilot Study

Component 5. Support to Local Government

     Subcomponent 5.1 In-depth assessment of Local Government's Capacity to undertake
                         Land Management
     Subcomponent 5.2 Training and Capacity Building
     Subcomponent 5.3 Investment support to selected (4 - 5) Local Governments
     Subcomponent 5.4 Preparation of an Investment Plan to support all local governments

     Subcomponent 5.5 MoHA Project Management Unit development

                                                        3
                                                                                                            ISDS




Components:


Component 1: Land Policy Component
Component 2: Institutional Development, Capacity Building, and Training
Component 3: Implementation of an Accelerated Land Titling Program
Component 4: Development of a Land Information System
Component 5: Support to Local Government




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Land titling will be on Java and selected urban centers off Java. There will be no land titling activities in Rural
Areas outside Java.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project is classified as category B because it is not expected to have significant adverse
environmental impacts. Other than construction of office space and related facilities, the project will not
support civil works, land conversion, resource extraction, industrial production or any activity that could
potentially damage the environment. Contracts for civil works under the project will be subject to screening
for environmental impacts by the local environmental entities (bapelda), which are responsible for this
activity. All contracts will include measures acceptable to the bapelda to minimize or mitigate environmental
damage. The project will not support land acquisition or associated involuntary resettlement. Policy
formulation and institutional development (about 25 percent the total project cost) are environmental
assessment category C. They are not subject to special environmental review requirements.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes   No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes   No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes   No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes   No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes   No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is not expected to have significant, large scale, or irreversible adverse environmental or social
impacts. The project will finance the expansion or construction of 10­12 small land office buildings.
Other than construction of office space and related facilities, the project will not support civil works, land
conversion, resource extraction, industrial production or any activity that could potentially damage the
environment. Construction of the buildings is expected to have little or no significant, large scale, or
irreversible adverse environmental impacts. Environmental impacts would arise primarily from poor site
management during the construction of the buildings.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
It is not expected to have any potential cumulative impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As described in paragraphs 5.5 and 6.5, NGOs will be contracted to monitor project implementation,
including compliance with the Bank's environmental and social safeguards. Bank supervision missions and
the midterm review will thoroughly review compliance and if needed propose actions to improve
performance. Bank specialists located in the Jakarta office will be available to address any issues as they
arise.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders are the people who will receive land titles under the project.             NGOs
representing the interests of a wide variety of groups have been during project preparation. These
include the included Legal Aid and the Foundation to Strengthen and Study the Community, both of
whom are involved with helping traditional communities gain formal recognition of their land rights.
Other groups consulted include the Association of Adat (an apex organization representing the
interests of traditional communities, the Consortium for Agrarian Reform, the Indonesia
Environmental Association, the Partnership on Local Government Initiatives, the Center for

                                                      5
                                                                                                           ISDS


Agrarian Study, the Archipelagos Alliance of Indigenous People, the Consortium Supporting Social
Forestry, the Association of Kota Governments (representing mayors) and the Association of
Provincial Governments. While the groups have diverse interests, they generally express support
for the project. The government has no objection to disclosure on safeguard policies.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/3/2003          7/9/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           3/10/2003         8/25/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Enviromental Guidelines will be submitted on October 28, 2003

                                                    6
                                                                                                      ISDS


Note: Under the new guidelines, there is no need to have safeguards classification. However, a rating was
typed for the purpose
of submitting this ISDS in SAP.

Signed and submitted by            Name                                                 Date
Task Team Leader:                  Wael Zakout                                          10/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Glenn S. Morgan/Person/World Bank                    11/14/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank                    11/03/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                      Name                                                  Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                        11/14/2003
Comments
Regional Safeguards Director       Maria Teresa Serra                                  11/14/2003

Sector Manager/Director            Mark D. Wilson                                       10/28/2003
Comments

