ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frec ol Poverty
nfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2003                                  25560
Section I - Basic Information                                       March 5, 2003
A. Basic Project Data
Country: INDONESIA                               Project ID: P063913
Project: Java-Bali Power Sector Restructuring and  Task Team Leader: M. Farhandi
Strengthening Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 7, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m): 140.00
Bank Approval: May 29, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASEG                             Sector: Power (95%); Oil and gas (5%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and
Status: Lending                                  privatization (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the Project is to improve the performance of the power sector on Java-Bali
by: (a) supporting the State power company (PLN) to implement its financial and corporate restructuring
plan, and to strengthen key elements of the Java-Bali electricity supply system; and (b) assisting the State
gas company (PGN) to prepare the groundwork for restructuring its gas transmission and distribution
operations, given the importance of natural gas for power generation.
This objective is to be achieved through the provision of Bank financing toward priority investments and
technical assistance for PLN, and technical assistance for PGN. In particular, project components for
PLN will: (i) support PLN's financial and corporate restructuring, by enhancing the company's
information technology capabilities; (ii) achieve greater utilization of existing generation capacity on
East Java, by relieving constraints in the bulk transmission grid; (iii) improve the reliability of existing
generation supply at the PLN and independent power producer (IPP) geothermal power plants on West
Java, by strengthening the associated local transmission system; and (iv) improve the reliability of power
supply at various locations throughout Java and Bali, by strengthening and debottlenecking local
transmission and subtransmission networks. Technical assistance to PGN will enhance its capabilities
for expanding gas utilization on Java.
I.A.3. Project Description:



2
ISDS
Component I - 500kV Transmission System
The Project will support PLN's initiatives to (a) achieve greater utilization of existing generation
capacity on Java, (b) improve the security of supply to the cities of Cirebon and Surabaya, (c)
debottleneck local interconnections between bulk transmission and subtransmission levels on Java; and
(d) replenish essential stocks of associated equipment. This will be achieved through the provision of
financing toward: (i) 500kV substation expansion; and (ii) 500kV circuit breakers.
Component 2 - 150kV Transmission System
The Project will support PLN's initiatives to (a) provide a level of security commensurate with the
existing and potential PLN and IPP geothermal generation capacity evacuated through the West Java
150kV subtransmission network near Bandung, (b) improve security of supply to Surabaya, and (c)
relieve multiple localized overloading and voltage problems at subtransmission level, via PLN's
150/70kV and 150/20kV transformer replacement and substation expansion program for Java-Bali (with
specific subprojects to be approved by the Bank during project implementation). This will be achieved
through the provision of financing toward: (i) 150kV subtransmission line uprating; (ii) 150kV substation
extensions; and (iii) 150kV circuit breakers.
Component 3 - Information Technology (Enterprise Resource Planning System)
The Project will support the implementation of PLN's financial and corporate restructuring program
through partial financing for PLN's improved information technology capabilities, in particular, the
initial rollout of an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. This will involve partial financing of
ERP software licenses along with related hardware (i.e., servers and local/wide area networks) and
consulting services.
Component 4 - PLN Technical Assistance
The Project will support PLN to (a) implement the institutional aspects of PLN's Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) for the Project, and (b) proceed further with preparation for the Upper Cisokan
pumped storage plant on Java. This will be achieved through the partial financing of technical assistance
for: (i) EMP implementation; and (ii) a review of the design of the Upper Cisokan pumped storage plant.
Component 5 - PGN Technical Assistance
The Project will support PGN's restructuring and institutional strengthening program, through the partial
financing of technical assistance for: (i) gas pricing; (ii) PGN corporate restructuring; (iii) PGN gas
distribution IPO; (iv) PGN gas transmission strategic partner; and (v) PGN capacity building.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project will support the uprating of existing transmission lines and the expansion of existing
substations throughout PLN's 500kV and 150kV interconnected transmission system on the islands of
Java and Bali. The key population likely to be affected are landholders along existing transmission
rights-of-way. Nevertheless, many of the potential impacts that would normally be of concern in an
electric transmission project are unlikely to arise under this Project. For all subprojects as currently
envisaged under the Project, no new transmission lines are planned, and PLN already owns or has access
rights to all of the land involved. No subcomponents are in proximity to any protected areas, sites of



3
ISDS
critical natural habitats, or culturally/socially sensitive areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Adverse environmental and social impacts of all of the Project's planned physical
subcomponents will be minor and easily manageable by means of good engineering, construction and
communication practice. Therefore, the Project has been rated as a category B project (i.e. Partial
Assessment).
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 3' No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            C' Yes * No    0TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C, Yes 0 No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes * No     0'TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               C Yes * No     C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes *No      J} TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No     C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 X.0 Yes * No   C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         C Yes * No     C TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No    C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The proposed Project activities consist of replacing or uprating the conductors on existing transmission
lines, expanding existing substations, and improving transformers and interconnectors within the existing
transmission system. For all subprojects as currently envisaged in the Project, no new transmission lines
are included; therefore there will be no associated need for land acquisition or resettlement, and no
dwellings, enterprises, or buildings will be adversely affected. Any land acquisition and compensation
which might arise for subprojects to be prepared during project implementation will be undertaken in
accordance with the Project's Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework. There are no
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's) involved, and there will be only limited increases in exposure to
electromagnetic fields (EMF). Principal concems relate to traffic control during rewiring, disposal of old
equipment, coordination of activities with other departments, and public information and relations with
communities where the subprojects would occur.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There will be no significant cumulative impacts.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
There are no potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



4
ISDS
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The choice of the Project's physical subcomponents was made after a full assessment of the Java-Bali
supply and demand balance, along with PLN's corresponding investment program. Subcomponents were
chosen based on their ability to: (i) achieve greater utilization of existing generation capacity on East
Java, by relieving constraints in the bulk transmission grid; (ii) improve the reliability of existing
generation supply at the West Java PLN and IPP geothermal power plants, by strengthening the
associated local transmission system; and (iii) improve the reliability and quality of power supply at
various poorly-performing locations throughout Java and Bali, by strengthening and debottlenecking
local subtransmission networks. All of the selected subcomponents are incremental investments that will
provide more cost effective improvements in supply efficiency, reliability and quality than would be the
case with constructing entirely new lines and substations. Furthermore, such investments will have
minimal environmental and social impacts, and can be commissioned more rapidly.
Not undertaking these investments would result in continued system bottlenecks and inefficiencies, in
turn creating an artificial demand for new power generation capacity, which-if such capacity were
constructed-would be constrained by the same bottlenecks. One alternative might be to utilize the same
level of funds on demand side measures. However, the Java-Bali system has suffered from chronic
underinvestment for the past 5-6 years, and the levet of system loadings in many localized areas are far in
excess of levels which could be efficiently mitigatecl by local demand side initiatives. Nevertheless, PLN
is not neglecting the demand side, having already initiated a comprehensive Integrated Resource Planning
(IRP) Program of both supply-side and demand-side measures, including: (i) increasing peak power
tariffs relative to off-peak tariffs; (ii) offering interruptible tariffs to large consumers, as well as buyback
tariffs from customers with their own captive power plants; and (iii) promoting the replacement of
existing street lighting with high efficiency bulbs. (This Program is being supported through grant
financing from USAID).
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The World Bank Group's safeguard policies on social and environmental issues were fully considered
and addressed during project preparation. An EMP has been prepared for the Project outlining
provisions to ensure compliance with safeguard policies during project implementation. PLN's
established procedures for designing, constructing, and maintaining transmission lines are summarized in
the 1996 General Policy Concerning the Establishment of Overhead Transmission Lines, and this has
been incorporated into the Project's EMP. The General Policy addresses public participation,
compensation and rehabilitation of property, and general mitigation measures. This Policy has
previously been reviewed and approved by the World Bank. The existing General Policy provides
adequate guidance for activities planned under the Project. Specific policies and procedures applicable
to any land acquisition and compensation which may arise during the course of project implementation
are addressed in the EMP, but have also been collated in a stand alone Land Acquisition and
Resettlement Policy Framework. Any land acquisition and compensation which might arise for
subprojects to be prepared during project implementation will be undertaken in accordance with this
Policy Framework. Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans consistent with this Policy
Framework will be submitted by PLN to the Bank for approval after specific planning information on
such subprojects becomes available.
PLN has established a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with overall responsibility for coordination and
management of the Project, and a subordinate Project Environmental Team (PET) will oversee and
coordinate all aspects of the Project's EMP. The PET will have the on-going task of environmental
screening of all subcomponents or activities to be funded under the Project. The PET will confirm that
for any changes or additions to the currently proposed subprojects, appropriate review is conducted. The



5
ISDS
PET will oversee any needed AMDAL studies in collaboration with the implementing PLN project
operations units. If either ANDAL-RKL-RPL or UKL-UPL are needed, the PET will review the terms of
reference, and provide advice and support to the implementing unit. The PET will also review the results
of any such studies to ensure that that they are satisfactorily completed and ready for submission to the
relevant AMDAL Commission.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the preparation of the draft EMP for the Project, PLN convened a public consultation session in
Surabaya with representatives from many stakeholder groups: government agencies, landholders, local
business, community organizations, and academics. During project implementation, subcomponents will
be screened by PLN's PET in order to determine their status under Indonesia's AMDAL requirements and
World Bank safeguard policies and procedures, in accordance with the Project's EMP. For all
subcomponents and activities likely to be conducted under the Project, the Indonesia's AMDAL
requirements equal or exceed the World Bank Safeguards in rigor, and an important component of the
AMDAL process is consultation with the public at the local level, in the kecematan (sub-districts) where
the subcomponent activities will take place. The Project's EMP and Land Acquisition and Resettlement
Policy Framework indicate that, where consultation is required, PLN survey teams will provide
site-specific maps describing physical impacts and project needs. Prior to any land acquisition, PLN will
conduct a public consultation and information campaign to inform the people of the project and to absorb
their views on impacts, concerns, compensation procedures, resettlement options, and project activities.
If necessary, consultation programs can be assisted by qualified independent entity (i.e. university), who
can provide informal door-to-door interviews to get reliable information and to establish close
communication between the project and any affected people.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/30/2003     1/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            2/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             2/14/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/30/2003     1/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            2/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             2/14/2003



6
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Siened and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             M. Farhandi                                 2/13/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Thomas E. Walton                       2/27/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Cyprian F. Fisiy                       2/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          2/28/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Keshav Varma (Acting)                       2/28/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH    _ | . FEEDBACK  _  SUE M& _p     SHOWCASE -



