Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC297 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 24, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P084872 
Project Name: Urban Water and Sanitation 
Improvement a 
Task Team Leader: Ventura Bengoechea 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 50 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Water supply (70%);Sanitation (30%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Jitendra Shah, Cyprian Fisiy 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The main project development objective is to improve and expand the delivery of WSS services by strengthening the 
local water utilities to become operationally-efficient and financially-sustainable. A second development objective is 
the scaling up of sanitation services by pilot-testing the SANIMAS approach into at least three urban areas. This 
approach, which has been successfully tested in peri-urban communities, is based on the establishment of a 
partnership between beneficiary communities, the local governments and NGOs to design and implement sanitation 
systems. Most importantly, the benefits are expected to reach beyond the areas included in this project through its 
demonstration effect on other PDAMs and urban areas. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project would finance investments aimed at improving the provision of water services in about ten  selected 
PDAMs and to expand their coverage into un-served urban and peri-urban areas. The project will also target three 
urban areas to pilot test low-cost wastewater collection and treatment systems in areas subject to environmental 
degradation. 
 
The selection of PDAMs and the community areas to benefit from this proposed operation will be demand-driven 
and based upon compliance with some eligibility criteria to guarantee the effectiveness and sustainability of the 
operations. 
 
3.1  Water supply investment component
 will finance investments to improve the services and expand the coverage 
of about 10 PDAMs that are: (i) commercially viable; (ii) committed to improving their efficiency and expanding 
their services; and (iii) supported by their respective local authorities. These investments will be selected from a 
priority list being prepared at each of the PDAMs, together with their corresponding standardized financial 
projection models. 
 
3.2  Pilot sanitation component
 would finance: (a) feeder sanitation investments; (b) trunk sanitation investments; 
and (c) technical assistance.  The feeder sanitation investments would include the implementation and optimization 
of separate and combined sewerage solutions. The trunk sanitation investments would include the construction of 
Page  2
 
 
interceptors and treatments facilities. The technical assistance would assist local authorities in preparing feasibilities 
studies, detailed designs, bid documents and in supervising the project implementation. This component will be 
developed in collaboration with the 
Sanimas
 initiative under the WB’s Water and Sanitation Program (Annex 5). 
 
3.3  TA component
 to: (i) assist the National Government in developing a new framework for on-lending to the 
water sector, and in the establishment of the new regulatory agency; (ii) assess the needs and demand for water and 
sanitation services and establish benchmark indicators; and (iii) finance a public information campaign. The first 
would require substantial work in developing the legal documents and guarantee instruments.  The second 
subcomponent will support the establishment of an initial base line, reliable mechanisms to measure progress made 
against key benchmark indicators, and to prepare action to attain agreed targets. The third part would include TA for 
developing and implementing public information campaigns at the national and especially local level to create 
awareness about the need to improve water and sanitation services. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will support the optimization of the following 10 PDAMs, subject to confirmation during pre-appraisal: 
 
Banjarmasin, Bogor, Cirebon, Jambi, Kendari, Lebak, Makassar, Malang, Manado and Pontianak. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Project implementation will be done through the above PDAMs which have proven successful in the implementation 
of the ASEM-funded PDAM rescue program, Financial Recovery Action Plans (FRAP). These PDAMs have 
improved their financial condition and are now ready and willing to invest to improve their efficiency and increase 
service coverage. Fund channeling arrangements need to be worked out with GOI during the appraisal process. 
Project oversight will be provided by a national-level Commitee on Infrastructure (Sub-committee for Water 
Supply/SWS) under the Coordinating Minister of Economy, with members from Kimpraswil, 
BAPPENAS, MOHARA and MOF.  
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
EA for participating subprojects will commence during project preparation. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Guidelines on Resettlement and Compensation of Land and Other Assets, consistent with Bank 
policies, will be prepared to deal with land acquisition, temporary displacement and other matters 
which may have a negative impact. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
 
Environmental assessments (EA) will be prepared by participating PDAMs, under the supervision of consultants for 
each of the towns, together with environmental management plans (EMP). In order to guide the preparation of EAs 
and EMPs for subsequent batches of subprojects, an Operational Manual for Environmental Assessments will be 
prepared as a part of appraisal. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The project-supported activities will involve the participation of primary beneficiaries (households willing to secure 
a water supply or sanitation connection and ready to pay user fee) through community mobilization. This will be 
done through the establishment of Users Groups (UGs), and the empowerment of these groups to speak on behalf of 
the communities. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding safeguards during 
project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
 
