Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC242
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/28/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDONESIA                                Project ID: P059931
Project: Water Resources & Irrigation Sector Managemen Task Team Leader: Guy J. Alaerts
Program
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 13, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 45.00
Bank Approval: June 26, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                              Sector: Irrigation and drainage (50%); General water,
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  sanitation and flood protection sector (50%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Water resource management (P); Rural
services and infrastructure (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
For APL Phase I
a) Water allocation, water quality and water conservation improved in Project basins, and river
infrastructure better maintained, through strengthened capacity for planning and management; and
investments.
b) Sector governance enhanced, and sector fiscal sustainability strengthened, nationally, and in Project
basins, through setting up Water Resources Councils; ensuring stakeholders involvement; unbundling
of operational tasks, and Private Sector Participation; improved cost recovery; and piloting a staff
redundancy plan.
c) Increased agricultural productivity and improved performance of irrigation, based on participatory
irrigation scheme management, through setting up and strengthening WUAs; strengthening restructured
Dinas PUP of local government; financing rehabilitation and improvement of existing irrigation
schemes; and facilitating access to agricultural support services and micro-credit.
These objectives are further specified for two "windows" in the logframe (Annex 1): for Improved Water
Resources Sector Performance, and for Improved Irrigation Management and Agricultural Productivity.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Components:
A. Sector & Basin Water Resources Management
A. 1. Sector Governance & Planning Capacity
A.2. River Basin Management Capacity
A.3 Implementation of Fiscal and Cost Recovery Policies (includes severance payments)
A.4. River Basin Infrastructure Improvement
B. Participatory Irrigation Management
B. 1 Water User Associations Capacity
B.2 Irrigation Agency Capacity
B.3 Irrigation Infrastructure Improvement
B.4 Irrigated Agriculture Support



2
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project (WISMP 1) is Phase I of a 10-year three-Phase Adaptable Program Loan (APL) and will
concentrate its activities in the 5 Java provinces (Banten, West, Central and East Java, and DI
Yogyakarta), with a more modest activity in those (parts of) 25 kabupatens and 7 provinces (North, West
and South Sumatera, Lampung, South and Central Sulawesi, and East Nusa Tenggara) outside Java where
the Dutch Grant-funded Indonesia Water Resources and Irrigation Reform Implementation Project
(IWIRIP) is currently already active. The provinces wil receive support for their river basin management.
The kabupaten, all in the same provinces (except Banten), will receive support for their irrigation
management program. All provinces and kabupaten have participated for the past 2-4 years in the IWIRIP
as well as the Java Irrigation Improvement and Water Management Project. Java as well as the off-Java
provinces contain protected or vulnerable areas. However, the Project will not undertake investments
outside the existing irrigation canals or existing river bed or infrastructure (weirs, revetments, water
distribution structures, etc.). With respect to river basin management, the focus of the Project is on
institutional development and the gradual establishment of river basin management organizations that will
be increasingly capable to manage water resources in an integrated manner. This is different from the
earlier appoaches where the Ministry of Public Works, which held a monopoly position in water
management, would emphasize development through physical infrastructure. Integrated water resource
management would notably include aquatic ecological and biodiversity aspects. The interventions will not
change historical water uses, and are aimed at creating institutional, participatory arrangements that will
help resolve existing as well as potential future water conflicts. Thus, the Project will not affect protected
or vulnerable areas. No isolated vulnerable indigenous peoples will be affected. In the longer run, in
Phases II and 1111 of the APL there is a possibility that such vulnerable groups will be affected.
B. Check Environmental Classiflcation: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Two sub-components of WISMP I involve physical works. Under A.4, River Basin
Infrastructure Improvement, eligible activities will include repair, rehabilitation and calibration of river basin
management infrastructure - hydrologic and meteorological gauging stations, flow measurement weirs, some
flood control structures and early-warning systems, and related short stretches of river channels, canals and
embankments including very localized dredging. Under B.3, Irrigation Infrastructure Improvement, the loan
funds may be used to finance small works (typically in the order of US$20,000 though can be up to $200,000)
involving repair, rehabilitation and improvement of existing canals and related existing infrastructure. The
activities may include: canal lining; repair of diversion boxes, gates, weirs, bunds and dikes; restoration and
seasonal maintenance of short stretches of canals and embanlknents; and emergency clearing and repairs in
cases of landslides and dike failures. None of these works will have significant, complex or irreversible
adverse environmental effects or will endanger protected or vulnerable areas or habitats. Potential impacts
will be short-term, localized, and readily prevented or mitigated by good engineering design and construction
practices, reinforced by adequate supervision in the field.
The Project will provide institutional support to the national Dam Safety Commission as well as for
monitoring
and routine maintenance activities related to dams. No works, however, will be financed. Thus, the Safety
of Dam policy is not triggered. The Project will not engage in activities in the river that crosses the border
between Indonesia (East Nusa Tenggara province) and Timor Leste.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)



3
ISDS
(click on M for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes * No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sumnmary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
H.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Although river basin management activities may possibly have larger-scale, significant or irreversible
impacts in the long term (i.e. during Phase II or m of the APL), these should in general be positive in
nature. Such impacts would be identified, and their potential impacts addressed during the preparation of
these Phases, which will take place during the Project. Such impacts will not in any case occur during the
Project itself, during which institutional development and management capacity will be emphasized, and
physical works will be limited to localized repair and rehabilitation activities within existing infrastructure
and water course systems. Moreover, Phase I will have beneficial effects because it will gradually
implement water quality management and pollution control in three pilot river basins and improve resource
management both at local and regional levels.
In the Project no significant social issues are anticipated. The irrigation and the river basin management
components focus on institutional strengthening and capacity building, albeit of new types of organizations
(Water User Associations, River Basin Management Units) that will be more efficient in the use of water
and land resources, and that are more transparent, inclusive and accountable than the organizations that
assumed these tasks before. The net effect should be water management organizations that are closer and
hence more responsive to water users at the community level. The Project will notably strengthen the
representation of stakeholders on councils (rivers) and commissions (for irrigation) that take management
and budgetary decisions, which will increase accountability. A "rapid mapping" of the Project provinces
showed that the river basin activities are all located in downstream and more economically developed
zones, where, in the Project provinces, no isolated vulnerable indigenous peoples are residing. Thus,
indigenous peoples are not affected in the WISMP I project areas, but the project design and the
Indigenous Peoples Framework (part of the Project Management Manual in Bahasa Indonesia) prepare the
government and the basin management agencies for the future APL Phases in which they have to adapt
their activities to such communities. Because the project will introduce and pilot water use rights and as
such introduce the recognition of ecological and irn-stream water uses, it provides an opportunity to protect
and enhance the rights of poor and vulnerable groups. The Basin Water Resources Councils will provide
for representation of IP where applicable.



4
ISDS
No significant land acquisition will take place, but it is possible that individual families may be affected in
a marginal way. In most of such instances, the Project will be able to make use of traditional community
mechanisms of voluntary contribution, and in other instances, of compensation, as guided by the agreed
Framework for Land and Asset Acquisition (part of the Project Management Manual in Bahasa Indonesia).
The Project will have no interventions that would cause resettlement in order for infrastructure
rehabilitation to proceed.
The irrigation component will have no large, significant, adverse, diverse, irreversible or unprecedented
environmental impacts, or affect vulnerable or protected sites or on critical natural habitats, because it is of
a primarily capacity-building nature and will be active within the existing irrigation canals only. With
respect to works in rivers, the same limitation pertains to the river basin component. The agreed
Environmental Guidelines (in Bahasa Indonesia) provide for a negative list. The Project Management
Manual will provide a screening procedure to guide in sub-project selection. The irrigated agriculture
support sub-component will not finance procurement of agricultural inputs. The 11 kabupaten where this
sub-component will be piloted have had training in Integrated Pest Management in earlier projects and
possess an active network of farmers with such experience.
II.D. Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are no potential cumulative effects anticipated.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
During the Project, the basin planning capacity of the river basin management agencies will be
strengthened, which implicitly will, in the long run, have positive implications for the environmental
condition of the basin. The Project will provide for the development of an Operational Manual or
Framework on River Basin Management (to be acceptable to the Bank) that will guide water managers in
dealing with competitive uses, environmental and ecological aspects of integrated water management, and
with vulnerable isolated indigenous communities. In the subsequent Phases H and IH of the APL, the river
basin management agencies could gradually develop policies and initiatives pertaining to land and soil
protection in upper catchments, and assume more complex tasks in water allocation based on the
Operational Manual, all of which should have positive environmental and social impacts, or minimize
existing or future negative ones. Indigenous people could possibly be affected in Phases II and m. With
proper consultation and planning emanating from the Operational Framework, the impacts on the
indigenous peoples should be beneficial.
H.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Analysis of altematives is not required.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Because of the very localized nature of the activities under Phase I, generalized and simplified frameworks
for local environmental impact mitigation, for resettlement and land acquisition, and for arrangements to
safeguard vulnerable isolated indigenous peoples are adopted similar to the ones agreed between Gol and
the World Bank for community-driven development projects such as KDP-H. These frameworks will
become part of the operational guidelines and criteria for the new local organizations that are to be set up
and are eligible to get access to the grants and credits for irrigation network maintenance and related
agricultural initiatives. There will not be a free-standing EA or EMP for the Project.
The Project will support the basin management agencies in developing a generic Operational Manual or
Framework on River Basin Management (to be acceptable to the Bank) that will guide water managers in



5
ISDS
dealing with competitive uses, environmental and biodiversity aspects of integrated water management, and
with vulnerable isolated indigenous communities. This framework will be ready before the start of Phase II
of the APL. The framework will emphasize the ways in which to identify and assess alternative options. Its
preparation will be conducted under the supervision of the National Water Council or the National Steering
Committee for Water Resources. It will then be mainstreamed in the operational procedures of the river
basin agencies. The subscription to the principles and application of these frameworks will be part of the
conditionalities for regional and local governments to receive access to the loan proceeds in the Phases H
and HI.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project (Phase I of the APL) would generate broad benefits for the rural and urban populations on
Java because it aims at developing and mainstreaming "institutional models" that can be replicated beyond
the geographic limitations of the Project area. The primary target population comprises:
*      The water users in the Project's river basins in the Project provinces, notably the farmers, urban
and rural settlements, industries, and the communities that depend for their livelihood on water from the
rivers.
*      Farmers as well as landless people, and by extension the rural population, in the Project areas, as
they will benefit from better water availability, from programs to assist in strengthening the rural economy,
and from increased productivity and income.
*      The population on Java as food security and environmental quality will improve.
Poor farm families are likely to benefit directly from the more reliable irrigation service and increased
income, and indirectly from improved access to agricultural infomnation and extension services, and new
business opportunities. In addition, because the Project and the long-term APL Program would help
establish Water Resources Councils at National, Provincial and River Basin levels which will provide a
forum for policy making and/or regulatory activities in which the governmental and non-governmental
stakeholders will participate, they should improve the levels of govemance quality, transparency and
accountability in the sector. In irrigation management, the Program will help establish Water User
Associations which pre-eminently are "stakeholder"-based organizations. The Councils, as well as the
Irrigation Commissions that the Project will help establish, will have stakeholder representation, and be
authorized to review work plans and budget proposals.
An important part of the preparation for the institutional arrangements that WISMP I intends to put in
place, and which emerges from the water sector reform program the govemment initiated in 1999, was a
Sectoral EA based on extensive public consultations at national, provincial, kabupaten, village, and water
uscr levels across the country (this was assessed as "very satisfactory" by the Bank's Quality Assurance
Group). Currently, public consultation has become a standard feature of the water sector activities and it
will as such be continued during the Project as well as subsequent Phases. The consultations are carried
out by NGOs with a history of independence and sectoral experience. During implementation of the
Project, public consultations will be applied for river basin planning and for all strategic framework
development.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.



6
ISDS
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan;          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 4/15/2003     4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/17/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/17/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 4/15/2003     4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/17/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/17/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 4/15/2003     4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/17/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/17/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Guy J. Alaerts                              04/16/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Thomas E. Walton/Person/World Bank     6/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Sulistiowati Nainggolan/Person/World Bank  6/29/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
ADproved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          6/30/2003
Sector Director               Mark D. Wilson                              4/16/2003
Comments



7
ISDS
Note: It was agreed that the Environmental Guidelines will be prepared for the project, in lieu of the
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan. Please refer to the dates indicated under the
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.
Regional Safeguards Unit Director    Teresa Serra                       6/30/2003



