                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/10/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF                           Project ID: P073070
Project: Local Development Fund Project                      Task Team Leader: Bassam Ramadan
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 30, 2003              IBRD Amount ($m): 150.00
Bank Approval: February 19, 2004                             IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSHD                                         Sector: Other social services (40%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           government administration (25%); Health (20%);
Status: Lending                                              Micro- and SME finance (10%); Central government
                                                             administration (5%)
                                                             Theme: Social risk reduction (P); Civic engagement,
                                                             participation and community driven development (S);
                                                             Decentralization (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main development objective of the Iran Local Development Fund (LDF) is to enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of community driven development interventions for poverty alleviation,
through strengthening the role and capacity of local governments and civil society organizations in
selected disadvantaged areas of four provinces in Iran. This will be achieved through three main types of
activities: (i) support to local community development by improving access to basic social and economic
services (health, education, physical environment), and income generation opportunities; (ii) support to
targeted vulnerable groups, especially women, children, youth and the disabled; and (iii) provincial and
local-level institution building, monitoring, evaluation and learning.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Development programs financed by the LDF will be demand-driven and identified in a participatory
manner, and will be selected by Local Village and City Councils assisted by specialized consulting firms.
Provisionally, the programs would be situated in 13 poor peri-urban communities and 27 small rural
communities situated in four provinces purposively selected for improved targeting and better resource
allocation. The provinces are: (i) Khorasan, (ii) Khoozestan, (iii) Hamedan, and (iv) Tehran, whose
selection was based on several criteria, including measures of poverty and other human indicators, level
of readiness and social mobilization of LCs and the chances of success leading to replicating the LDF in
other provinces. The selection of the provinces and the communities is explained in Annex 4 and will be
confirmed at appraisal.

The project will consist of three main components: (i) local community development; (ii) support to
vulnerable groups and pilot initiatives; and (iii) provincial and local-level institution building,
monitoring, evaluation and learning. All activities to be supported under the three components will
identify issues of inclusion and exclusion in development benefits, devise approaches that ensure greater
sensitivity to gender matters especially where needs of poor women are concerned, and address
socio-economic and gender equity considerations. The main tools to ensure these concerns are the social
assessment/situation analysis, and the Operations Manual (OM).

Component 1: Local Community Development

                                                     2
                                                                                                     ISDS



This component will be the largest in the project with an estimated allocation of 75% of total project
funds. This component will finance investments in three areas that are interrelated, with the mix between
them being determined on a case by case basis according to the specific needs of the communities
concerned:
   (a) Small scale demand-driven social infrastructure projects: the project will finance programs
       that aim at improving quality of and access to basic education, public health care and social
       services through the rehabilitation and upgrading of schools, health, youth, cultural and
       recreation centers and facilities in poor areas.

   (b) Small scale demand-driven economic infrastructure: the project will finance community
       potable water supply, small wastewater disposal schemes, small irrigation and drainage schemes,
       construction of local market facilities, small access and agricultural roads, land reclamation and
       rehabilitation of terraces, and environmental protection activities, such as reforestation and soil
       erosion control, wells, and spring protection and preservation of natural resources.

   (c) Income generating activities: the project will support business development services for Small
       and Micro Businesses (SMBs). It can support activities that develop the capacity of existing
       SMBs in the targeted areas or those that would help establish new ones. SMBs are a good
       instrument of employment creation and generation of wealth for the general benefit of regional
       and national economies. They assist in alleviating poverty and in helping smooth the transition
       to market economies. SMBs also play a leading role in creating a more flexible and competitive
       economic structure in their regions, and at the national level. The project will use different
       instruments to support SMBs in the targeted areas. These will include: (i) training, counseling
       and advice; (ii) establishing and nurturing new institutions, and creating awareness of existing
       ones; and (iii) technology development and transfer.

Component 2: Support to Vulnerable Groups and Pilot Initiatives

About 15% of the project's funds will be allocated to this component. This component will finance:

   (a) Programs/projects to support groups of the population in difficult circumstances like the
       disabled, children, youth, women and the elderly.         The following categories of especially
       vulnerable people may be broadly identified: disabled, including their families; children at risk,
       including orphans, out of school and children of parents at risk; youth at risk; women at risk
       (e.g., abused women; widows); elderly at risk: single or living alone; chronically ill,
       ex-prisoners and drug addicts. When these special needs occur in generally poor areas,
       vulnerability may easily translate into acute destitution and suffering. Those affected are less
       likely to be able to access government services or effective NGOs, and family mechanisms have
       often broken down or are ineffective because of poverty and multiple claims on resources. This
       component will adopt approaches that aim at the social and economic integration of these groups
       in society, at stengthening mutual support, and at improving their knowledge of and effective
       access to sources of support. The component will use a thematic targeting approach based on
       special needs (e.g., functional literacy, disability, etc.) by identifying qualified beneficiaries
       (orphans, disabled, female-headed households, etc.) wherever they are most concentrated.

   (b) Supporting new and innovative ideas through pilot initiatives with potential for replication in
       delivering social services to the identified target group. A number of sector-specific themes
       require attention at the national level in order to complement and reinforce the local development
       programs. These would be undertaken by qualified NGOs who would focus particularly on the
       needs of disadvantaged groups.

                                                        3
                                                                                                        ISDS




Component 3:        Provincial and Local-level Institution Building, Monitoring, Evaluation and
Learning.

About 10% of the project's fund will be allocated to this component. This component will finance:

    (a) Provincial Institution Building: includes training, technical assistance, incremental operational
         costs for project staff in the four provinces, and gender-sensitive social assessment/situation
         analysis that will be conducted at the beginning of the project in each of the selected provinces;

    (b) Local Council Capacity Building: includes training and technical assistance for LCs and civil
         society organizations (whether those sponsoring subprojects with LDF or not).              Capacity
         building is critical for the success of this project, especially in areas such as procurement and
         financial management, social analysis, proposal writing, community participation and
         consultation, monitoring and evaluation.

    (c) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Systematic Learning: includes the establishment of
         baseline indicators in the targeted areas to allow for regular follow-up and a major impact
         assessment towards the end of the project; and the establishment of systematic learning based on
         analysis of processes and outcomes. The consolidation of this learning and its dissemination
         upwards, downwards and horizontally will lay the foundation for subsequent going to scale.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The project will cover four provinces: Tehran, Khoozestan, Hamedan and Khorasan. The programs
would be situated in 13 poor peri-urban communities and 27 small rural communtities situated in these
four provinces. The project is demand driven, thus the exact location of investments within the identified
clusters will depend on demand and on the results of the social assessment that will be conducted at the
onset of the project.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: No significant environmental issues are envisioned to be caused by the LDF. Investments under
Component 1: "Local Community Development" are small-scale infrastructure improvements and
rehabilitation, most of which will be less than US$200,000 and are not expected to have major adverse
environmental impacts as they would be limited in scope. The proposed project will not entail any
resettlement or land acquisition. In addition, the project will not fund any major construction works. The
LDF is expected to have substantial beneficial impacts on the environment as it would improve basic social
and economic infrastructure for the communities.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

                                                      4
                                                                                                        ISDS



    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                             Yes       No       TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                              Yes       No       TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     Yes       No       TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                         Yes       No       TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)              Yes       No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                   Yes       No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The project triggers OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.               The Local Community Development
component may have potential negative environmental impacts related to construction for improving
and/or rehabilitating community social and economic infrastructure. Under this component, the project
would finance the rehabilitation of schools, health and cultural facilities, community potable water
supply, small wastewater disposal schemes, as well as irrigation and drainage schemes. Given the small
scale of these community subprojects, negative environmental impacts that could arise would not be
significant, irreversible or large in scale.     Potential negative impacts will be mainly related to
construction activities including disruption of traffic pattern, interference with other infrastructures,
disrupted access to residential and/or other buildings, change in the landscape (loss of vegetation), noise
nuisance, air pollution due to dust formation, safety hazard from construction activities and inappropriate
disposal of excavated materials and construction debris.

As is the case with other demand driven projects in the region, the OM will include procedures for
appraising the environmental impacts of any proposed subproject. If a subproject is found to include
substantial environmental impacts, further procedures are included to address them or to alter the design
of the subproject.

The OM will describe in detail how subprojects will be evaluated to ensure that environmental and social
safeguards are enforced and World Bank policies are complied with. Environmental criteria will be
included in the selection of subprojects, and adequate mitigation measures will be incorporated in the
contract agreements so that all anticipated environmental impacts are avoided or minimized.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

No cumulative impacts are expected at this stage, however the appraisal mission will identify any
potential cumulative impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

No long-term negative impacts are expected at this stage. Possible positive environmental and social
impacts include provision of adequate water quantities and qualities, protection of water resources from
contamination, improved access of poor people to health and social services, improved employment

                                                      5
                                                                                                       ISDS



opportunities for long-term unemployed, etc.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental assessment OP 4.01:

The appraisal mission will review, in close coordinatin with other Bank projects in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the environmental, legal and regulatory framework for assessing the environmental impacts of
subprojects, including the mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental screening and review of
Environmental Assessment (EA) results. If necessary, the project will provide capacity building for the
TSUs and other concerned stakeholders to ensure that subprojects are properly evaluated and meet the
environmental requirements of appropriate national and local authorities and are consistent with OP 4.01.

Guidelines for Environmental Assessment will be prepared and will be included in the Project OM.
Subprojects submitted for financing will be environmentally screened and will be subject to an
environmental review according to the environmental guidelines. This environmental review would
identify potential environmental issues that might arise from proposed subprojects. Based upon the
review, the applicant may be asked to prepare an environmental assessment or an Environmental
Management Plan to ensure that all negative impacts are properly mitigated and monitored.

The environmental guidelines will include details of environmental review procedures, institutional
arrangements for environment as well as legal requirements. Any subproject, as a condition of approval,
will be required to meet all environmental requirements and have in place all necessary approvals,
licenses and certificates as required by the government authorities.

The environmental guidelines will be developed in close coordination with other Bank projects in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and will be subject to review and approval by the DOE.



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders of the project include Government and related agencies including the Management and
Planning Organization (MPO), the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance (MOEAF), the Ministry of
Interior (MOI), municipalities, NGOs and LCs.

During the initial project preparation, the technical, financial, environmental and social issues associated
with the project were discussed in meetings attended by representatives of the LCs, municipalities, NGOs
and various other stakeholders. Further consultations will be held during appraisal to facilitate
stakeholder involvement and awareness at all levels of project implementation and to ensure that the
information required for decision making is available to all interested parties.

During the implementation of the project, wide participation and consultation at the central level will be
ensured through the Steering Committee that includes representatives of Government, NGOs and LCs.

The participatory approach is integral to this project. LCs, being the lowest representative body, are
forum for the key local stakeholders together with CBOs, NGOs, municipalities, local authorities and

                                                     6
                                                                                                        ISDS



local communities at large are key stakeholders in this project. They are collectively engaged in all
stages of the project, including the gender-sensitive social assessment, program identification,
formulation and execution. Several examples already exist of local development committees and groups
that bring together a wider than normal range of stakeholders for project identification and management.
The capacity of LCs in developing sensitive local social assessments and community action plans would
be enhanced during the project.



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              3/19/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          5/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           5/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

                                                7
                                                                               ISDS




Signed and submitted by           Name                                 Date
Task Team Leader:                 Bassam Ramadan
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Kanthan Shankar/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Meskerem Brhane
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                     Name                                  Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif
Sector Manager/Director           Jacques F. Baudouy

