ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Free of Povorty
Wf6Shop
Tbc Wod 1+3nk
Report No AC28
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/15/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: JORDAN                                   Project ID: P075829
Project: Education Reform for Knowledge Economy I  Task Team Leader: Mae Chu Chang
Program
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 6, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 120.00
Bank Approval: May 27, 2003                       IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSHD                              Sector: Secondary education (35%); Primary
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance  education (35%); Pre-primary education (30%)
Loan (SIM)                        Theme: Education for all (P); Education for the
Status: Lending                                   knowledge economy (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the Education Reform for Knowledge Economy I (ERfKE I) project is to support the
Government of Jordan (GOJ) to transform the education system at the early childhood, basic and
secondary levels to produce graduates with the skills necessary for the knowledge economy. This
objective will be achieved through the carrying out of an integrated program of education reform
supported by the Government and participating partners, including the Bank. This integrated program of
education reform is set out in the Government's Statement of Sectoral Policy and operationalized in an
ERfKE I Five-Year Implementation Plan.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The ERfKE I program includes the following four components: (i) re-orient education policy objectives
and strategies through governance and administrative reform; (ii) transform education programs and
practices for the knowledge economy; (iii) support provision of quality physical learning environments;
and (iv) promote readiness for learning through ECE.
Component 1. Re-orient Education Policy Objectives and Strategies through Governance and
Administrative Reform
Component I is designed to provide a redefinition of the vision and associated policy objectives of the
educational system that will enable the required transformation to meet the emerging needs of the
knowledge economy.    This component has five sub-components: (i) a redefined vision and
comprehensive integrated national education strategy; (ii) revised governance, management, and
decision-making mechanisms to achieve and support an education system that delivers basic skills, core
competencies and essential learning for 'the knowledge economy; (iii) an Education Decision Support



2
IS DS
System (EDSS) to facilitate efficient policy analysis and effective system management as well as to
promote transparency; (iv) comprehensive and coordinated educational research, policy analysis and
monitoring and evaluation activities; and (v) effective management and efficient coordination of
educational investments directed towards reform efforts. Additionally, support will be provided to
school-based innovations.
Component 2. Transform Education Programs and Practices for the Knowledge Economy
Component 2 is designed to transform teaching and learning processes in order to achieve learning
outcomes that are consistent with the requirements of the knowledge economy. This component has
three sub-components: (i) development of new curriculum and enhanced learning assessment; (ii)
professional development of MOE personnel; and (iii) provide required resources to support effective
learning.
Component 3: Support Provision of Quality Physical Learning Environments
Component 3 is designed to ensure adequate provision of structurally safe school buildings and improved
learning environment. This component has two sub-components: (i) replacement of structurally unsafe
and overcrowded schools; and (ii) upgrading existing schools to support learning in the knowledge
economy through the provision of computer and science labs.
Component 4: Promote Readiness for Learning through ECE
Component 4 is designed to enhance equity through public provision to KG 11 to low-income areas.
MOE will initially develop a program to phase in KG II for children at age 5, to be followed by KG I at
the end of ERfKE 1. This component has four sub-components: (i) an enhanced institutional capacity for
ECE; (ii) a cadre of early childhood educators; (iii) increased access to KGs for the poor, and (iv) parent
and community participation and partnership (public awareness and understanding).
The total ERfKE I program size is estimated to be about US$370 million and the World Bank project will
provide partial financing towards the program. World Bank financing will support civil works, goods
and equipment, training and technical assistance.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project will cover the whole Kingdom of Jordan. No significant environmental issues are foreseen.
The only project components that could have potential environmental impact would be the construction of
replacement buildings for unsafe and overcrowded schools. These schools will be built on existing school
sites or vacant sites in the public domain.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. No significant environmental issues are foreseen.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)             .      0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes * No
1 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes * No



3
ISOS
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No significant environmental issues are foreseen. The only project components that could have potential
environmental impact would be the construction of replacement buildings for unsafe and overcrowded
schools. These schools will be built on existing school sites or vacant sites in the public domain and
hence do not trigger resettlement safeguard. The experience gained in the implementation of the
HRDSIL I and HIRDSIL 11 projects, which included construction of new buildings, will benefit the
ERfKE I project. This experience shows that only three types of environmental impact could be
possible, namely, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal and increased vehicular traffic in the vicinity to
the schools. Other impacts, such as those associated with construction, topographical and geological
conditions at the sites, would be mitigated by the proper selection of sites following environmental
criteria which will be included in the project Operational Manual (OM). Each of these impacts will
require separate mitigation measures which shall be included in the design of and the bidding documents
for such facilities. The environmental guidelines for the construction of new replacement buildings will
require an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) specified in the project OM. Each EMP will follow
the generic criteria developed during project appraisal.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The OM includes a generic EMP (submitted by MOE March 20, 2003) and guidelines to be considered in
the selection of sites for replacement schools as well as in the design and construction of extensions to
existing schools and new facilities. The new facilities funded by the World Bank to replace unsafe or
overcrowded buildings will be located generally at the same sites or on vacant properties belonging to
MOE. Also, World Bank supervision during project implementation will include an environmental
expert, as required, to ensure compliance with World Bank guidelines as provided for in the OM.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



4
ISDS
The key stakeholders are parents and students of schools which will be replaced. The MOE will
announce in local newspapers the proposed locations of school sites for each school district. As of
February 2003, the MOE has not recorded community objections to proposed replacement schools.
Future school sites to be identified for replacement and corresponding EMPs will be published in local
newspapers for information to the concerned communities. Any concerns raised by such communities
will be addressed by the DCU and MOE during the design and construction stages.
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[S. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2002    12/18/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/20/2002    12/21/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/30/2002    12/23/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. n/a
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date



5
ISDS
Task Team Leader:              Mae Chu Chang                                04/09/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  John Bryant Collier/Person/World Bank    04/09/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  John Keith Rennie-MNS/Person/World Bank  04/09/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif                        04/13/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Jacques F. Baudouy                            04/15/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
LskkfW LfCKJ                   SITAcK  I   MAP_ I SHOWCA5E  J



