ISDS
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section 1- Basic Information                                            24904
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/23/2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: JORDAN                               Project ID: P077404
Project: JORDANIAN GAS TRANSMISSION           Task Team Leader: Bent R. Svensson
PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 7, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 1, 2003                   IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: COCPO                          Sector: Oil & gas (100%)
Guarantee: [ ] Partial Credit [X] Partial Risk  Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P)
Status:
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objectives are to attract private sector investments in the energy sector, to
reduce government investments in the sector, and to enable the introduction of clean-burning
natural gas into the country's energy balance. The Project would increase the efficiency of the
energy sector, reduce environmental impact of fuel use by replacing oil products by natural gas,
reduce the dependence on imported oil, work as a catalyst for regional trade and economic
integration, and ultimately stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty.
Jordan is almost entirely dependent on imported oil, mainly from Iraq, to meet its energy needs.
As part of its strategy, the Government of Jordan is seeking to diversify both the fuel mix in the
country's energy balance, as well as sources of the country's energy supply. Exploration for local
gas is ongoing and regional electricity interconnections are being promoted. Jordan is presently
interconnected to the Egyptian power system, and a new interconnection with Syria is expected
to be filly operational later this year. The role of renewable energy is also expected to increase.
The proposed Project consists of a 369 km natural gas pipeline system from Aqaba to the Rehab
and proposed Samra power stations, and eventually to the international border with Syria. The
Project will purchase natural gas from East Gas Company, an Egyptian government-owned
company, at an interface point at Aqaba. A new Egyptian pipeline system from El-Arish in
Egypt to Aqaba is under construction, and when competed will include an undersea portion in
international waters across the Gulf of Aqaba. East Gas Company plans to first deliver gas to
Aqaba in mid-2003.



2
ISDS
Based on an international competitive bidding, an Operator will be selected to design, engineer,
construct, finance, own, and operate the pipeline system, and, at the end of the contract period,
transfer it to the Government or its designee. A competitive gas price at the border should ensure
that delivered natural gas prices will be competitive with other fuels. The Project would be
supported by an IBRD partial risk guarantee, which is critical to the financing of the Project.
The Government has deferred development of the Samra Power Project (P057862), for which an
IBRD partial risk guarantee has been approved by Bank management, pending successful award
of the Project. The Samra Power Project, which had been conceived as an oil-fired power plant
initially, will now be designed for burning natural gas from commissioning. The JGTP and
Samra Power Pro.lects are separate but linked projects.
This operation would be the second IBRD guarantee in Jordan. The first IBRD guarantee was a
partial credit guarantee approved on May 4, 1994, for Jordan Telecommunications Corporation
(P-6278-JO).
The operation is expected to be a joint operation between IFC and IBRD, using IFC Loans and
IBRD Guarantees in a complementary manner. MIGA insurance may be added at a later date if
the selected Operator so desires.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Components:
The project is a 369 km natural gas pipeline from Aqaba to Samra and Rehab, serving industries
on the route. The Bank is providing a partial risk guarantee (PRG) for the implementation and
construction of this pipeline, which is a private-sector-led development and operation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The pipeline will run from Aqaba in the south of Jordan to the Samra and Rehab power stations
in the north of Jordan. Aqaba is a coastal city and the import terminal will be located south of the
city, approximately half way to the Saudi Arabian border. The pipeline, which will be buried, is
planned to follow the main highway to the capital, Amman through a highland desert. The power
plants are 345 km and 369 km, respectively, from the import terminal in Aqaba. A small number
of industrial customers on the route may be served as well. Potential issues related to natural
habitat, cultural property, indigenous people and involuntary settlements will be evaluated during
the preparation of the EA.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments. The Project is a Category A project. This project is a major construction activity, linked
to similar construction activities across an international waterway, and which when completed will



3
ISDS
be utilized for high pressure transport of natural gas, a hazardous (flammable, explosive) material.
All geological, environmental and other necessary site investigations will be the responsibility of
the Project Company. As a condition to the IBRD partial risk guarantee, the Project Company,
will be responsible for preparing an Environmental Assessment (EA), and the related
Environmental Managemant Plan (EMP) for the Project, in accordance with the Bank's policies
and requirements and any requirements of the Government of Jordan.
An outline route has been proposed by MEMR, however the Project Company proposes the final
pipeline route, for approval by MEMR. Rights of way will be granted across government land.
MEMR will expropriate all private lands according to expropriation law No. 12 of 1987. MEMR
will then agree a lease for the land with the Project Company. Compensation to private land
owners may be an issue. Depending on the route(s) selected other potential environmental
safeguard issues such as natural habitats, and cultural properties may be triggered. If these are
identified during EA preparation they will be addressed in strict compliance with World Bank
policies, Jordanian regulatory requirements and any international treaties to which the
Government of Jordan is signatory.
For ancillary work in the Project's area of influence, such as the pipeline from El-Arish to Aqaba,
and the Samra power station, each of the third parties undertaking this work would be
responsible for preparing EAs and related EMPs. The standards normally applied by the World
Bank for EAs are those of the sovereign state in the Project and its Area of Influence, e.g., Jordan
or Egypt. In the event the Bank determines that local standards do not meet World Bank
standards, World Bank standards will apply.
For the section of the pipeline within Egypt, a draft EA has been prepared by URS Corporation, a
US firm in accordance with Egyptian environmental laws and regulations. It is under review by
the environmental authorities. An EA for the remaining sections of the pipeline, including the
undersea crossing, has been commissioned to the same firm and is under preparation.
The project will replace around I mill. ton 3% sulfur heavy fuel oil and 21000 cubic meters of
diesel oil with natural gas in existing power plants, Aqaba and Rehab.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on Q for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
|-                       Policy                             Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)   * Yes ( ) No   TBD
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)             Yes t'. No * TBD
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                              Yes * No     TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                Ycs * No   .TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                          b)Yes .'No *TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                            Yes   )No  *TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                  0 Yes   No  ! TBD
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                        Yes *No      TBD
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes  No K) TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*  ( ) Yes * No  O TBD



4
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Potential issues related to natural habitat, cultural property, indigenous people and involuntary
resettlement will be evaluated during the preparation of the EA. A Resettlement Policy
framework would be prepared before appraisal, in respect of expropriation to be undertaken.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
II.D.Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
TBD during the EA as a part of the project preparation
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
TBD during the EA as a part of the project preparation
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As a Category A project, the Operator will engage independent consultants to prepare an
Environmental Assessment. Concerning the Project's Area of Influence, we understand that an
EA, primarily for the section of the pipeline within Egypt, has been prepared by URS
Corporation, a US firm, in accordance with Egyptian environmental laws and regulations. This
EA will be reviewed by the World Bank for compliance with relevant law. EAs for the
remaining sections of the pipeline, including the undersea crossing, must also be carried out in
accordance with applicable law, provided the law and its standards meet or exceed World Bank
standards.
Preliminary analysis indicates that the crossing of the Gulf of Aqaba by the Egyptian pipeline
constitutes a project in international waters. Riparian states will be notified in accordance with
OP 7.50 as a condition to the IBRD Guarantee.
During Project preparation, applicability of other safeguard policies will be determined.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A participatory approach and related mechanisms for consultation and collaboration with NGOs,
civil society organisations and communities will be identified during the scoping exercise (6.1
above);



5
ISDS
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S ]2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 1/13/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/13/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 1/13/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/13/2003
Date of submissioni to InfoShop                             3/13/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:               Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sigined and submitted by      Name                                         Date
T    ask T  eam Leader: Bent R. Svensson          W   lB                     2-ic /02,.
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Nicole Glineur/Person/World Ban  {9 t9/=/
Task Team Leader:nBenthR RvenssnieMSPro
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  John Keith Rennie-MNS/PersontWorld Bank  . 14 / 
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
ADproved by:                  Name                                         Date



6
ISDS
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif       Q   /  1
Comments
Sector Manager                 Francoise C o es    '
Comments
71             Vs I



