                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                Report No: AC134
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/01/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: KAZAKHSTAN                                          Project ID: P078301
Project: Forest Protection and Reforestation Project         Task Team Leader: Jessica Mott
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 18, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m): 30.00
Bank Approval: July 5, 2006                                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                                         Sector: Forestry (80%); General public
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           administration sector (15%); Animal production
Status: Lending                                              (5%)
                                                             Theme: Land management (P); Environmental
                                                             policies and institutions (P); Rural policies and
                                                             institutions (S); Other environment and natural
                                                             resources management (S); Civic engagement,
                                                             participation and community driven development (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project objective is to develop environmental and economic services through more sustainable use,
increased productivity and enhanced conservation of forest and associated rangeland resources, with a
focus on in the northeastern pine forest and southern saxaul woodlands. The development objective is
both local and global in nature. The project would include:
(a) a policy, legal, organizational, and information framework that enables improved forest and rangeland
    management;
(b) rehabilitation and effective management of damaged Irtysh pine forest in the northeast (Pavlodar and
    East-Kazakhstan Oblasts) to increase the value of the forest assets by reducing losses due to fire,
    pests, and unsustainable logging, and by otherwise increasing economic productivity and
    environmental services; and
(c) vegetative plantings and improved management of the woodlands and associated rangelands in the
    south (Kyzyl-Orda Oblast) to control desertification, reduce wind-blown pollution of salts and dust
    from the Aral Sea bed, provide shade and fodder for livestock, and increase the value of timber and
    fuelwood.

The global nature of the development objective it is highly relevant to global environmental concerns of
the Global Environment Facility (GEF) in several focal areas. The land degradation is the most
significant focal area in that the project would decrease the rate of desertification, including control of
wind-blown dust in and around the Aral Sea bed. Other GEF focal areas relevant to the project
development objective would include climate change, and ecosystem biodiversity and associated human
communities in forests and semi-arid zones. Given this multi-focal objective, integrated ecosystem
management would also be relevant. Potential global benefits associated with desertification control, air
pollution control, carbon sequestration, and biodiversity, will be further investigated during project
preparation.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The following activities and investments are being considered for an initial six-year project. The
long-term intention is to provide examples that can be replicated on a larger scale across the country

                                                        2
                                                                                                            ISDS



through follow-up investment by Kazakh or international lending sources.

A. Enabling Environment. This component would strengthen the National Forest Management
Capability of the Forestry and Hunting Committee and its selected territorial and local branches. Project
costs might include computers, other equipment, remote sensing and other data, office facilities including
utilities, furniture, dissemination materials, other supplies, vehicles, field surveys, staff travel, technical
advice, training, consultation workshops, and staff. Activities would include:

i.       Information, policy, and organizational support. This would include both information for forest
management planning and monitoring, as well as policy and organizational development. This
subcomponent would support a national forest inventory; upgrade facilities and skills in forest
management; and improve forest information systems. It would also include the development of a
National Forest Policy and Strategy process based on broad public consultation. In addition it would also
would also upgrade capacities for economic analysis, forest product marketing policy, legal and
regulatory frameworks, incentive frameworks, organizational arrangements, human resource
development, and strategic communications.

ii.      Project coordination. While project management and implementation will be largely
mainstreamed into permanent organizational entities, some additional support (e.g., procurement,
financial management, project reporting) will be required for the duration of the project.

B. Protection and Rehabilitation of Irtysh Pine Forests in the Northeast. This would focus on the
damaged Irtysh pine forests in Pavlodar and East-Kazakhstan Oblasts. Project costs might include
forestry works including nurseries and rehabilitation plantations, computers, research equipment, nursery
equipment and supplies, fire management equipment and facilities, other equipment, data, office facilities
including utilities, furniture, dissemination materials, other supplies, vehicles, staff travel, field surveys,
technical advice, training, consultation workshops, service contracts, community grants, and staff.
Activities would include:.

i.       Development and implementation of new forest management plans for improved and
cost-effective reforestation and for a more effective and sustainable management of hazards (pest, fire,
and illegal logging). These activities would involve local communities and businesses through
public-works contracts in forest fire protection and reforestation, as well as strengthen local participation
in forest management planning and should develop feasible models for replication by the Government in
other northern and eastern regions.

ii.      Development of small demonstration investments in:
     community or private forest management contracts,
     testing establishment of private forest plantations, and
     small community grants to increase community involvement in reforestation and environmental
     education.

C. Vegetative Plantings and Improved Management of Woodlands and Associated Rangeland in
the South. This component would support field testing to assess the costs and benefits of potential
treatments to the dry Aral Seabed and of management approaches to the desert saxaul woodlands in
Kyzyl-Orda Oblast, and scaling up of cost effective measures. Project costs might include forestry works
including nurseries and rehabilitation plantations, computers, research equipment, nursery equipment and
supplies, other equipment, data, office facilities including utilities, furniture, dissemination materials,
other supplies, vehicles, staff travel, field surveys, technical advice, training, consultation workshops,

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS



service contracts, community grants, and staff. In populated areas new forest/rangeland management
would aim to combine desertification control and protection of the existing native woodlands, while
restoring pasture and forest quality and reducing rural poverty through increased involvement of local
communities in integrated forest/range management. Activities would include:

i.       Field testing of the cost-effectiveness of saxaul plantations, grass, or other treatments in the dry
Aral Sea bed and surrounding abandoned agricultural lands to stabilize the toxic salts, and if appropriate,
support for scaling up of the most cost effective treatments.

ii.      Improving the capacity in woodland and associated range management of traditional saxaul areas
at oblast and rayon levels including development of management plans and incentives for sustainable use,
communication, fire control, etc. It would include field testing to improve the capacity and quality of
saxaul reforestation in historic saxaul areas, and if appropriate, support for scaling up of the most cost
effective treatments, support for planting stock improvement, modern (where possible private) nurseries,
and more extensive private sector involvement.

iii.     In addition, the project could develop demonstration pilots in:
    the effective protection of tugai floodplain woodlands in the south;
    rangeland leasing, livestock migration routes, and water supply; and
    testing establishment of private tree plantations for fuel wood and gardening.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project areas are located in
(a) two northern oblasts i.e. Pavlodar and East Kazakhstan which are dominated by pine forests that, among
others, and protect the city of Semey from sand dune encroachment. The areas is dominated by pine forests,
interspaced with grassland, and occasional salt pan and salt lake. It is inhabited by (state paid) forest
workers, some other forest workers and farmers; most are ethnically Russian.
(b) the southern oblast of Kyzyl Orda with saxaul and tamarix woodlands on the north and south side of the
Syr Dara river irrigation system and adjacent dry Aral Sea coast. The project areas are rural and are
seasonally populated with mainly Kazakh or Uzbek livestock herders; some parts were abandoned during the
transition due to the lack of employment. There are also villages of former fishermen, railway workers, and
rice farmers.

The project does not include parks, although in January 2003 the Government designated the eastern Irtysh
pine forest ( a major target of the project) as two national forest reserves. Unlike national parks, in natural
reserves timber harvesting can still take place as sanitary fellings or for thinning immature stands.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: No significant adverse environmental impacts are foreseen. Environmental benefits are
fundamental to the project development objective and outcomes. These beneficial environmental impacts
include reduced desertification, salt and dust control, reforestation of degraded lands, improved conservation
and sustainable use of biodiversity in selected ecosystems, and reduced use of potentially harmful pesticides.
The reforestation is expected to utilize native species of pine, saxaul, tamarix, poplar, willow, aspen and
other. The forest planning and management activities (including fire management strategies) will address
natural habitat considerations in both the site-specific and landscape context.

The project will help develop more environmentally acceptable pest management strategies. There is a

                                                       4
                                                                                                        ISDS



possibility of using a limited amount of pesticides in preparing planting stock in nurseries and in major
pest outbreaks, but overall pesticide use is likely to be reduced in favor of biological controls.

The Irtysh Forest may have been affected by fall-out of 1949-1962 nuclear tests on the nearby
Semipalatinsk testing grounds. Preliminary data indicate that currently the dose contribution of most
radionuclides is low. The risks associated with this nuclear contamination and the implications for forest
management and related aspects such as soil erosion, fire management, and use of forest products will be
assessed in an analysis to be carried out by a multi disciplinary Kazakh team and peer reviewed by an
expert from the International Atomic Energy Agency or another internationally recognized center of
excellence in issues related to radiation. The study will be part of the environmental assessment.

Temporary minor impact (dust, minor soil loss) can be expected from planting activities, building
construction and other works. No new access tracks are envisaged. Improvement of shelter and access to
water in the woodlands that could increase livestock movement and lead to trampling and some loss of
topsoil will be carefully managed with necessary safeguards to prevent environmental deterioration.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                    Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes       No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes       No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes       No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes       No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes       No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes       No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes       No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes       No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes       No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes       No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The project is not expected to carry significant safeguard risks.

In view of possible minor risks the safeguards on forest and pest management are triggered, and
safeguards on natural habitats and involuntary settlement may be triggered. Environmental Assessment is
triggered as explained above under Section II B.

(i) Forest is triggered because the project is intended to affect forested areas. It will be implemented in
    accordance with the Bank's operational policy. It will support investment in rehabilitation of existing
    degraded forests and woodlands to restore protective cover and to make these and other forests more
    productive. The project would not finance plantations that involve any conversion or degradation of

                                                       5
                                                                                                          ISDS



     critical natural habitats. The project would not finance industry-scale commercial harvesting
     operations. Any harvesting by local communities or other local entities supported by the project
     would adhere to a time-bound action plan for achieving a standard of forest management developed
     with the meaningful participation of locally affected communities, consistent with the principles and
     criteria of responsible forest management.

(ii) Pest management is triggered because the project would help to develop more environmentally
     acceptable pest control strategies. The possibility of using a limited amount of pesticides in preparing
     planting stock in nurseries, and in major pest outbreaks. In such cases the possibility of using
     biocontrol products will be explored before considering chemical interventions. Project preparation
     will include an evaluation of current patterns of pest management and pesticide use and make
     recommendations where needed on introducing/expanding integrated pest management tools,
     strategies and skills improvement Action plans, including pest management plans will be
     incorporated into the overall forest management plans.

(iii)Natural habitats may be triggered. The project is not expected to convert or degrade critical natural
     habitats. The process of site selection would include a field visit by a qualified biologist to further
     confirm that the project would not adversely affect endangered species or habitats.

(iv) Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered, since the project may limit access to forest resources
     which could potentially curtail existing legal or illegal incomes of vulnerable people, at least on a
     temporary basis. There is no encroachment of human settlements in the project area forests and
     project itself will not cause involuntary physical displacement of people. The project would not
     include support for national parks.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative negative impact expected. In the aggregate, the project is expected to have significant
positive environmental impacts. The quality of Kazakhstan's natural habitats and forests, and associated
environmental services is likely to improve, especially in contrast to the continuing decline which would
likely take place in the without project scenario. Similarly, on forest management and social aspects,
local people are likely to begin to participate in forest management in a meaningful way, gain more
control over their destiny (empowerment and security) and to receive livelihood benefits. The principles
underlying the safeguard policies are imbedded in the project's logical framework.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No negative long term impact expected.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The project design integrates provision of environmental services with more classic forest production.
This choice reflects the significant economic impacts of the environmental services resulting from the
project, particularly those concerning desertification control. The project does not focus exclusively on
environmental services because (a) sustainable multiple-use management approaches to the two project
areas are possible and appropriate, and (b) economic utilization is likely to be essential to a politically
viable and fiscally sound incentive framework for resource management.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
 The Borrower will carry out an environmental assessment conforming to Bank procedures and Kazakh
 environmental regulations. The EA will identify possible environmental impact and the mitigation of
 risks. The Environmental Management Plan (including a Pest Management Plan) will be included as an

                                                        6
                                                                                                         ISDS



 annex of the Project Appraisal Document. The preparation work will include drafting guidelines and
 procedures for the preparation of improved site-specific forest and rangeland management plans in the
 project areas that would be developed and initiated during the project implementation period. It will
 also include specialized consideration of legal aspects, pest management aspects, sustainable harvesting
 considerations, natural habitat considerations, and other environmental issues. A social assessment field
 survey will be carried out based on a combination of participatory rural appraisal methods, in-depth
 interviews, focus groups, and secondary data. The social assessment will also include an estimate of the
 number of affected people and the number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, ethnic affiliation,
 level of wealth, age, and other social indicators. If the social assessment finds that vulnerable people are
 likely to be affected by restrictions of access, An Access Restriction Process Framework (ARPF) would
 be prepared prior to appraisal which would describe the participatory process by which the project was
 prepared and will be implemented, providing guidelines for designing site specific mitigation measures
 on the potential adverse impacts of restrictions of access on vulnerable people and developing an
 institutional arrangement for the implementation of mitigation measures.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders will include the rural people living in and around the forests, livestock-herder families,
forest users, forestry staff, as well as environmental NGOs. Interactions to date include workshops in
Astana, Kokchetau and Semey with environmental NGOs that are very interested in the project concept,
and informal group meetings with villagers and foresters in the proposed project areas. Most likely
consultations will involve a process of ongoing consultations (with local communities, NGOs, Academic
Institutions, and other government agencies) that would elicit the input of key stakeholders and
incorporate their views throughout the design period and during implementation. Prior to the departure of
the appraisal mission, a Russian version of the EA report will be disclosed within Kazakhstan, and
Russian and English versions will be made available in the Bank's Infoshop.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               9/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           9/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            9/30/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual

                                                     7
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of receipt by the Bank                                            9/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        9/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         9/30/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            9/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        9/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         9/30/2004

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Jessica Mott                                       6/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Radhika Srinivasan                                 6/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Tjaart Schillhorn-Van Veen                         6/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Emilia Battaglini                                      6/26/2003
Comments
Cleared

Sector Manager                       Marjory-Anne Bromhead                              6/26/2003
Comments
The ISDS has been revised as agreed at the PCD Review and is herewith approved.

