ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                         AWorld Frce ot Povarty
-      _=   - - = ~ - '   [i
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2002                             24627
Section I - Basic Information                                  August 5, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: KAZAKHSTAN                            Project ID: P059803
Project: NURA RIVER CLEANUP PROJECT            Task Team Leader: Piotr Krzyzanowski
(FORMERLY ENV. MGT & REHAB)
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 16, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m): 41.60
Bank Approval: February 13, 2003               IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                           Sector: Central government administration (25%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Information technology (5%); Water supply (70%)
Status: Lending                                Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);
Water resource management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The immediate objective of the project is to significantly reduce hazards of industrial mercury in
the Nura River Basin by cleaning up the mercury pollution at its original source (AO Karbide
plant site) and along the banks and floodplains of the Nura River, and by instituting effective
water quality protection measures and needed regulatory reforms to prevent further
contamination. Longer term, the project will ensure the availability of a second source of clean
drinking water for the country's capital city (Astana), obviating the need to pump water from a
distant, uneconomic canal.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will: i) excavate contaminated hotspots, including those at the AO Karbide plant site
and certain areas along the banks and floodplains of the Nura River; ii) complete the spillway at
the Intumak reservoir to provide a water management tool and possible sediment trap; iii)
strengthen the Nura River Basin Authority, in order to improve its monitoring network, the water
pollution control system, and the regulatory framework within which it operates.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project focuses on the AO Karbide plant site, located in Temirtau, Kazakhstan, and on
approximately 25km of the Nura River. The river is a typical steppe river, with its flow
practically limited to snowmelt during the summer season. Some 1.5 million people live in the
Nura-Ishim river basin (the project area). Most live in the national capital, Astana, and in the



2
ISDS
cities of Karaganda and Temirtau, which together have a population of 925,000. The agricultural
users in the Nura River Basin are found throughout in scattered, small communities. Farmers
once relied on highly subsidized irrigation systems, but with the removal of subsidies, most
farners abandoned irrigation and now rely on subsistence, rainfed farming. Although many
industrial enterprises have closed or scaled down production in the face of world market
competition, industry continues to employ the bulk of workers in the basin. In addition to serving
direct human needs, the Nura eventually discharges into the Kurgaldzhino Wetlands, an
internationally-recognized nature reserve (a RAMSAR site).
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The project will handle mercury, a hazardous waste. The excavation and final disposal
of the mercury-contaminated soils is sensitive, requiring proper construction practices, operation of
the landfill, worker practices, and monitoring. Therefore, the project has been categorized as "A."
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                              Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                   O Yes C No    O TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                           O Yes O No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                             O Yes O No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                               O Yes O No    C TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                   0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                            O Yes O No    0 TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                             * Yes O No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*       * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)     0 Yes 0 No    C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
IT.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment. The project triggers OP 4.01, is rated A, and thus an Environmental
Impact Assessment is being undertaken for the project. The EIA contracted by the Borrower is
being overseen by an International consultant, using local consultants for data gathering and
public meeting organization. The EIA will be submitted to and reviewed by the Bank, to ensure
full compliance with Bank guidelines (including public consultation and disclosure).
Safety of Dams. The Intumak Reservoir, located on the Nura River, will be used by the project
as a water management tool and perhaps as a sediment trap for remnant mercury-contaminated
sediment. Therefore, a dam safety assessment was undertaken by international experts. The
study recommended that the main dam needs rehabilitation to be at international standards. The
project will undertake the recommended measures.



3
ISDS
International Waterways. The project triggers OP 7.50 since the Nura (a wholly national river) is
connected to the Ishim (which ends in Russia) by a canal near Astana. The Kazakh government
has sent the letter, as required by the OP and approved by the Bank legal department, to the
Russian government.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Mercury is highly toxic, therefore, proper management of exposure during excavation and
containment at the landfill is critical. Proper long-term operation and monitoring of the landfill
will ensure that the project has a positive environmental impact. The project includes a
component to establish a monitoring system and strengthen water management, with a view
toward providing the downstream protected wetlands with 100% of needed ecological flow. The
quality of the water entering the wetlands will be much improved as a consequence of this
project.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The long term impacts are expected to be positive, through reduced mercury release into the
environment. Increased water use by the city of Astana is anticipated, which will affect the water quality
and quantity of the Nura River. The project would address long-term water resource management issues,
including institutional aspects and ecological flow.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Do nothing. The argument can be made that the latent mercury should be left undisturbed both at
the Carbide plant site and the topsoil. However, the risk analysis done during the feasibility
study indicated that this option should be rejected due to the increasing risk that the mercury
cannot remain contained: mercury currently contained in the Carbide plant's buildings will be
released in the short-term when the decrepit roof collapses; and mercury hot spots on the river
banks and floodplain are likely to further contaminate the water during the Spring floods.
Adding to this risk is the fact that the Carbide plant's bankruptcy protection ends this Spring, and
squatters are expected to invade the previously-protected grounds. The do-nothing scenario also
ignores the medium-term need for an alternate water supply for Astana, which requires that
contamination of the Nura during floods be cleaner up and the Nura protected from further
contamination.
Focus on AO Karbide plant site only. One option is to focus only on the immediate need for
environrmental remediation of the AO Karbide plant site, without any intervention in the
floodplains or banks of the river. The feasibility study indicates, however, that there are hotspots
with very high mercury concentrations in the floodplain and in some sections of the Nura River's
banks. These sites should be remediated in order to ensure potability of the Nura River and to
avoid contamination of the water supply from floods.
Technical options for remediation. The technical option for remediation of the contaminated
areas include in-situ remediation, excavation, and isolation. Due to the significant amounts of
chemicals that would need to be used, and the location of the contaminated soil in riverbeds and
banks of the Nura, in-situ remediation is not feasible. Isolation is not favored since the



4
ISDS
groundwater would remain vulnerable. The feasibility study recommends removal and safe
storage.
Landfill siting. Various sites for the landfill are being considered in the EIA. The most
appropriate will be selected based on many considerations, including: transportation, geology,
hydrogeology, natural habitats, social impacts and so on.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Oversight of the implementation of the EMP will be the responsibility of the Borrower. Many of
the actions regarding proper excavation techniques, worker safety, and landfill operation, will be
passed on to the contractor. These requirements will be included in bidding documents.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The initial public consultation workshops on the draft EIA were held in early February 2002 both
in Temirtau and Karaganda. Forty and 120 people attended, respectively, representing decision
makers, NGOs, academia and local farmers. The workshops, organized by a local environmental
NGO, led by the international consultant overseeing the EIA, and chaired by the Deputy
Governor, were the first ever EIA public consultations in the region at this level. A smaller
working group was formed, with representatives from all areas, which will be responsible for
providing input into project design and implementation. The final EIA and Environmental
Management Plan will be consulted. Minutes, participant list and final agreements are in project
files. The draft Final EIA will be locally available in Russian before the final consultation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/25/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          2/7/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           4/30/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  5/17/2002    5/17/2002
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure



5
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               7/16/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/29/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop                              4/25/2002
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Piotr Krzyzanowski                          April 18, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Kirsten Oleson/Person/World Bank       April 18, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                             August 1, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Laura Tuck                                  August 1, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         _ D8ACI( _ =   S                   E   _1



