Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC374 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 29, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P085414 
Project Name: Development of a National 
Statistical Sy 
Task Team Leader: Lucas A. Ojiambo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTP2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration 
sector (60%);General information and 
communications sector (40%) 
Theme: Poverty strategy, analysis and 
monitoring (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 20 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The development of Kenya’s National Statistical System stems from the GOK’s own initiative 
aimed at making substantial reforms in its NSS, strengthening its data collection, analysis and 
storage mechanisms, and reforming the its national statistical office, i.e. CBS.  The government 
is much committed to the modernization of the system, staff up-grading and data improvement as 
evidenced by the preparation of the above mentioned SP and drafting of  a new edition of 
Statistical Act.  Among other things, the new Act seeks to establish the Kenya National Bureau 
of Statistics (KNBS) to coordinate and supervise the NSS. 
 
 The main development objectives of the proposed project are to support the government’s 
efforts towards: (1) creating general awareness about statistics and raising the profile of the 
National Statistics Bureau to meet the emerging challenges; (2) producing high-quality statistics 
by improving consistency,  accuracy, completeness of official data; (3) improving data analysis, 
reporting, dissemination and access mechanism; (4) creating an efficient NSS by reviewing the 
existing Statistics Act, improving management information systems, Improve coordination, 
collaboration, networking and information sharing among stakeholders, and improve technical 
coordination among data producers; (5) create an effective KNBS by  reforming congenial 
statistical legislation, providing appropriate physical infrastructure, improving existing 
 
management systems, strengthen the statistical infrastructure, improving  strategic governance, 
Page  2
 
 
improving  the resource flows, harness information and technology, and actively participate in a 
number of regional and sub-regional activities. 
 
 
The project will support GOK in the implementation of its ERSWEC prorgam.  The ERSWEC is 
a broad-based poverty reduction strategy that aims at improving the country’s macroeconomic 
framework, increasing employment opportunities, enhancing good governance, reducing income 
inequality, encouraging private sector participation and investment. A key component of the 
ERSWEC is the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) and key of principal indicators related to economic growth, poverty, education, health 
and infrastructure activities.  This project will ensure a steady supply of reliable and timely social 
and economic statistics needed for policy making , monitoring and evaluation of the MDGs and 
performance indicators outlined in the ERSWEC.   
 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The project components   and their preliminary costs are given in the appendix I to this note.  
The estimated cost for the next three years non-wage activity program was presented as US$ 
43.7 million.  GOK’s contribution is estimated at US$ 4 million, and pledges from donors to date 
is US$ 0.8 million.  This leaves a financing gap of US$ 38.8 million, which is expected to be 
finance by STATCAP project loan and funds from other development partners. The highest share 
of expenditure is allocated to four activities; Agricultural Census - US$ 10.3 million; 
Preparation for Population Census – US$ 10.3 million; Integrated Household Budget Survey 
(IHBS) - US$ 4.0 million;  and construction of new CBS headquarter  - US$ 4.1 million. The 
amount allocated to FY2003/04 is US$ 6.8 million – nearly 60% of which will be spent in 
carrying out IHBS.  In the preparation of the activities in Appendix I, GOK paid particular 
attention to the following factors: (i) the extent to which particular statistical activities are 
currently justified in ERSWEC vis-à-vis other work for which demand has already been 
expressed by users; (ii) the cost imposed on respondents to data collection, in terms of time and 
efforts; and (iii) prospective total resources available the to CBS over the three-year period.   
What is currently missing in the program are the performance indicators, which GOK has 
agreed to  establish at macro and lower levels of the implementation plan.     
 
The implementation plan will the information provided in Appendix I to set out a detailed, 
prioritized and costed work program, linked to the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
(MTEF), that specifies what will be done by whom and when. The implementation plan will also 
identify targets for key inputs, activities and outputs; and will specify how progress is to be 
monitored. On the demand side, the implementation plan will be prepared in way that will take 
account of and respond to the urgent priorities set out, in the ERSWEC  and other GOK policy 
documents. 
  
The overall environment for statistics in Kenya is more favorable now than it has been at any 
other time in the past 20 years. The ERSWEC provides a clear framework for National 
Development and poverty reduction and sets out what needs to be done to define policies and 
monitor progress. There is a widespread commitment to the principle of evidence-based policy 
Page  3
 
 
making and the CBS and other agencies in the National Statistical Systems (NSS) are facing 
rapidly increasing demand for statistical data. There is also an increasing interest in new areas of 
statistical concern, including monitoring and governance and the efficiency and effectiveness of 
service delivery. The commitment of the GOK to facilitate an effective process of 
decentralization and strengthening capacity at the district level is also providing new 
opportunities and placing new demands on the NSS.   
 
In addition to the World Bank, a number of other bilateral and multilateral donors have indicated 
their interest in supporting the development of statistics in Kenya and the implementation of the 
SP. They include: DFID, USAID, Japan, Germany, France, the European Union, and the UN 
through the United Nations Development Framework (UNDAF) and the IMF. Although few 
agencies are yet in a position to make formal commitments, they have all indicated that they are 
interested in providing financial and other types of support provided that strengthening the NSS 
is identified by GOK as a priority. 
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Lucas A. Ojiambo 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
