ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Frtc ol Povertv
InfoShop
Report No AC24
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: KENYA                                   Project ID. P078058
Project. Arid Lands Resource Managemlient Project Phase Task Team Leader. Christine E. Cornelius
Two
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 15, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m)
Bank Approval: Junle 19, 2003                    IDA Amounlt ($m) 60.00
Managing Unit AFTRI                              Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry
Lendinig Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (40%), Animial production (30%); Other social
Status Lending                                   services (30%)
Theirie Natural disaster management (P); Other rural
development (S); Civic engagemilenit; participation
and community driven development (S), Other
environlilienit and natural resources management (S)
I A 2. Project Objectives.
The proposed second phase project (ALRMP 11) wvill build UpOIn the first Arid Lands Resource
Management Project (ALRMP), whiich is scheduled to close on June 30, 2003. ALRMP has has
undergonie evaluation and the lessons from the evaluation have been built into the preparationi of the
proposed project. The first phase ALRMP objective, as revised during the Mid-Term Review, was to
build the capacity of comImlullities in the Arid Districts of Kenya to better cope with drougit. The
evaluation concluded that the project had met this objective.
The project developmenit objective of the proposed second phase is to enhanice food security and promote
sustainable livelihoods through implemlieniting effective systems and development approaches which
reduce vulnerability. ALRMP TT will support three complemilenitary chaniniels of intervenitioni, wihich
together address the complex problem of vulnierability, and enable communities in the project area to
move beyond survival and subsistence to sustainiable development: 1) Strengthlellilng and
Institutionalizing Natural Resources and Droughit Management, whiich will improve the management of
natural capital, reduce the impact of natural shocks and dminilishi acute vulnierability by reinforcing
preparedness and mitigationi activities, and by improving the effectiveness of response intervenitions; 2)
Empowering communlities so that they can successfully identify, implement and sustain their
developmenlt priorities througil ComMUllity-Driven Development; and 3) Fostering a conducive enabling
environimilent for developmenit in the arid lands throughi policy support, advocacy and improvemenit in the



2
ISDS
delivery of essential services, complementing existing sector programmes.
L.A 3. Project Description
T'le proposed project has three components. I) Natural Resource and DroughLt Management, 2)
Community-Driven Development, and 3) Support to Local Development The latter two components will
be implemented in the eleven arid districts of Kenya whicih were included in the I st Phase project. The
first component will also be implemilented in selected semi-arid districts which suffer regular acute food
insecurity related to drought.
Component 1: Natural Resource and Drought Management
The Natural Resource and Drought Managemiient Component aims to mitigate the risk posed by drought
and other factors by strengtihenililg and institutionializinig natuLal resource and drought management
systems This in tirn will reduce the vulIlerability of the populationi an area whicil is characterized by
frequenit, acute food insecurity related to drought. The component will promote a better understanding of
the natural resource base, leading to better planning and implementation of a coordinated set of activities.
These activities will be designed to make the most beneficial and sustainable long term use of the natural
assets found in these areas, whicih are subject to low and erratic rainfall and other external uncertainties
It is generally agreed that effective natural resource managemenit in Kenya's ASALs will be achieved
mainly thiroughi socioeconomic and administrative means rather than through the development and
application of new techniiques in forestry or range maniagemenit The key challenges relate to community
organization, consensus building, and the application of agreed rules and regulations
Specific activities aroulid natural resource management (NRM) include enhancing the informationl and
awareness of the natural resource base. This will include the collection and analysis of informationi on
the natural resource base and production system, and determination of trends. Much information already
exists, however some data collection through survey work will be necessary, including research grants to
be made available to Kenyan students to carry out some of this analysis.
Another activity will aim to clarify and strengtheni the roles of institutions responsible for improved
NRM in arid and semiarid areas. The focus will be firmly on providing support to local-level
institutions, suchi as pastoral associations and management committees. The PRA process will provide an
entry point, but as the experience of the first phase has shown, communities will not demand NRM inputs
as readily as other perceived pressing needs. NRM problems normally cut across communlilties as well
As training and awareness grows, this should change For the initial part of the project, the main work of
NRM planning will fall to districts rather than communities The componenit will provide resources for
training and capacity building of the DSGs and other district leaders, with cross fertilization withi the role
of traditional leaders regarding conflict resolution and other related roles and responsibilities.
Guidelinles for district level NRM planning will be developed to guide local actors in the preparation of
district NRM plans, whichi will form the basis for plannilig district drougIlt preparedness investmenits
(especially water) and other investilments in local service provision. As comimilluinity capacity grows, the
implemenitation of discrete developmenit area plans (areas where ecology, population growth, and relative
social and economic feasibility is delineated from neighiboring tracts as havinig distinct development
opportIllities or requiremenits) will form the basis for local investimenit, as well as for the further
establishment of grazing reserves and conservation areas.
Enhanced work on drought managemenit, both preparedness and responise, will be based on a better
understandinig of productioni systems, the resilience of the ecosystem and the use of simple, widely
replicable management responses. The objective being a more effective drought cycle management



3
ISDS
system, which will minimize the need for emergency intervenitioni, and enhance response mechaniisms for
better action in acute drought emergencies
DroLught management activities wvill build upon the drought management system established durinlg the
first phase project. The system has been operatimg successfully in the ten arid districts, and an expanded
EWS is being piloted in six food-insecure semi-arid districts The system is based on three pillars
I  An effective institutional and decision-making framework at communiity, district and national
level to coordinate and support drougilt monitorinlg, mitigation, response and recovery
2   Timely availability of reliable drought status inforimiationi to aid decision-making at all levels, and
3. Capacity to plan and implement interventions in a timely, effective and efficient manner,
including the timely availability of fuLidinig to finanice mitigation and response interventionis
Under the second phase of the project, the drought managemenit system will be expanded to an additional
ten semiarid districts (includinig those where the pilot is going on) Where the system is already
operational, it will be revised to increase its effectiveness. The first improvement will be to enihanice the
early warninig system (EWS). The current EWS is well sulted for the dynamiiics of a pastoral economy,
with a focus on livestock and water related indicators. With increasing nulimbers of periurban and mixed
livelihoods, in the arid lands and a variety of farn and waged labor activities in the semiarid districts, the
EWS will broaden its focus. This will be accomplished through improvements in the field data collection
instruments and the database system, includiig a range of income and expenditure indices beyond the
meat-cereal price ratio" currently being used. More data will be collected on natuial resources,
migration and conflict Software and data capture instrumilenits will be upgraded, as well as mapping
capability. Systems for better communiication of EWS data and analysis will be enhanced for improved
upward and downward flow. Human and technical capacity will be enihanced at district and national
levels to ensure the continued credibility and sustainability of the system.
The second phase of the project will aim to strengthien and institutionialize the drought managemenit
system at nationial and district level. At the national level the legal formalization of the Kenya Food
Security Meeting (KFSM) as the nationial steering group for food security and drought management
would be soughit. Investments to strengthieni the role and functioni of the Kenya Food Security Steeriig
Group (the secretariat of the KFSM) through its data sub-committee of and the data management unit at
ALRMP headquarters would be carried out to complete the capacity building requiremilenits for national
coordination as well as to formalize the key focal points in all relevant goverinmenit departmenits for
information sharing on food security and drought T'he legal formalization the district steerilg group in
all 22 project districts in the govermenit structure would be sought, as the subcommilttee of the DDC
responsible for natural resource and droughit management with the mandate to harimionize the planning of
NRM and drought related activities of all line ministries, CBOs and NGOs in the district In addition, the
project will aim to strengtiheni local government by enilanicing the role of community councilors, the Ink
betveen line miniistries at district level and the county/municipal councils, and assist xvithi feasibility
studies for local authiority projects as appropriate
The component will strengtheni and improve drought prepar-edness and contingenicy planniniig at the
district level The first step will be to enhanice and standardize the continigenicy planning process by
developing an improved continigency planning software tool. Intensive technical training of drought
management officers (DMOs) as well as general district training of the DSGs will lead to the preparation
of tvo plans The project will contilLue to finance key droughit mitigation and management activities
SuChi as livestock offtake, strategic water investmenits, drought grazing reserves, as wvell as emergency
human and animal health interventionis. To ensure that droughit contingenicy plans are better tied to the
drought cycle and flexible enough for rapid response, a restricted definitioni of what is eligible for



4
ISDS
continigency funding will be applied A separate planning and fundinig process will be developed to
cover long term investmenlts for strengthening the district's ability to prepare and recover from drought.
A separate long-term Drougilt Preparedness Plan will be prepared, whiicih will embody the natural
resource management and discrete development area plans, highiligiting agreed long term investments to
better prepare the district for drought Districts will be assisted to gather all existing hydrological, range
and other physical data with the aim to prepare maps reflecting their mediulil term spatial developmenit
plan From this, districts will prepare their first aniual drought preparedness work plan, which will
include an environmental assessment and mitigation plans of each large-scale investment to be carried
out
A second district Drought Contiligency Plan will be formulated, wivose actions will be triggered by the
stages of drought signaled by the EWS Contingency fuLids will be on standby to finance agreed
activities outlined in the contingency plan Logistics, plans of operation, scenario developmenit, and a
portfolio of rapid intervenitionis for each phase of the drougilt cycle will be developed for funding from
the contingency fund Improved fundinig mechaniismiis will be established, to allow better multi-sectoral
planing and also to attract other- donors Separate modalities will be developed for fuLiding drought
preparedness and drought contingencies. It is expected that a mechanism will be established to allow
other donors to contribute to a Drought Contingency Trust Fund.
Component 11: Community-Driven Development
The Communiity-Driveni Developmenit (CDD) component will foster development capacity at the
community level and below to empower communlities to take greater charge of their owvn development
agenda and take responsibility for the developmenit choices made. The componlent activities will build on
the significant capacity created during the first phase and strengtheni existing institutionis, as well as
expanding to other communities in the same districts to achieve broad coverage and to bulid up new CDD
implemenitation capacity. The componenit will strengtileni decentralized and participatory plannilng and
implementation procedures at the community level to finanlce a variety of community priority
investments. Inniovations and improvemenlts over and above the first phiase are planned In particular,
communities will take greater responsibility in project implementationi, iiclidinig procuremilenit, the
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) approach will be adapted to identify the differentiated needs and
priorities of various sub-groups in the community, and PRAs will not be one-offs but start a process of
continiuous priority setting and review. Two approaches to implement CDD are envisaged in the second
phase:
Basic CDD Communiities withi no or little micro-project implemenitationi experience will be supported by
Mobile Extension Teams (MET), composed of district technical and partner agency staff, to formiulate
and update Community Action Plans (CAPs) throughi PRA. Priority projects identified will be forwxarded
for fundinig approval to the District Steering Group (DSG). Individual CDD projects will not exceed an
established threshold (USD 10,000). Once a project has been successfully implemented and accouLited
for, the community may request approval of further projects for fundinig
Extended CDD Communities which have established a track record of successful project implemenitation
and accountability may submit their full CAP for funldinig approval within a certain allocated budget over
a specific time period (USD 25,000 over three years). This will give the community greater power to
manage different development priorities and meet various comimiuniity needs in a comprehensive fashion.
The community will then be accountable to the DSG for the CAP implementation as a wvhole.



5
ISDS
Community projects identified in the CAPs and eligible for project finaicinig will fall into three broad
categories
I Social Infiastructure and Service Delivery: projects whichi produce benefits for the wilole
commuLiity or a large section of the community. Likely priorities will be in water developmenit,
animal and humani healthi, and education provision.
2. Safety nets: mechanisms targeted and managed by the communilty to support and protect the most
vulnerable communLity members (including marginalized groups, the elderly and orphans) These may
include restocking and shelter projects
3. Incomtle-Genieratinig Activities- projects whichi generate incomile or other direct benefits to the
participants The projects may be implemented by a sub-sectioni of the community. Likely activities
include animal and other trading activities, production of goods sucih as housing materials for sale,
fishinig or bee-keeping.
A 30% community contribution will be required for the first two categories of CDD projects, following
the policy of the first phase. Incomlie-genierating activities will not be supported by a lump-sum grant
Instead the project will foster the group's savings capacity by providing top-ups once groups have
mobilized specific saving levels. This approach is designed to ensure that groups retain a strong feeling of
ownership of the funds invested and, withi the assistance of the METs, select financially viable
investments.
The componienit will finance capacity building of commullities and their management committees In
leadership skills, finanicial managemileint and procureimient, of project and MET staff to support community
development processes and advise on techinically, financially, environmenitally and socially souLid project
design, visits and study tours to enable the exchanige of experiences and lessons amongst commullities
and support staff, and the implementation of the approved CDD projects and CAPs.
CDD implementation and perforimianice will be monitored by the project monitoring system, whichi will
incorporate participatory M&E techniques to monitor the performanlce of the MET teams, as well as to
measure the perceived and actual impact of the CDD projects from the participants' standpoint.
Community projects will continue to be vetted throughi the DSG for enviroiinienital, fiianicial and
technilcal soundness, and after approval, funids will flow directly from the project to commullities The
process will be governed by a memorandum of understaniding which clearly specifies the roles and
responsibilities of the governmeit and the comim unities througIlout the design, implementation and
evaluationi of the CDD projects or CAPs.
Component 111: Support to Local Development
The Support to Local Development Componient aims to foster a conducive enabling environment In the
arid lands to allow the population to break out of the prevalent survival-rellef continuum in to a positive
development agenda leading to economic growth and reduced dependence on outside intervention. This
will be achieved by improving the delivery of essential services, which will enable communities to
diversify their economilic activities and to develop sustainable exit strategies, and by promoting the
interests of the arid lands at the national level to ensure that adequate consideration is given to arid lands
development.
The component will provide financial assistance topolicy, advocacy and research in support of arid
lands development. Policy work will follow-up on the agenda highlighted by the Pastoral Thematic
Working Group of the PRSP to ensure that the particular concerns and requirements of the arid lands are



6
ISDS
adequately addressed in national and sectoral policy ilitiatives A particular focus of policy intervenition
will be on gender concerns to feed into the current development of the national gender policy. Natural
resource planninig and management interventions carried out Linder Componenlt I will be complemented
by the developmenit of Vision and Strategy,for the Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASAL). The development
of the Vision would be a participatory process to generate a clear picture of how the population and their
leaders in the ASAL view the futire and how the governmenit can respond to the opportunlities and
challenges identified. This Visioni should theni be translated into an ASAL strategy for natural resources
managemilenit, whicih will outline procedures to guide natural resource management operations in the
ASAL The project will continue the activities of the first phase in advocating for the interests of the arid
lands to complement these policy initiatives TIhe componienit will support local and national advocacy
groups to allow them to present their interests more effectively in the right fora. The project will also
finance visits of national policy makers to the arid lands to enable them to develop a first hand
appreciation of the particular challenges in the project area. Funds are set aside to finance research work
to analyse and develop appropriate responses to specific techilical and social challenges in the arid lands,
includinig innovative responses to risk througih drougIlt or livestock insuranice. The project will also assist
local governmient in the local governnment reform process by trainilg clerks and councillors to prepare
them for their greater responsibilities in shaping the local development agenda. Conflict resolution? in the
arid lands will be strengthened by fostering dialogue between parties and supportinig local initiatives to
manage conflicts between different pastoral groups as well as betweeni pastoralists and other local
stakeholders, such as sedentarized farmers.
The project will strengthieni local services development in sectors, which are essential to the sustainiable
development of communllities In the arid lands The aim of project intervenitions is not to replace existing
government and partner programmes but to complement these, and to address the particular challenges
posed by the imiobile lifestyle and low population density in the project area. There will be two chaniels
of fundinig to improve service delivery Some strategic investimienits are earmarked for funding. To
complement these investmenits, each district will be allocated a district services fund to allocate to
specific interventions prioritized by the district throughi the District Steering Group and outlined in the
District Aniual Work Plan. The district services fund can finanice capacity building for service delivery
as well as the construction of facilities
Sectors for whiich specific investmenit funds are earmarked include educationi, humani healthi and
HIV/AIDS, livestock prodLiction, marketing and health, and agricultural advisory services. In education,
the project will complement existing governmenit and partner initiatives to provide at least basic
education to the population in the arid lands. Recognizing that education is a particular challenge in
nomadic pastoral communities, whicih do not reside in the same area all year rouLid, and in view of
ALRMP's comparative advailtage in workiiig with mobile communities, the project will pay particular
attentioni to strengthening the delivery of mobile educationi provision in line with the GoK Concept Paper
on the Education of Pastoralist and Nomadic Communities. To complement and support the mobile
schools the project will also finanice the establishmilent of nomadic learinig centers, wlicil provide
backstopping for teachers, educational resources for the community and act as a link between the
informial mobile schiools and the convenltionial schooling system. These learning centers would also
function as information resource centers for other sectoral information material. On hunian health and
HIV/AIDS, sensitization and awareness creation programimles will be strengthiened. Support to
agriciultural services in the arid lands wvil focus on increasing the capacity of technical service providers
through training In irrigated and rainfed cropping techiniques. The emphasis is not on augmentinig
cropping in the arid lands but on assisting those communlities that already rely on crops for parts of their
livelihoods to increase the profitability and sIistainiability of their operations The project wvill also
support the creation of river water user associations on a pilot basis with a view to strengthening
community based water resource maniagemenit as well as the preventioni and resolution of conflicts over



7
ISDS
access to and use of water resources As the majority of houselholds in the arid lands depend upon
livestock for their livelihoods, the project will continue to support livestockproduction, health and
markeling initiatives. Strategic investments will be undertaken in the establishmenit of disease-free zones
to facilitate export and movement of animiials to finishing ranches, the provision of funding for feasibility
studies to attract private investmenlt (particularly in meat processing), the drafting of guidelinies for
emergency livestock offtake, the comparative study of drug delivery systems in the arid lands with a view
to highlighting best practice, and the strengtheninig of technical service providers to deliver improved
backstopping and advisory services to pastoralists
Investments whicih are expected to be prioritized for funding by the DSGs ulider the district servicesfund
include the constructioni, rehabilitation or upgrading of education and health facilities, drug dispensaries,
the training of CAHWs, CHWs and TBAs and the rehabilitation of market infrastructure for livestock.
Only investirients which benefit more than one communlity should be finaniced Llider this componenit, to
avoid overlap with investmenits under the CDD componenit for which a 30% communllity contribution will
be levied.
The project will also pilot the provision offinancialservices in the arid lands Recognizinig that currenit
coverage of forimial and inforimial finanicial services whichi support expenditure smoothiing and investment
remains very low, the project aims to identify low-cost delivery mechanisms for finanicial services, which
meet the needs of the population in the arid lands. In conjunction with an in-depth review of traditional
finanicial services to highligilt suitable entry points, a market research process will identify appropriate
financial services products which will then be piloted in five locations with varied cultural and economilic
characteristics. Following the pilot, a careful review will be carried out to assess performance and impact
and to provide recommendationis on appropriate roll-out strategies and approaches
I.A.4. Project Locationr (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
All three components would continue to be implemented in the arid districts of Kenya (Turkana, North
Baringo, Samburu, Isiolo, Marasbit, Moyale, Mandera, Wajir, Garissa, Ijara and Tana River. These districts
are populated almost entirely by pastoral communities, witih the exception of some riverine communities
along the Tana and Dawa rivers The total population of these districts is 2.3 million people, according to
the latest census
Only one componienit, the droLight preparedness and management componenit, would be expanded to ten
additional semiarid districts These districts were chosen due to their agro-ecological characteristics
(ramifall, and vegetation types of zones 5-7) and levels of food insecurity (measured by qualification as WFP
emergency food distribution districts in the 2001 droughit assessment) These districts are Narok,
Transmara, Kajiado, Makueiii, Kitui, Mwingi, Tharaka, Mbeere, Laikipia and West Pokot. Several divisions
of Nyeri which qualify will be included as well, and managed from Laikipia. The total population of these
districts is 3.5 million people, who practice agropastoralism and dryland agriculture.
District boundaries in Kenya were drawn mostly on ethilic lines. This is especially true in the arid and
semiarid districts The larger ethnic groups (Somali, Turkania, Boran, Samburu, Maasai, Pokot) occupy their
owIn districts and consitUte a vast majority of the district population. In other districts, suchi as Tana River,
several ethnic groups occupy distinct zones, whichi has resulted in an ongoing, iterative process of conflict
and negotiation over natural resources. Thus far under the project, conflict resolution over resource use has
been an integral activity and significanit positive achievement. This will be contilLued and intenisified over



8
ISDS
the second phase, includinig a more systematic approach to inclusion and participation in project processes
The project area, being mostly rangeland, includes many protected areas and a significant proportion of the
wildlife in Kenya. Thus far in the project, in Samburu for instance, the protection and fostering of natural
resources for tourism is an integral part of the district economic and development plan and thus of the
drouglht and disaster management plans. The drought preparediness and management component encourages
districts to plan for drought by better understanding the interaction betweeni the intenisity of drought and the
protection of natural resources, and provide tools for better planning and management at the local level.
Two internationally designated protected areas, Mt. Kulal Biosphere Reserve in Marsabit District and
Amboseli Biosphere Reserve in Kajiado district, are in the project area. Nationally protected areas include
Arawale National Reserve in Garissa District; Malka Marn National Park in Mandera District, Bisanadi,
Rahole, North KituLi National Reserves and Kora and Meru National Parks, and Tana River Primate Reserve
in Kitui/Tana River Districts; Samburu, Buffalo Springs and Shaba National Reserves in Samburu and Isiolo
Districts, South Turkana, Nasolot, and Central Island National Reserves in Turkana District; Sibiloi
National Park and Marsabit National Reserve in Marsabit District and Masai Mara National Reserve in
Narok District.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
The types of investments and intervenitionis proposed under the project point to a Category B rating. Thle
Borrower has carried out an EA study in order to prepare an Environimiental Management Framework
(EMF). The framework is to ensure that environmental concerns as they relate to the project have been
carefully assessed and that the appropriate systems and procedLires are put in place during
implementation to mitigate against any possible negative environmental impacts. The main objectives
under the EMF are to. establish procedures for sub-project design, review, approval, implementation and
monitoring; identify potential policy issues and proposed resolution mechianisnis; and develop a capacity
building program for stakeholders to carry out EIA and mitigation throughout thc project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.0 1)                    * Yes C No
Natural Flabitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                            * Yes C No
Forestry (OP/GP 4 36)                                        * Yes CQ No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    * Yes V No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes * No
lndigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 C Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4 12)                        0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  C Yes * No
Projects in Interinationial Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0Yes * No
*By supporting the propo.ved project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final deterinination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sumnmary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions If infornma7ion is n1ot available,



9
ISDS
describe steps to be takeni to obtain necessary data
I1.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify aiid
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible Impacts
Under component one, the project will establish (or improve) in all project districts, planniniig and
management mechanlisms at the local level which should result in commullities having increased
resilience to drought. Funds will be managed at the local level for preparedness and initial drougilt
response, as well as contilluous monitoring of houselhold and environmienital welfare indicators This
should have an overall beneficial effect throughi reduced conflict, and better uliderstaniding of the natural
resource base. There would, however, be minimal risks associated with physical investments designed for
drought preparedness and drought response, hence a proposed environmenital screening and appraisal
process will be used to assess these subprojects and to recommend mitigationi measures to address them
during implementationi.
In eleven project districts, investments at the community level will support priority needs under
component two, in accordance with project guidelines (technical and environmenital) These will be small
in scale (less thani US$ 10,000) and geographically dispersed. In addition, technilcal support services
related to community needs will be strengthened under component three It is not anticipated that this
component will result in any environimiienital impacts; in fact, it will provide technical assistance and
training in environmenital and natural resource management
Other Safeguards
Natural Habitats This policy has been triggered due to the potential nature of ALRMP 11 activities to
border or operate in natural habitats or protected areas The project area encompasses many natural
habitats, mentionied above, which are protected by law The project does and will operate in areas which
include or border upon these areas, and other areas which qualify as natural habitats ulider OP 4.36. The
EMF will address these concerns via a set of environimenital screening and review procedures. These
procedures will be applied to all subprojects in order to identify the potential impacts on natural habitat
and to appropriately address them.
Forestry. Forests, though not a common feature of the project area, do provide several important
watersheds. Moreover, small-scale infrastructure to be financed under the project may induce pressure on
forest resources, mainly the need for wood for constructioll. T o mitigate this concerin, the EMF provides
the necessary measures in the screening process to identify impacts on forests and forest resources. Good
practice measures are provided in the EMF to address these concerins. Moreover, it is anticipated that the
project, througIl the droughit managemenit component, and throughi enhanced participatory mechanisms,
will raise awareness and empower commullities to increase protection of fragile watersheds
Pest Management The project could conceivably, through promotion of rain-fed or irrigated farminig,
indirectly involve the use of pesticides. In addition, it is conceivable that project funds will be used for
animal pesticides, either directly or indirectly. To mitigate against the potential for pesticide use and
culIlulative impacts of pesticides due to the nature of subprojects, the screenin1g and review system
provided in the EMF will identify the potential for subprojects to trigger the OP 4 09, and will provide
guidance on mitigating impacts related to them For potential cumulative impacts as described uinder the
policy, an Integrated Pest Management Plan will be prepared during implementationi of the project to
ensure compliance with the World Bank's safeguard requirements.
Cultural Property. Unlike many areas in the highlanids, there are few areas in pastoral areas of Kenya that



10
ISDS
constitute cultural property in the sense described in OPN 11.03 Where they might occur, micro-projects
would be unlikely to involve excavation or inundationi. Furtlherimiore, the project activities will be carried
out only in areas selected by the local citizens in the pastoral zones, who would give great importance to
safeguarding their cultural property Therefore, this safeguard policy is highly unlikely to be applicable.
Indigenouis Peoples. The project will be implemented mainly witlh pastoral peoples who form the
dominant society in districts However, there are also several groups of forest dwelling people in the
project expansion areas (the Ogiek and Dorobo of Narok and Laikipia) but only the Natural Resources
and Drought Managemilenit component will be implemenited in these districts. Indigenous people, as they
are identified, will be included in subproject identification and preparation as part of the participatory
approaches to preparing Community Action Plans. It is felt that the imipact on these communities from
this component would not be great enough to warrant a free standinig Indigenous Peoples Development
Plan. Within the ten arid districts, there are vulnerable and marginialized people who would not
necessarily participate In communilty or district fora withiout extra targeting efforts. These vulnierable
groups are not indigenous peoples as the term is used in Africa operationis in the World Bank
Community leadership and capacity building activities, PRA and resulting CDD intervenitions, and other
project interventions will be designed to ensure that these poorest and most vulnierable groups are
reached.
Involuntaty Resettlement The project is not anticipated to result in or promote involuntary resettlement.
As a demand driven project, decisions about movement or sealement will be made by the pastoral groups
themselves, either as a normal part of the dynamics of pastoral households or as a decision of the clan or
sub clan in the process of their own developmenit planining. Furthermore, given the vast amounts of land
available to pastoralists and land's low marginal cost, any small parcels acquired through the construiction
of micro-projects (suchi as a school or health post) are unlikely to impose a significant cost in lost
resources to a pastoral communlity. Therefore, OP 4 12 on Involunitary Resettlement has been deemed by
the Africa safeguards ulnit not to apply to this project
Safety of Dams This project will not finance large investnmenlts aimed at dam constructioni and is in
accordance with this safeguard policy.
Projects in International WVaters. This project does not foresee any extensive use of irrigation water or
practices which would pollute water sources, and therefore this policy is not triggered.
Projects in Dispiuted Areas This project does not foresee any possible activities in disputed areas and is
in accordance with this safeguard policy.
It D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componient.
Given the size of the project area and the dispersed nature of the physical investmenits made under the
project, cumulative impacts of comImlunity micro-projects are unlikely, but not impossible The project is
anticipated to have a positive cumulative impact. The first phase has already demonstrated that improved
planning of mitigation and response to drought has resulted in more sustainable managemenit of the
natural resource base Decisions about water points and other investimienits at the district level (which are
not necessarily finaiiced by this project) are seen by the local decision makers througlh the lens of a
commonily developed natural resoLirce plan, both at community and district level The project
componenits thus present a mutually supportive system of decision making which promotes sustainable
development. There is concem, however, for potential cumulative impacts as relates to small-scale



11
ISDS
infrastructure developmenits and the sources of materials imported into the district (timber, bricks,
cement). Cumulative impacts of the larger-scale projects il the Support to Local Development
component are more likely, particularly in the case of borelhole impact on groundwater resources,
irrigation or river diversion impacts on surface water sources, and water development impact on pastoral
resources.
Monitoring the impact on the local environment from initial micro-project construction will be included
to learn how to avoid or mitigate localized impacts so that measures can be integrated into subsequenit
activities.
11 D. I c Describe any potential long tern impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
A number of small-scale activities have the potential to result in long term strategic impacts which will
require more detailed assessmenit Water source development in particular will need to be assessed for its
strategic impact particularly in terms of their location in relation to wet season grazing areas, mobility of
communities and soil erosion The EA study has identified other types of projects that may cause
strategic impacts, particularly development activities whicih relate to pastoral resource use. Potential
impacts include overgrazing associated with settlements attracted by supply of permianent water sources
(boreholes and small dams), destruction of riparian forests to create irrigation schemes; increased
humant/wildlife conflict along irrigation schemes and blocked migratory paths; increased conflict
between pastoralists and cultivators over blockage of access roLites to watering points and dry season
grazing reserves; and soil exhaustion and resultant land degradation associated with seasonal cultivatioll.
The EMF has provided appropriate mechaiiisms to ensure that these are taken into account in subproject
preparation, and approval, through screeninig tools and technical support to communiity project
development.
IT.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatmienit of alternatives (if required)
Consideration of alternatives will be part of the preparation and approval of all CDD subprojects and
other investments under ALRMP 11, followinig procedures delineated in the EMF
II.D.3. Describe arrangemenlt for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmienital Managemenit Framework (EMF) has been prepared that details a screelling,
assessment and review process for comimiuniity microprojects and for inter-communllity projects. The
screening criteria provided in the EMF includes relevant questiolIs on natural habitats/protected areas,
involuntary resettlement and land acquisitioni, introductioll of pesticides, impacts to forestry resources,
impacts to cultural property and inclusiol of indigenous people in the project identification process This
will ensure that all concerns related to the Bank's safeguard policies are taken into account during the
screeninig of micro-projects and inter-comimillunity projects for potential impacts, and that the appropriate
mitigation measures are adopted to address them.
In addition, the EMF details the individuals/agencies responsible for implementing these measures, and
recommenided measures for training and capacity building. The EMF will act as a guiding instrumenlt for
the Borrower to mainstream environimenital concerns into the project design, appraisal and
implemenitation process



12
ISDS
11 D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people
During the preparation stage, various stakeholders have been involved in conceptualizinig the objective of
the second phase. Workshops at the nationial and local levels have been held where various stakeholders
have participated. Extensive consultationis were carried out from 1 3th to 24th January 2003 in Kenya
with the following groups: ALRMP staff, and governimiienltal and non-governmenital stakeholders or key
informants at a central Nairobi level; beneficiaries of ALRMP 1, potential beneficiaries of ALRMP 11,
ALRMP officers and governmienital and noni-goverinmenital stakeholders withiin the District Steerinlg
Group in one representative arid district, Garissa; and similar stakeholders in a representative semi-arid
district, Kajiado, where ALRMP has established an early warning system
ALRMP I has already developed and introduced an effective participatory approach to service delivery
based on a good uliderstanding of pastoralist commuLiltles Communlity targeting through PRAs that
enables communities to articulate their problems, needs, priorities and help in mapping necessary course
of action has been effective. The PRAs has also been an effective tool for communiity empowerment.
There is, however, the need to examine the PRA methodology further in the light of the new project as it
extends to other areas, and the need to cover more communiLties withill the existing project area. The
Social Assessment has carried out a stakeholder analysis and has provided a participatory plan whiich
indicates the various entry points for stakeholders at all levels
The Mobile Extension Team (MET) concept will be contilnued and strengthienied under ALRMP 11,
whereby teams will work with community members to equip them withi skills for prioritizing and
designing projects geared to meeting their needs. Communlity Development committees that already exist
will be strengthiened so that they are able to take more responsibility in community priority setting and
management of their own programs, including proper implementation of the EMP.
On April 9, 2003, the EA/EMF study was submitted to the Infoshop, and disclosed in Kenya The
EAIEMF is available in Kenya at the World Bank Informiation Center, the Arid Lands Nairobi and
district offices, and at NEMA
E. Safeguardis Classification Category is determined by the highiest impact in any policy Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI - Significant, cumulative aiid/or irreversible impacts; or significanit techiical and institutionial risks
in managemenit of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3 -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Finaicial intermediary projects, social developmenit funds, community driven development or
similar projects whicil requiire a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



13
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirenients
Environmental Assessment/A nalysis/Mancige,nent Plan.       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/3/2003      2/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/11/2003     4/9/2003
Date of submission to InfoSlhop                             4/11/2003     4/9/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A prol ects)
Resettlement Action Planl/Franewot-rk.                      Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-counitry" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framewvork              E.rpected      Actial
Date of receipt by the Banik                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShlop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoSlhop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Damn Safety Managenent Plan                                 Expected       Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-coulitry" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-counitry disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si_ned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader              Christine E Cornelius                       April 9, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Johni A Boyle/Person/World Bank        April 9, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Dan R. Aronsoni/Personl/World Bank     April 9, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator. Charlotte S. Bingiham                    April 9, 2003
Sector Manager/Director.      Karen Mcconnell Brooks                      April 9, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SERC         FEED8ACK       I __E MAP  -                  SHv'cAAS_



