25680
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
Xfin"ho p-
lbrW%dd Ua¢Ek
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: KYRGYZ REPUBLIC                        Project ID: P071061
Project: Governance Structural Adjustment Credit  Task Team Leader: Jit Bahadur S. Gill
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 19, 2003     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 15, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: ECSPE                             Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL)  Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);
Status: Lending                                 Decentralization (P); Public expenditure; financial
management and procurement (P); Other public
sector governance (S); Health system performance
(S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Governance Structural Adjustment Credit (GSAC) would support the Government's program to
strengthen the effectiveness of the State. It has two complementary objectives: (a) to improve the
transparency and responsiveness of the public sector and enhance the ability of external stakeholders to
hold it accountable; and (b) to increase efficiency, effectiveness and accountability within the public
sector. With regard to the first objective, the GSAC would support reforms aimed at (i) improving
personal accountability of political officials and civil servants; (ii) strengthening voice and participation
by improving public access to official information; (iii) improving the interaction between regulatory
agencies and business enterprises; and (iv) strengthening external audit. To advance the second
objective, the operation would support reforms directed at (i) strengthening public expenditure
management, by establishing a more strategic and transparent budget formulation process, and
strengthening accountability and transparency in budget execution; (ii) improving the internal control
environment; (iii) improving transparency, value for money and accountability in public procurement;
(iv) improving service delivery in the health and education sectors; (v) enhancing the effectiveness of the
civil service; and (vi) streamlining the structure of Government ministries and agencies.
I.A.3. Project Description:
A. IMPROVE THE TRANSPARENCY AND RESPONSIVENESS OFTHE PUBLIC
SECTOR AND ENHANCE THE ABILITY OF EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS
TO HOLD IT ACCOUNTABLE
(i)   Improving PersonalAccountability of Political Officials and Civil Servants



2
ISDS
One of the instruments frequently used to promote integrity amongst political leaders and civil servants
who exercise State authority, is to require public officials to periodically declare their own and their
close relatives' incomes and assets and make their declarations public. The obligation to file the
declarations makes it harder for politicians and bureaucrats to hide gains from corruption; imposes an
implicit obligation to explain sources of investment in property; and creates potentially incriminating
evidence that could be used against them in future corruption investigations. At the same time, the
publication of the declarations provides the media, civil society and the public with useful benchmarks
against which they can measure the actual life styles of public officials and demand explanations for
observed discrepancies. By increasing the likelihood of detection of corruption, the system dissuades
many public officials from venturing into it. By providing documentary evidence of corruption, it
facilitates punishing those who persist.
Currently, the Election Code, the Law on KR Jogorku Kenesh Deputies' Status and Civil Service
LawArticle 27 of the Election Code of the Kyrgyz Republic (April 29, 1999); Article 37 of the Law on
KR Jogorku Kenesh Deputies Status and Article 13, the Law on Civil Service, 1999. have some
provisions for declaration of income and assets by candidates, deputies to Parliament and civil servants,
respectively, but these need to be improved and expanded. None of the laws requires publication of the
declarations. The declarations filed by Deputies and civil servants are explicitly treated as secret. Also,
these officials are not required to file any declarations regarding the income and assets of their close
family members. The State Tax Inspectorate, which receives the declarations of deputies and civil
servants does not have the capacity to systematically scrutinize these to identify cases of illicit
enrichment.
The Government is keenly interested in increasing the accountability of persons in authority, in order to
combat corruption. For this purpose, it proposes to improve the effectiveness of system of declaration of
income and assets. By Board, the Government will issue a resolution indicating its intention to submit
to Parliament (a) a draft Law on Declaration and Publication of Income and Assets of High State
Officials in the Executive, Judicial and Legislative Branches of the State, including the President, Prime
Minister, Vice Prime Ministers, Ministers, Deputies Ministers, Judges and Deputies of Jogorku Kenesh,
and their close family members; and (b) amendments to the Civil Service Law, satisfactory to IDA, to (i)
require declaration of income and assets of civil servants and their close family members and (ii) make
the declarations of incomes and assets of civil servants available to the public, and declarations of
incomes and assets of their close family members available to specified state bodies Italicized text in this
section indicates actions that are conditions of Board Presentation or release of the second and third
tranches.. Before second tranche release, the Law on Declaration and Publication of Income and Assets
of High State Officials and the aforesaid amendments to the Civil Service Law will be enacted. Before
third tranche, the Government will ensure publication of declarations of income and assets of High State
Officials and their close family members, in accordance with the aforesaid Law. It wil l also make the
declarations of income ancl assets of civil servants available to the public. Appropriate administrative
arrangements, to ensure regular, effective examination of the declarations of civil servants and their close
family members will be implemented to detect conflict of interest and illicit enrichment.
(ii)   Strengthening Voice and Participation by Improving Access to Official Information.
The availability of relevant and timely information about the functioning of the public sector is an
important pre-requisite for enabling civil society, the media and the public to contribute to policy
dialogue, participate in consultative processes and oversee the performance of public sector entities. The
Kyrgyz Republic has a relatively open Government and is making efforts to increase the transparency of
the public sector and increase public engagement in Governmental activities. For example, public budget



3
ISDS
hearings were held to receive feedback on annual budget for 2002. The budget and the Fiscal Bulletin
are published. Web sites of several Government entities have been created to disseminate infonnation on
the internet. However, the penchant for secrecy still survives in several areas of Government and the
quality and accessibility of official information remains quite limited, as revealed by surveys of
households and enterprises.
The NPRS places a high priority on strengthening civic participation in budget formulation and execution
at all levels of Government and in other decisions involving general community interests. It also aims to
increase the ability of civil society to monitor activities of State agencies. For this purpose, the
Government plans to improve public access to information on activities of State agencies and local
authorities. In accordance with agreements with IDA, as part of preparation for Board presentation, the
government has already published annual audited financial Statements and audit reports of 10 largest
joint stock companies with State share of 51 percent or more, for FY 2001; and information on public
procurement contract awards exceeding $20,000 made in 2002. It has also organized a workshop to
disseminate the "Governance in the Kyrgyz Republic" report prepared by the World Bank, based on
service delivery survey conducted in 2001. In addition, by Board, the Government will. (i) publish
several other key documents including: the complete annual audit report of the Chamber ofAccounts on
the execution of the republican budget for FY 2001, as adopted by the Parliament; the list offirms
receiving tax concessions and exemptions, as an investment incentive, and the list of 50 largest
delinquent taxpayers and energy users. By second tranche, the Government will institute mechanisms,
satisfactory to IDA, for the regular publication of the documents mentioned above, including information
about the public sector reform program implementation, results of ongoing monitoring and evaluation of
the health sector reforms.
Before second tranche release the Government will: (i) enact amendments to the Law on Guarantees
and Freedom ofAccess to Information, satisfactory to IDA, to enhance access of the public to official
information, strengthen the mechanisms of individuals to appeal against denials of requests for
information, and provide a system for monitoring of compliance of state bodies with the Law. It will also
establish a Government Public Information Center to provide free access to official information of public
interest and to the portal and websites of the Government.
(iii)  Improving t/e Interaction between Regulatory Agencies and Business Enterprises
The creation of a competitive business environment is one of cornerstones of the growth and poverty
reduction strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic. However, the interaction between the State and enterprises
suffers from various problems that dampen the development of the private sector.
Many regulatory agencies are partially financed by 'special means funding', which includes fines levied
for infraction of regulations. This encourages these agencies to carry out frequent inspections, with a
view to find faults that could generate revenue for them. The resulting excessive contact between
inspectors and businesses also generates opportunities for corruption. To prevent misuse of regulatory
and enforcement powers, through a Presidential Decree, the Government has taken a decision to prohibit
formation and use of special means funding of Governmental institutions through receipts from issue of
permits, licenses and certificates and fines imposed through inspections, except as specifically allowed
by law. By Board, the Government will issue an appropriate legal act, satisfactory to IDA, for this
purpose. The budgetfor 2003 and 2004 will be executed accordingly, as a condition of second and third
tranche release, respectively.
On the normative side, there is multiplicity of laws and regulations affecting businesses, many of which



4
ISDS
are outdated. There is inadequate participation of the private sector in development of new laws and
regulations. Little assessment of the impact of new regulatory instruments on the business environment
is carried out before they are put into effect. This also encourages proliferation of regulations. To rectify
these deficiencies, the Government has formed an inter-departmental commission in the Ministry of
Justice to review proposals for improvement of legislation. Draft amendments to the Law on Normative
Legal Acts, requiring all draft normative legal acts regulating or otherwise restricting economic entities
to be published, openly discussed, harmonized and studied for their economic, social and budgetary
impact before being enacted, have been submitted to Parliament. Before second tranche release, the
amendments to the Law on Normative Legal Acts, satisfactory to IDA, relating to publication and
discussion of draft Acts regulating activities of economic entities will be enacted and by the third tranche,
its provisions will be fully implemented for all Acts, issued after the passage of the Law. Furthermore,
the Government will conduct Regulatory Impact Assessments of three new Laws and three new
regulations, to be agreed with IDA, in accordance with the new Law.
With regard to enforcement of regulations, regulatory agencies have overlapping authority, as a result of
which businesses face multiple inspections by different agencies for similar purposes. Private firms are
often unaware of the regulatory norms applicable to them, as also their rights and obligations when they
are subjected to inspections by State agencies. The mechanisms for addressing grievances of enterprises
against abuse of authority by regulatory agencies are weak.
To address these problems, before the second tranche, the Government will connect the database of the
Ministry of Justice, which contains draft laws, enacted laws, regulations and instructions, to the Internet
to make it publicly available. By third tranche, the Government will enact a Law on Administrative
Procedures, satisfactory to IDA, to, inter alia, institute specific procedures for internal administrative
review of all actions which impose a penalty or burden upon, or deny a request sought by a citizen or
legal entity, and provide the right of appeal to a court, after exhaustion of administrative appeals. With
regard to regulatory activities of specific agencies, by second tranche, the Government will develop and
implement a plan for divesting Kyrgyz Standard of its regulatory and enforcement functions to eliminate
conflict of interest. In addition, by third tranche, the Government will develop and implement a plan for
rationalizing the food and drug inspections carried out by the Sanitary and Epidemiology Service (SES)
and the Pharm Control Laboratory (PCL), respectively, publicize their rules and regulations and results,
improve oversight of these agencies by the Ministry of Health and create appropriate grievance
mechanisms.
(iv)   Strengthening External Audit
An effective, independent external audit is essential for enforcing accountability in the public sector and
enabling the Parliament to oversee the working of the executive. Significant efforts were made to
improve external audit, under the PSRMAC, including clarification of responsibilities among the various
audit institutions such as the Chamber of Accounts (CA) - the equivalent of a Supreme Audit Institution,
the State Financial Inspectorate (SFI) under the Prime Minister's office and Internal Audit Department in
the Ministry of Finance. The Law on the Chamber of Accounts Law on the Chamber of Accounts of the
Kyrgyz Republic, 1998., established a 13-member CA, reporting to both to the President and the
Parliament. In 2000, the SFI was merged with the Chamber of Accounts with a view to avoid
duplication of functions.
The external audit function, however, continues to have some deficiencies, as detailed in a recent
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA). The independence of the CA is compromised by
the fact that President approves its structure, staffing and employee salaries and Ministry of Finance



5
ISDS
approves its budget. Besides the Republican budget, the CA is also entitled to receive 10 percent of the
amount recovered to the budget as a result of irregularities detected by it. This financing arrangement
leads to perverse incentives. Further, while the Law requires the CA to 'control' a large number of
financial transactions, it does not require it to prepare a comprehensive report on the audit of the annual
financial Statements of the Government. There are also no requirements regarding the adoption of audit
standards. The majority of the staff in the Chamber of Accounts was transferred from the SFI. The staff,
though proficient in conducting compliance audits, lack skills in and exposure to financial audits.
The NPRS includes the Government's objective of improving external audit to strengthen accountability
and transparency in Government spending. With this end in view, before release of the second tranche,
the Government will enact amendments to the Law on the Chamber ofAccounts, satisfactory to IDA, to,
inter alia, (a) empower the CA to determine its own structure, staffing and employee salaries; (b)
authorize the Budget Committee of the Parliament to review the draft budget proposals of the CA,
instead of the Ministry of Finance; (c) eliminate the provision entitling the CA to receive 10 percent of
the amount recovered to the budget as a result of irregularities detected by it, and, (d) require the CA to
adopt INTOSAI (or ISA) audit standards. The budget of the CA for 2004 and 2005 will be executed on
the basis of the amended law. Technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of the CA will be financed
by DFID.
B. INCREASE EFFICIENCY, EFFECTIVENESS AND ACCOUNTABILITY WITHIN THE
PUBLIC SECTOR
(i)    Strengthening Public Expenditure Management
A transparent, well-performing public finance system is essential for good governance and effective
economic management. It ensures that macro-economic discipline is maintained; scarce public resources
are allocated according to the Government's priorities; funds are spent according to allocations approved
by Parliament; transactions are properly documented; and regular reports on the budget are made
available to the Parliament and public, to enable them to hold the Government accountable for public
expenditures and performance.
Since independence, the Kyrgyz Republic has made important progress in establishing the basic elements
of public expenditure management (PEM) institutions, including a legal framework and procedures for
budget management, a basic framework for inter-governmental finance relation, a Treasury system -the
first among CIS, and an external audit function. These reforms, however, are only a first step in a long
and continuous process. Several issues remain to be addressed to ensure the sustainability and effective
functioning of the PEM system. These include: (a) ineffective and unpredictable budget allocations as a
result of weak budget policy formulation processes, (b) inadequate implementation of the
inter-governmental finance system, (c) limited functionality of a manual Treasury system and weaknesses
in budget execution and (d) weak financial and managerial accountability as a result of underdeveloped
internal control systems and inadequate quality of External Audits. The Government's reform agenda on
public financial management included in the NPRS encompasses all these issues. The main challenge is
to deepen the first generation reforms in order to respond to new realities of handling a significant fiscal
adjustment, allocating resources to poverty reduction programs and addressing the consequences of weak
governance and public administration.
(a)    Establishing a more Strategic and Transparent Budget Formulation Process
The main objective of the reforms in this area will be to remove the structural impediments to a more



6
ISDS
strategic and open budget policy formulation. Reforms will aim to improve the linkages between policy
planning and resource allocation and establish the budget as the main strategic instrument for
formulating, implementing and monitoring public programs. By strengthening the policy focus of the
budget, the Government will aim to establish a framework for prioritization of public expenditure
programs, and integration of the objectives of the CDF and NSPR within the budget. A more transparent
and strategic policy formulation process is also likely to create a buffer against pressures from vested
interests, which become difficult to resist in a policy vacuum.
The Government has intensified its efforts towards more strategic budgeting. It is making good progress
with the preparation of a simplified version of a Medium Term Budget Framework (MTBF) for
2003-2005, which aims to combine three important elements in budget formulation, the macroeconomic
framework, sectoral strategies and expenditure plans to implement these strategies. However, a
substantial agenda remains to expand and fully institutionalize the MTBF process as the main instrument
for Government's budget policy formulation. Initial actions include (i) consolidation of the economic
policy decision making process; (ii) improvements in the format for presenting the budget to the
Parliament; and (iii) better integration of the recurrent and investment planning processes.
Integrating the decision making process. Economic policy and budget decision making is fragmented
between the Budget Comrnission The Budget Commission is established every year at the start of the
budget process by decree of the Government and it is chaired by the Minister of Finance. It includes
representatives of the Prime Minister's Office, and several ministers, State committees and
administrative agencies.. The commission also includes representatives of the Legislative Assembly and
People's Representative Assembly. which reviews and approves the recurrent budget and the
Goskominvest Committee Goskominvest Committee is a permanent committee of the Government that
reviews approves and coordinates foreign financed public investments and economic assistance. It is
chaired by the PM and has the First Vice PM, the Governor of the National Bank, various ministers,
Heads of Regional State administrations, Heads of local self-Governments and the Mayor of Bishkek as
its members. which reviews and approves the Public Investment Program (PIP) and the Development
Budget (annual investment plan). Subsequently, both budgets are consolidated (as aggregates) and sent
to the entire cabinet for approval. This practice leads to incoherent decisions with regard to macro and
fiscal discipline, sector policies and resource allocation, which in turn can undermine the effectiveness of
the MTBF.
The Government has recently established an apex level Economic Policy Council (EPC) for
strengthening economic policy management in the country EPC is headed by the PM and includes key
members of the Government who also participate in the other two committees. It can also call in other
members of the Government or other institutions, as necessary. Finally, the EPC has the right to consult
the Parliament on most matters of importance.. As the Government budget provides the strongest
measure of the Government's participation in the economy, the authorities are considering merging the
functions of the Goskominvest and the Budget Commission into the EPC. This is to ensure that overall
macroeconomic and fiscal policy decisions occur at a point in the policy-making process that allows the
Government to impose fiscally sound, realistic and binding budget constraints and make policy
trade-offs. By second tranche, the Government will issue an appropriate legal instrument and modify
existing legislation for integrating the functions of the existing Budget Commission and Goskominvest in
the Economic Policy Council.
Enabling the Parliament to review budget policy priorities. The format in which the Government
presents the annual budget to Parliament is geared towards the economic expenditure items and agency
expenditure levels, rather than sectoral and inter-sectoral policies and priorities. Such format not only



7
ISDS
makes it difficult for the Parliament to see what policies the Government is proposing to finance, but also
creates confusion about the authority that can authorize changes in the budget. It requires Parliament to
approve even unimportant changes in the course of budget implementation, distracting its attention from
major policy issues. Before second tranche, the Government will revise the format for presentation to
and approval by the Parliament of the annual budget law, with the view to (i) make more transparent the
policy priorities financed by the budget, and; (ii) present sectoral ceilings for two consecutive years,
based on the MTBF. The Government will also issue a decree that defines rules of virement Rules of
virement define in detail what kind of reallocations/changes can take place during the budget
implementation and who has the right to authorize them based on the provisions of the Law on Budget
Principles..
Integrating recurrent and investment budget planning processes. At present investment and
recurrent budgets are planned separately, to the extent that they are often driven by different objectives
and there is little consideration of recurrent cost implications of investment decisions. Moreover, there is
very little integration between domestic investment planning and foreign investment planning, as the
majority of the investment budget is financed by donors. Budget classification structures are not
consistent between recurrent and investment budgets. In order to better integrate the budget planning
process, by third tranche, (i) the Ministry of Finance will develop and present to the Parliament an
integrated budget, for FY 2005, incorporating recurrent and investment expenditures. The Government
will also include estimates of recurrent cost implications of all investment projects, in the Medium Term
Budget Framework (MTBF), beginning with the 2005-2007 MTBF.
Improving Effectiveness of Inter governmental Finances. Improvements in Inter-governmental fiscal
relations are directly linked with better budget formulation and overall improvements in revenue
generation and expenditure management. The Government has made some progress since 1997, by
defining expenditure responsibilities of various Government levels, establishing appropriate revenue
assignments and codifying the framework for a system of inter governmental transfers between the
national Government and the Oblast level, with support from PSRMAC. The decentralization process
has also progressed with elections of local self Governments (lowest tier of Government) in December
2001.
Implementation of the reforms, however, has been erratic, especially with regard to shifting of
expenditure responsibilities to sub-regional Governments, calculation and allocation of categorical and
equalization grants and the extension of the rules for revenue sharing at the lower levels of Government.
Back sliding in several fronts has produced a seriously distorted structure in which elements of the
inter-governmental finance system are implemented in a manner, individually and as a whole, that fails to
produce desired outcomes. The implicit overriding objective of the current implementation appears to be
to provide flexibility to and insulate the Central Government from budgetary risks. This is being done by
shifting those risks to regional and sub-regional Governments, which are the levels less able to
accommodate such risks.
Making the existing rules transparent: One the significant problems faced in the implementation of the
inter-governmental finance system is the non-transparent application of the existing rules and procedures
for allocating resources to the regional and especially sub-regional Governments. This has created room
for negotiated, unstable, discretionary and unpredictable budgets at the local level. Local Governments,
especially below the Oblast level, are not aware of how categorical and equalization grants are allocated
to them from the higher levels. In addition, various expenditure responsibilities are shifted to them
during budget implementation, especially in cases where they are able to collect more revenues than
planned. Such practices allow room for inefficiencies, discretion and rent seeking in the course of



8
ISDS
allocating and executing the budget. To mitigate this problem, the Government has agreed to make
transparent all the existing rules and procedures, as well as the methodology used by the Ministry of
Finance to allocate resources to the local Governments. Before second tranche release, the Government
will develop, publish and make available to all interested parties, especially local Governments at all
levels, the rules and procedures for the calculation of equalization and categorical grants, as well as
other transfers.
Establishing stable tax sharing at the sub-regional level: The Law on the Basic Principles of the
Budget (1997) defines a tax sharing system between the Central Government and the Oblast
Governments. However, below the Oblast level, tax sharing is very unsystematic and usually subject to
negotiations of rayons and cities with. Such a system does not assure any stability or predictability for
the sub-regional Governments. In addition, these negotiations and the high level of discretion available
to the Oblast to allocate resources to the sub-regional levels, totally undermine the role of elected local
self Governments. Recently, the government has extended the tax sharing system to the rayon level in
Bishkek City and Jalal-Abad. By Board, the Government will extend the tax sharing system to the rayon
level in at least three additional oblasts.
(b)    Strengthening Accountability and Transparency in Budget Execution
The main objective of the Government's reform program on budget execution will be to reduce
discretion and non-transparent practices in the disbursement of the budget funds, by improving financial
planning and cash management, bringing all the accounts of the budget institutions under the Treasury
control and phasing out non-cash settlements. It is expected that this will not only make budget
execution more transparent, but it will also improve predictability in the financing of government policies
and programs.
Improving financial planning and cash management. The introduction of a manual Treasury system
in 1996 substantially improved budget execution. However, several weaknesses have emerged, which
undermine the Government's capacities to implement policies and programs and create possibilities for
extracting rents and favors during budget execution. The disbursement of budget funds (spending
authorization process) has resulted in an ad hoc system of daily negotiations between the budget
department, Treasury and spending agencies to finance mainly protected expenditure items Protected
expenditure items consist mainly of wages, pensions, and social security contributions.. This comes from
the lack of a proper system for financial planning and cash management, which is essential in a country
with very limited financial resources and an uneven flow of liquidity in the Government accounts during
the year. The existence of special means accounts and other accounts outside the Treasury General
Ledger (TGL) also inhibits good financial planning and cash management during budget implementation.
The Government recognizes these issues and is taking measures to address them. It has already created a
new Financial Planning department within the Treasury and is working on streamlining the MOF
procedures for authorizing spending. By Board presentation, the Government will also adopt a
regulation, satisfactory to IDA, that establishes a new procedure for the preparation of the monthly
financial plan. The new procedures for financial planning will be implemented before release of the
second tranche.
Phasing out extra budgetary operations of Budget Institutions. Lack of appropriate cash
management systems in the MOF and the tight controls imposed on the budget institutions in the use of
cash resources have encouraged the emergence of fiscal operations outside the Government budget, in
violation of the Law on the KR Treasury Law on the Priciples of the Treasury of the Kyrgyz Republic



9
ISDS
passed on May 28th, 1994. Over 40 percent of the aggregate extra budgetary resources at the end of
2000 INIF report " Modernization of the Kyrgyz Treasury and Further Reforms in PEM, June 2002 were
held outside the Treasury Single Account (TSA), probably in cash or other bank accounts. Almost every
central Budget Institution maintains a so called "Special Means Accounts", which, until recently, was
operating outside the TSA. The amount of money deposited in these accounts in some cases is equal to a
Budget Institution's regular budget allocation.
The Government has initiated various actions to control the opening of such accounts, including the
reiteration of the basic provisions in the Annual Budget Law for 2002. However, a more systematic
approach needs to be adopted with regard to controlling extra budgetary fiscal operations of any form.
By second tranche, the Government will complete an inventory of extra budgetary accounts and issue a
Government Decree for transferring these Accounts, other than the Social Fund, into the Treasury
General Ledger. It will also adopt an Action Plan of gradually transferring these accounts into the
Treasury General Ledger and begin its implementation. By third tranche, all extra-budgetary accounts
will be transferred into the Treasury General Ledger.
Phasing out off-set transactions in the Treasury. There is a widespread use of off-set transactions
within the Treasury for paying utilities and some contractors. Such transactions have reached a
magnitude of around 25-30 percent of the annual budget (practically all the utility payments). These
off-sets are legitimized in the Treasury Manual, which permits the settlement of dues between the
Government and the suppliers of goods and services on a non-cash barter basis. While the Government
has designed special accounting rules to record these transactions, they present inappropriate budget
management practices and might conceal liquidity problems in the real sectors, such as energy, for
paying tax liabilities to the Government's budget. Moreover they undermine financial planning since the
amounts dedicated to off-sets become by default non-discretionary spending and cannot be reallocated.
By the second tranche, the Government will issue a resolution adopting an Action Plan, satisfactory to
IDA, for phasing out off-sets and non-cash transactions in the budget and the Social Fund, and, by the
third tranche, initiate implementation of theAction Plan.
Establishing systematic reconciliation between the Treasury records on payments made and
reimbursements received from the agent banks. At present there is no reconciliation between the
Treasury records on payments made during the day on behalf of the Government and the amount of
reimbursement to the agent banks for these transactions. This process creates possibilities for the agent
banks to over-report on payments, be over-reimbursed from the National Bank of KR (NBKR) and utilize
the float during the month for their own purposes. Apart from the ineffective management of the
Government's idle funds, such practice may create possibilities for non-transparent use of the funds on
the bank's side as well as conceal difficulties they might have in meeting reserve requirements. A
comparison between the Treasury records and the Settlements Saving Company (SSC) (one of the main
agent banks) for the month of December 2001 revealed major differences. At the end of December 2001
the cumulative difference was around 5 million soms See Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(2002) for a more detailed description of this process.. The Government has agreed, by Board, that the
MOF will implement a systematic mechanism for daily reconciliation of Treasury transactions and
reimbursements from the NBKR.
The improvements in budget execution mentioned above will be complemented by the modernization of
the Treasury with assistance from the GTAC.
(ii)  Improving the Internal Control Environment



10
ISDS
While an external audit fuinction is important to provide Parliament and outside stakeholders a means to
hold the executive responsible, within public entities, there is a need for a strong internal audit function
to assess financial and operational risks, design appropriate internal control systems to mitigate the risks
and conduct internal audits to assure management that the control systems are working and the
organization is operating in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
The Internal Audit function in the Kyrgyz Republic is underdeveloped. The Ministry of Finance
continues to maintain a small internal audit unit to carry out compliance tests for treasury transactions.
However, currently, there are no internal audit units within the line ministries, except in the Ministry of
Labor and Social Protection. There is a lack of clear legal obligations requiring line ministries to
maintain an adequate internal control framework. Ad hoc steps taken to ensure financial probity have
proved to be ineffective in preventing abuse and waste of resources, as is indicated by several instances
of non-compliance with laws and fraud/corruption reported by the CA in its annual reports.
The Government recognizes the need to strengthen the internal control environment within the public
sector. Therefore, by second tranche, the Government it will prepare a strategic framework for the
creation of an effective internal audit function in public entities. Based on the framework, by third
tranche release, a Law on Internal Audit, satisfactory to IDA, will be enacted and Internal Audit
Departments will be created in at least three Ministries, to be agreed with IDA.
(iii) Improving Transparency, Value for Money and Accountability in Public Procurement
Procurement of goods, services and works constitutes about 35 percent of budgetary expenditures. An
open, competitive procurement process, conducted on a level playing field, has the potential of
significantly increasing the efficiency of this substantial amount of public spending. The resulting
savings would have the implicit effect of expanding the envelope of scarce resources, thus, enhancing the
ability of the State to better implement public policies. At the same time, it is important to increase the
transparency and accountability in procurement, as this is an area where the risk of corruption is very
high.
In 1997, a Public Procurement Law (PPL) based on the UNCITRAL Model Law was enacted. This law
established a decentralized procurement system, under which procurement is carried out by individual
public entities; created an independent oversight body (the State Procurement Agency), with authority to
issue regulations; and established modern procurement processes. However, as indicated by the Country
Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), conducted in 2002, the procurement system continues to suffer
from various organizational, normative, procedural, financial and capacity deficiencies.
The State Procurement Agency was merged with the State Material Reserves Fund in 2001, to form the
State Commission on Public Procurement and Material Reserves (SCPPMR). This has created a
potential conflict of interest, as the agency is now responsible for both procuring for the Reserves and for
supervising itself in connection with those procurements. The organizational structure of the SCPPMR
needs to be improved to enhance its capacity in legal, monitoring and evaluation, and procurement
capacity building functions. The funding mechanisms of the SCPPMR also needs to be changed. While
part of the costs of the agency are met by budgetary allocations, it is also entitled to receive I percent of
notional savings made on contracts concluded through unlimited tenders, creating conflict of interest. By
second tranche, the Government will prepare and implement a restructuring plan, satisfactory to IDA, for
the State Commission on Public Procurement and Material Reserves (SCPPMR), to separate the
procurement function from the State Material Reserves, strengthen the legal, monitoring and evaluation
and procurement capacity building functions of the SPA, and strengthen the capacity of procuring



11
ISDS
entities.
There has been a proliferation of procurement rules issued by different authorities. Since 1998, 26
decrees, instructions and orders, dealing with different aspects of procurement, have been issued. Many
of these rules have led to confusion in the division of responsibilities and distortions in procurement
practices. There also appear to be frequent deviations from procurement procedures established by the
PPL, for instance, procuring entities frequently disclose estimated contract values to bidders, extend bid
submission deadlines informally and sometimes negotiate contact prices with selected bidders. Although
the PPL does not stipulate it, the SCPPMR has assumed a direct role in procurement through review of
bidding documents, evaluation reports, contracts, etc. This makes the procuring entities excessively
dependent on the SCPPMR and seriously compromises the latter's oversight and supervision
responsibilities.
The efficiency and cost effectiveness of public procurement is also affected by deficiencies in budget
execution. Public agencies enter into contractual commitments based on their approved budget
allocations. But due to cash flow constraints of the Treasury, they do not receive the required funds in a
timely manner. Therefore, payments to contractors are frequently delayed. This discourages enterprises
from bidding for Government contracts, thus, limiting competition. It also raises the cost of goods and
services procured, as contractors factor the cost of potential payment delays in their bid prices. There is
no training strategy or program for providing procurement training to public servants on a regular basis.
As a result, procurement is being conducted largely by untrained and unqualified public officials.
In order to deal with the aforesaid deficiencies, the Government has already confirmed its agreement with
the CPAR Action Plan. By second tranche, the Government will implement the activities pertaining to
2003 included in the CPAR Action Plan. These would include enactment of amendments to the Public
Procurement Law and regulations required to streamline and consolidate the regulatory framework, and
eliminating funding of the SCPPMR through 1 percent of notional savings realized in the procurement
process, while providing compensatory funding from the Republican budget. By third tranche, the
Government will implement the remaining activities of the CPAR Action Plan In addition, the
Government will prepare and implement a Procurement Training Strategy and introduce an attestation
program for Procurement Officers, to raise the qualification level of persons engaged in procurement.
To enhance accountability and transparency in the public procurement, as a condition of second and
third tranche release, the Government will carry out procurement audits of selected, high value items, to
be agreed with IDA, that affect service quality in the Health and Education sectors (e.g. selected
pharmaceuticals on the List of Essential Drugs, text books etc.). The audits will verify compliance with
the procurement rules and regulations, assess value for money with reference to international and
national market prices and recommend consequential remedial actions. The procurement audit reports
will be made public.
(iv)  Improving Service Delivery in the Healthl, Education and Social Protection Sectors
Rationalizing expenditure responsibilities. In order to advance reforms in health and education, there
is a need to have a fresh look at how expenditure responsibilities can be streamlined and made stable
among various Government levels to ensure better service delivery. Before second tranche, the
Government will prepare draft amendments to the relevant legislation, satisfactory to IDA, to streamline
and clearly define the functional and expenditure responsibilities in the health sector. By the third
tranche, it will enact the amended legislation, satisfactory to IDA, in health sector and make similar
amendments to legislation pertaining to education and other sectors, as agreed with IDA.



12
ISDS
Establishing a system for defining minimum service standards. In order to assure local fulfillment of
regional and national priorities, minimum service requirements must be defined for priority services.
Without this, there is no basis for determining appropriate financing, or holding sub-national
Governments accountable for the proper execution of expenditure responsibilities. To the degree that
standards currently exist in the Kyrgyz Republic, they are based on physical and facility norms and are
not conducive to assuring any meaningful level of accomplishment. Especially in the health sector,
where a different financing and service provision system is being implemented, the use of inputs and
physical norms as a means for allocating expenditures has proven outdated. It is important therefore, to
start the development of service standards. Before second tranche, the Government will issue an
appropriate legal act defining the methodology for developing minimum service standards in the
education sector and refining those in the health sector.
Health Sector: The health sector of the Kyrgyz Republic, similar to those of other transition economies,
is facing the challenge of providing quality health services to the population in the context of shrinking
public expenditures on health care, an excessive number of health facilities and personnel and a weak
emphasis on cost-effective preventive and primary health care approaches. To address these problems,
since 1996, the Kyrgyz Republic has been implementing a comprehensive health sector reform program,
in a phased manner The Manas Health Reform Program.. Key elements of the reform program include:
(i) rationalizing health facilities and personnel; (ii) improving equity in the geographical allocation of
resources, (iii) making the health system more cost-effective by strengthening preventive and primary
health care services, (iv) making providers accountable for efficiency, quality and access at the health
facility level, and (iv) reducing corruption in the health sector. New health care financing (the single
payer reform The single payer system refers to an arrangement where all funds at the oblast level (from
oblast, rayon and city) are collected within a single organization (TDMHIF). The purpose of the single
payer reform is to reduce the fragmentation and duplication among the various levels (oblast, rayon and
city) and streamline the financing and delivery of health services. Since one payer is responsible for
contracting of health services, this reduces administrative costs and also strengthens the ability of the
MHIF to offer a coherent set of incentives to providers. ), was introduced in two regions in 2001 and in
two more regions in 2002. It extends the output-based purchasing methods of the Mandatory Health
Insurance Fund (MiHIF) to budget funds and also includes the formalization of hospital co-payments.
Implementation progress oni health reforms is satisfactory, but critical challenges remain The recently
completed Kyrgyz Republic Public Expenditure Review discusses these challenges is greater details.. In
particular, the organizational changes in primary care have not been supported by a corresponding shift in
resource allocation from the tertiary to the primary level.
Implementation of recent reforms in the health sector and especially the introduction of the Single Payer
System requires changes in institutional arrangements for budget management. As noted above, these
changes relate to the output-based purchasing and pooling of health resources. This new practice is quite
different from the current process of input based budgeting, where health providers (e.g. hospitals) are
financed on the basis of physical norms (number of beds, staff). Although some changes in budget
management practices for the health sector have taken place in selected Oblasts, these are based on
temporary regulations rather than legislation, and this puts the health sector reform process in a rather
tenuous position. Another problem, especially in those oblasts that are implementing the formal
co-payment policy for hospitalizations, is unplanned and non-transparent re-allocations from health to
other sectors. Therefore, suitable changes need to be made in the legislative basis for budget
management and other reforms in the health sector, while ensuring that these are consistent with overall
budget management and financial accountability systems. By second tranche, the Government will enact
a Law, satisfactory to IDA, to provide a sound legal basis for the single-payer reforms in the Health



13
ISDS
Sector. In addition, it will issue an appropriate legal instrument to revise the budget management
arrangements for the health sector consistent with the Laws on Single Payer System, Basic Budget
Principles and Treasury.
Since its establishment in 1997, the MHF has faced the challenge of timely and adequate transfer of
funds from the Social Fund (SF) for employed persons and pensioners and from the Republican budget
for children and persons with social benefits Between 1997 and 2002, the Social Fund has accumulated
arrears to the MHTF of 550 million Soms.. Among all categories, transfers for pensioners is the most
problematic. For example, between 1997-2002, only 18% of planned revenues for pensioners has been
transferred to the MHIF. Pensioners are generally heavy users of health services, and the fact that the
MHIF does not receive adequate funding for this is one of contributing factors for MHIF financial stress.
By second tranche, the Government will amend current legislation to establish responsibility of the
Republican budget for the financing of allocations for healthcare insurance of pensioners and
unemployed.. The 2005 budget will include funds for this expenditure item.
Another problem affecting basic service delivery is local Government contributions to the health sector,
especially from categorical grants (CG) In 1997, categorical grants were introduced as a Republican
budget transfer to oblasts to support the delivery of essential health and education services. However, the
categorical grants were used to cover inputs, especially salaries. Five years into their implementation, the
design of these grants is no longer in compliance with the ongoing reforms in the health sector that has
moved towards output-based purchasing. The lack of concordance between the reforms in the health
sector and the design of categorical grants has meant reduced incentives for the health sector to
rationalize personnel, since they will mean less funds from CGs. Given this situation, it is critical that
health sector allocation under the CGs are pegged to outputs (delivery of services). The resource
allocation formula under the CG is linked to inputs (mainly salaries) and therefore negatively affects
health sector allocations which are increasingly moving towards output-based allocations. The design of
CGs needs to be synchronized with the current developments in the health system. By second tranche,
the Government will adopt an appropriate legal act to define capitation-basedformula for calculating
categorical grants in the Health sector. Before third tranche, it will implement the new categorical grant
formula.
Despite the progress in the health sector, there have been few changes in the allocation of public funds
towards primary care and regions with the greatest health needs. For example, hospitals consume 70
percent of public expenditures, and the geographical allocation of resources is skewed with Bishkek city
being favored over the other regions. Improvements in allocative efficiency of public funds are needed to
improve the poverty impact of public expenditures on health care. Reallocation is contingent on the
implementation of the single-payer system in all oblasts and, especially, in Bishkek city Implementation
of the single payer system in Bishkek is needed to create incentives for supply-side rationalization which
is needed to reduce the overall envelope of public spending on Bishkek health facilities. Rationalization
in Bishkek is supposed to free-up resources for improving the geographical equity and increase spending
on public health, preventive and primary health care services.. Accordingly, by Board, the government
will complete drafting appropriate legislative acts on rationalization of health facilities in Bishkek City,
satisfactory to IDA.
Education Sector: In principle, local Governments finance primary and secondary schools from their
own resources. The current practice of financing teachers' salaries under the Republican budget has the
very compelling advantage that it ensures that even the poorest localities are able to pay teachers' salaries
and keep their schools open. But it has a serious disadvantage in that it does not include financing for
textbooks. Textbooks are financed by parents under a textbook rental scheme. Although rental charges



14
ISDS
appear modest in an absolute sense, the extremely low level of incomes means that many households
cannot afford the cost of textbook rental, thus preventing children from having textbooks. This is a major
reason for low quality and incomplete school attendance in poor areas of the country - including many
rural areas.
More fundamentally, the practice of financing teacher salary costs under the Republican budget treats
existing teacher costs as non-discretionary and hence tends to legitimate what may be an inefficient
delivery of education. A preferred basis for central financing of education costs is through a
differentiated capitation system of financing, which pays for education on the basis of the number of
students enrolled in each type of program. Under this approach, it is important that the financing formula
reflect intrinsic sources of higher costs - such as dispersed population, and a higher-than-average density
of students with specials learning needs. But developing such a formula will require preparation in the
form of a careful examination of the sources and magnitudes of intrinsic cost differences prior to
implementation of the formula. Another problem is that the current financing formula provides virtually
no financing for in-service teacher training. Failure to fund teacher training is a high-risk and
low-efficiency option, because it means that the education system's most important asset - its teachers -
are not equipped to perform their work effectively, especially in introducing the important innovations
planned under the education reform. To deal with these issues, the Government will undertake studies of
the cost of system-wide textbook provision for pre-university education and the costs of efficient delivery
of pre-university education for different sizes, configurations, and locations of schools. As a condition of
second tranche release, the Government will adopt an appropriate legal act to define capitation-based
formulafor calculating categorical grants in the Education sector, and implement the new formula
before the third tranche release.
Social Protection: Pension reform in the Kyrgyz Republic is at a critical juncture. The recently
completed Public Expenditure Review highlights the need for the Government to clarify priorities among
the multiple objectives of the current pension system, based on the 1997 reforms. Proposals for a new,
fully funded pillar within the Kyrgyz pension system have been advocated because of a concern that
incentives for contributors to participate in the current system are inadequate, and a belief that
introduction of a funded pillar could promote economic growth by raising the level of savings and
encouraging the development of financial and capital markets. The Bank's technical assessment of the
proposal for a fully-funded pillar indicates the need for first investigating the prerequisite costs, and
feasibility of this approach in current Kyrgyz circumstances, before taking any irrevocable steps to create
and implement a funded system. By third tranche, the Government will retain the basic structure of the
current pension system unchanged until: (i) all past and current obligations of the Social Fund have been,
and are continuing to be, paid in cash and (for current obligations) on time and (ii) the Government has
provided financing and implementation plans that are satisfactory to IDA for any proposed changes in the
basic structure of the current pension system.
(v)   Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Civil Service
The country is in the initial stages of developing a professional civil service The terms 'Civil Service' or
'Civil Servant' are meant to include permanent public employees, exercising State authority as managers
and staff in Ministries, State Agencies, State Committees, State Commissions, Oblasts, Rayons and Local
Governments, as distinguished from political appointees, support staff, teachers, healthcare workers,
uniformed services and workers in State Owned Enterprises. The terms 'Public Service' or 'Pubic
Servant' are used in a broader sense and refer to all persons paid out of the national budget. In 2001,
total State employment was about 300,000, of which about 22,000 were civil servants. . A Law on Civil
Service (LCS), enacted in 1999, defines the civil service in very broad terms and covers political



15
ISDS
appointees, such as the Prime Minister, members of the Government, nominees of the President and
Deputies of the Parliament and their assistants and advisers, as well as career civil servants. Thus, the
line between permanent civil servants and the political executive is blurred. Political appointments also
extend quite deep down the administrative hierarchy. Changes in political heads of ministries and
agencies, therefore, lead to large scale changes in incumbents at lower levels. The LCS also provides
inadequate protection to career civil servants against politically motivated dismissals. As a result, the
independence, impartiality and quality of advice provided by them to the political executive suffers.
While the LCS and associated regulations have created a basic framework for human resource
management in the civil service, this framework has not been fully institutionalized. In addition, the
current rules need to be improved in several respects. Remuneration of the civil service, as also of other
public services, remains way below competitive levels. Low salaries lead to low quality of public
services, encourage misuse of regulatory authority and create incentives for corruption. Turnover of staff
at skilled levels is quite high. Although the Govemment has carried out retrenchment of staff in the past
years, there still appears to be scope for further rightsizing. While new skills are sorely needed to equip
civil servants to handle the evolving role of the State, no systematic training needs assessment is carried
out. Most training is ad hoc and depends on donor funding. Finally, the lack of adequate institutional
arrangements for managing the civil service is a major deficiency. The capacity of the Civil Sector
Division in the President's Administration, which performs this function, is extremely limited, as is the
capacity of the personnel departments of ministries and agencies.
The Government is keenly aware of the need for a well-qualified, professional civil service, that would
assist it in formulating and implementing policies for effective governance and poverty reduction. It has
taken various measures in the recent past towards this objective. Merit-based competitive recruitment
was launched in 2001; the compression ratio of salaries in the CS was increased to improve motivation; a
process of assigning Class Ranks to civil servants was initiated in 2001; in order to trim the size of the
civil service 1,200 civil servants were retrenched in 2001 and 1750 civil servants and managers in
budgetary entities are expected to be retrenched in 2002; a Presidential decree on Ethics of Civil Servants
was issued and Ethics Commissions were created at the level of the President's Administration and other
Ministries and Central agencies. In continuation of its efforts, by Board, the Government will Initiate
discussion of draft amendments to the Law on Civil Service with relevant stakeholders. By second
tranche, the Government will. (i) enact amendments to the Law on Civil Service, satisfactory to IDA,
with a view to separate political appointees and career civil servants; increase competitiveness in
recruitment and promotion; reduce political interference in personnel management decisions; improve
incentives for performance and integrity; and improve institutional arrangements for management of the
civil service; (ii) ensure that all persons appointed to "Main" and "Lead" positions in 2003 are
recruited andpromoted, in accordance with the Civil Service Law; and (iii) implement an Action Plan
for rightsizing of staff in state administration bodies, based on functional reviews completed in 2002. By
third tranche, the Government will: (i) establish the Civil Service Management Agency (CSMA) and
ensure that it is fully operational, by appointing management and staff, providing adequate budgetary
resources, and developing rules and regulations for the functioning of the agency, (ii) ensure that all
persons appointed to "Main " and "Lead" positions in 2004 are recruited and promoted, in accordance
with the Civil Service Law; (iii) implement an Action Plan for rightsizing of staff in state administration
bodies, based on functional reviews completed in 2003-2004 and (iv) implement a revised remuneration
structure for the civil service.
(vi)  Streamlining Structure of Government Ministries and Agencies
The State in the Kyrgyz Republic, like all other FSU countries, inherited a wide range of functions.



16
ISDS
While its role has shrunk since then, its span of activities continues to be too large relative to its
resources and capacity. The roles and responsibilities of Government at the central, oblast, rayon and
local level are not entirely clear. At the central Government level, there is duplication and overlapping of
functions between the President's Administration and the Office of the Prime Minister, between different
ministries and between different units, departments and agencies under individual ministries. At the
regional level, there is a superimposition of a Presidential administrative network over regular
Government organizations, leading to ambiguity about the authority of the governors and the ministries
over subordinate organizational units and their accountability for service delivery.
In addition to the functional review of the Ministry of the Health mentioned above, the Government has
carried out functional reviews of the organizational structure of the Ministries of Education and
Agriculture and Water Resources, with a view to rationalize the organization structure and remove
duplication of functions. Other ministries and agencies are in the process of carrying out their own
functional reviews, with assistance from DFID and UNDP. By second tranche, the Government will
extend Functional Reviews of Ministries of Health and Education and two other Ministries, to be agreed
with IDA, to cover their oblast and rayon branches and affiliated agencies, such as the Mandatory Health
Insurance Fund, and, by third tranche, implement the reorganization plans in the Ministries of Health
and Education, and in two other ministries, as agreed with IDA.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Kyrgyz Republic - Bishkek City.
B. Chleck Environmental Classification: U
Comments U
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       Q Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes * No    O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



17
ISDS
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
NA
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NA
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure



18
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Banik
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Siened and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Jit Bahadur S. Gill
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Anil Markandya                           3/20/03
Sector Manager/Director:      Helga W. Muller                             3/20/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
1     E           1   M           S WCA



