Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No: AC208 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 9, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P078976 
Project Name: INVESTMENT LOAN 
Task Team Leader: Michael T. Mertaugh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 15 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy 
(P);Education for all (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
 
The primary objective of the proposed project is to improve the coverage and quality of primary 
and secondary education, with improved coverage defined as improved school attendance in grades 1 
through 11, and improved quality defined as improved student learning achievement throughout primary 
and secondary education (grades 1 through 11).  The project’s secondary objective is to make primary and 
secondary schools more accountable to the local community and to involve parents more actively in the 
activities of schools.  (International research has consistently found that parental involvement in schools 
is positively associated with educational outcomes, including school attendance and student 
achievement.)    
 
C.  Project Description 
 
As currently envisioned, the proposed project comprises four components:  
 
A. Textbooks.
  This component would finance: a) publishing and distribution of priority textbooks – for 
the most part consisting of titles for which acceptable manuscripts are already available, b) improving 
textbook publishing by starting the process of separating authorship and selection functions, introducing 
competition in the authorship of new titles, and allowing private-sector publishers to compete with the 
Academy of Education for publication of textbooks, c) author training and other actions to improve the 
quality of textbook content, and d) the development and introduction of an improved textbook rental 
scheme with clear and sustainable objectives and with adequate provision for ensuring that household’s 
inability to pay textbook rental charges does not prevent children from having textbooks.  The component 
would include a 
Letter of Government Policy on Textbook Production
 which confirms the Government’s 
Page  2
 
 
commitment to the medium-term policy changes in the textbook production process.  The project Grant 
Agreement would also include assurances that rental charges would not prevent any project-financed 
textbooks from being fully available to students.  This could be either through a covenant requiring 
adoption of the new rental scheme as a condition for procurement, or through other enforceable 
assurances. 
    
B. Teaching and Learning Materials. 
 This component would finance the provision of educational 
materials to all primary and secondary schools through a participatory, demand driven process.  The 
amount available to schools would be set under a formula which favors smaller, remote, and poorly 
equipped schools.  An educational materials fair approach – which has been successfully used in other 
ECA education projects -- is envisioned as the mechanism for schools to select educational materials 
which are relevant to their particular needs.  Parents and local government representatives would 
participate in the selection of educational materials.  This would help jump-start the collaboration and 
local ownership which was intended under the decentralization policy but which, for the most part, has 
not been achieved.  
 
C. Targeted
 
School Grants for Improved Teaching and Learning.
 This component would be provided to 
selected low-performance schools to support the preparation and implementation of school development 
programs.  This activity is intended to strengthen teaching skills and to support activities which address 
schools’ teaching and learning needs.  School development programs would be prepared, implemented, 
and monitored collaboratively by the school and the local community.  Each program would start with a 
statement of educational objectives and an action plan for achieving them, including specific roles for the 
principal and for each teacher.  It would also need to include an assessment of needs for improving 
teaching skills and to propose appropriate training to meet those needs.  In addition to training of 
principals and teachers, the component could finance a broad range of actions to address educational 
needs of the school – including purchase of more educational materials than are provided under the 
Teaching and Learning Materials
 component, measures such as provision of school lunches, heating fuel, 
school materials, or clothing to address the income constraints of poor students, or actions to improve the 
living conditions of teachers if these are agreed by parents and the community as important for attracting 
and retaining qualified teachers.  As currently envisioned, this component would be targeted to selected 
schools in two oblasts with the poorest overall educational performance – prospectively, Talas and 
Batken.  Schools would be selected for participation based on performance and poverty criteria.  A 
competitive process is not proposed for selection of schools because schools which are most in need of 
assistance are typically the least capable of assessing their needs and developing a credible plan to address 
them.  Experience with school funds in other countries demonstrates the importance of close and 
continuous support to help schools and communities understand and apply the concept of school 
development programs.  The component would include financing for contracted outreach services to 
assist the selected schools and their communities to prepare and implement school development 
programs.   
D. Monitoring and Evaluation.
  This component would finance: a) the development of student assessment 
as an instrument for improved quality of primary and secondary education, including participation in the 
next round of the PISA learning assessment organized by the OECD, b) monitoring and evaluation of the 
project, including commissioned studies and surveys of the educational impacts of the project within the 
larger context of other actions affecting primary and secondary education, including the education 
projects supported by the Asian Development Bank, USAID, and other donors, and c) development of the 
Ministry’s professional capacity for strategic planning.   
   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Rural 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[NA] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[NA ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[NA ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   
[X ] B   
[] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Some minor civil works could be performed under the school grant program. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   
[X ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [X ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Safeguards issues are associated with component (iii), which will include grants for small scale school 
rehabilitation (such as roof repairs, window replacement, heating system repairs) and heating fuel supply. 
Safeguards issues are minor. However, since schools may have asbestos roofing, provision will be made 
for proper handling and disposal of the construction wastes and assure protection of the school children 
during the repair works. Heating improvements will be financed with the school grants and the condition 
of the existing heating stoves be inspected to mitigate indoor air pollution.  A brief Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared. 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The EMP will be discussed with the stakeholders when the draft EMP is available before the appraisal 
mission.   The EMP will be disclosed in country in local language and at the Bank Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 
