1                            25677
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
4Q7foShop
The WxM lk Ik
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: KYRGYZ REPUBLIC                          Project ID: P071063
Project: Governance Technical Assistance Credit   Task Team Leader: It Bahadur S. Gill
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 19, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 15, 2003                       IDA Amount ($m): 9.44
Managing Unit: ECSPE                              Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);
Status: Lending                                   Decentralization (P); Public expenditure; financial
management and procurement (P); Other
accountability/anti-corruption (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
*      Improve transparency and responsiveness of the public sector and enhance the ability of external
stakeholders to hold it accountable.
*      Increase efficiency, effectiveness and accountability within the public sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The GTAC will have three components: (a) Technical Assistance to support Design and Implementation
of Reforms included in the GSAC; (b) Modernization of the Treasury; and (c) Project Management. The
specific activities to be financed are indicated below. The sequencing of these activities is included in
the Project Implementation Plan.
Component 1. Technical Assistance to Support Implementation of Reforms included in the GSAC
(US$ 2.74 million):
This component would provide consulting services, training and goods to support reforms included in the
GSAC. While other donors would provide grant assistance for some of these reforms, the GTAC would
provide TA for the remaining GSAC measures. The assistance provided by the GTAC would cover a
longer time horizon (5 years) than that of the GSAC, in order to facilitate institutionalization and proper
implementation of the policy measures. This component will have the following sub-components.
Details of specific activities covered under each sub-component are indicated in Annex 2. These are
summarized below:
Sub-Component (i) - Strengthen Voice and Participation (US$ 0.43 million): This subcomponent
would support establishment of a Public Information Center; dissemination of key information



2
ISDS
pertaining to the public sector, and carrying out of Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) S laws and 5
regulations, to be agreed with IDA, under the amended provisions of the Law on Normative Legal Acts.
Sub-component (ii) - Strengtlten Public Expenditure Management (US$ 0. 54million): This
subcomponent would support improvement of effectiveness of intergovernmental finances, through
clarification of functional and expenditure responsibilities and revenue sharing arrangements among
different levels of government; development of a methodology to define minimum service standards;
strengthening of accountability and transparency in budget execution, by development and
implementation of an improved system for financial planning and cash management and a new approach
for phasing out off-sets and non-cash transactions in the budget, including the Social Fund; and
restructuring of the Ministry of Finance.
Sub-Component (iii) - Improve Transparency and Value for Money in Public Procurement (US$ 0.15
million): This subcomponent would assist in the preparation and implementation of a restructuring plan
for the State Commission on Public Procurement and Material Reserves (SCPPMR) and the procurement
function in ministries and agencies. In addition, it would support revision and implementation of
procurement rules and processes, and carrying out of procurement audits of selected items that affect
service quality in the Health and Education sectors.
Subcomponent (iv) - Improve Service Delivery in Healthl and Education Sectors (US$ 0.15 million):
This subcomponent would assist in revision of budget management arrangements in the health sector in
order to ensure consistency with sector reforms and overall PEM reforms; estimation of costs associated
with the rationalization of healthcare-related payments in Bishkek city and the other single-payer oblasts;
and revision of mechanism for allocating categorical grants to the health and education sectors. In
addition, it would support estimation of costs of system-wide textbook provision for pre-university
education and efficient delivery of pre-university education for different sizes, configurations and
locations of schools; and development of a cost differentiated capitation formula for pre-university
education.
Sub-Component (v) -Improve the Effectiveness of the Civil Service (US$ 1.2 million): This
subcomponent would support establishment of the Civil Service Management Agency (CSMA);
development of secondary regulations, systems and procedures to improve civil service management;
implement of a basic civil service database; strengthening of Personnel Management Departments in
Ministries and Agencies; development and implementation of a system for attestation of civil servants;
development of a revised salary structure for the civil service; preparation and implementation of an
Action Plan for staff reductions; and monitoring of implementation of provisions of the Civil Service
Law pertaining to recruitment and promotion.
Sub-Component (vi): Streamline the Structure of GovernmentMinistries and Agencies (US$
0.lmillion): This subcomponent would assist the government in carrying out functional reviews of the
oblast and rayon branches of Ministries of Health and Education and two other Ministries, to be agreed
with IDA, and implementing consequential organizational adjustments.
Sub-Component (vii): Refine thle National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) and Monitor and
Evaluate Progress (US$ 0.2inillion): This sub-component would meet an express request made by the
Government to assist it in prioritizing the NPRS and implementing a Monitoring and Evaluation system
to measure progress towards achievement of its objectives.
Component 2: Modernization of the Treasury (US$ 7.76 million):



3
ISDS
This component would finance consulting services, goods and training for the modernization of treasury
operations through the implementation of a Treasury Management Information System (TMIS),
restructuring for Treasury General Ledger (TGL) The Treasury General Ledger is a summary book of all the
Treasury Accounts and implementation of a new chart of accounts (COA), in full compliance with the new
GFSM200 1. The project would provide assistance in (a) preparation of user requirements, conceptual
design of the system, system architecture and software and hardware specifications for the T1MS; (b)
selection, procurement, adaptation and implementation of an off-the-shelf software package; (c)
procurement and implementation of hardware and communication equipment; (d) development of the
regulations for the implementation of the system; and (e) training of staff. It is expected that the 1MF
would be closely involved in the implementation of the TIMS and would also be able to provide
technical assistance. The system would first be piloted in the Central Treasury and two or three pilot
oblasts, before being replicated to all the RTOs. Annex 12 provides a detailed description of the
implementation plan for this component.
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 0.41 million):
This component would finance consulting services, equipment and training for the Project Management
Group; communication of project objectives and activities to stakeholders; surveys to collect data on key
performance indicators and obtain stakeholder feedback; and project audits.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infonnation about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Kyrgyz Republic - Bishkek City.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments. There will no civil works, except for minor alterations for installation of computer systems, and
no rehabilitation work involved in the project. Therefore, the project is assigned Environmental Category C.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No     0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             O Yes * No     O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        O Yes * No     O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No     0 TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                C Yes * No     O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 O Yes * No     O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No     0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  O Yes * No     0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No     0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes 0 No     0 TBD
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



4
ISDS
ID. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Il.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
IT.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
E. Safeguards Classif cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          ExVected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected       Aclual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



5
ISDS
Pest Management Plan:                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sinned and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Jit Bahadur S. Gill                           03/10/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Anil Markandya                             03/20/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Helga W. Muller                              03/20/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEA*C  K       EIBETEIMAP        WChPM



