Report No. 23623
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 1, 2001
A. Basic Project Data
I.A.1. Project Statistics
COUNTRY: Tanzania                                         PROJECT ID: 76093
PROJECT: LVEMP/Tanzania Supplemental     TTL: William Lane
APPRAISAL DATE: 12/13/2001                        IBRD AMOUNT ($m):
BOARD DATE: 12/13/2001                            IDA AMOUNT ($m):5.0
MANAGING UNIT: AFTR1             SECTOR:VM-Natural
Resource Management
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: SIL                                  STATUS:LEND
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS) The Supplemental
Credit will be totally directed at continuing the existing
LVEMP program. As such, the Project Global and Development
Objectives will remain the same. Nothing will be added or
modified from the original work plan. The following
description of Project Objectives is copied from the Staff
Appraisal Report for the LVEMP, as the objectives remain
valid for the work supported by the Supplemental Credit.
"The LVEMP is a comprehensive program aimed at
rehabilitation of the lake ecosystem for the benefit of the
people who live in the catchment, the national economies of
which they are a part, and the global community. The
program objectives are to: (a) maximize the sustainable
benefits to riparian communities from using resources
within the basin to generate food, employment and income,
supply safe water, and sustain a disease-free environment;
and (b) conserve biodiversity and genetic resources for the
benefit of the riparian communities and the global
community. In order to address the tradeoffs among these
objectives which cut across national boundaries, a further
project objective is to harmonize national management
programs in order to achieve, to the maximum extent
possible, the reversal of increasing environmental
degradation".
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS) The project is the
first phase of a longer term program whose aims are as
outlined above. This first phase provides the necessary
information to improve management of the lake ecosystem,
establishes mechanisms for cooperative management by the
three countries, identifies and demonstrates practical,
self-sustaining remedies, while simultaneously building
capacity for ecosystem management. The project consists of
two broad sets of activities. The first set of activities,
which are designed to address specific environmental
threats, takes place in a series of selected pilot areas.
The second set of activities improve information on the
lake and is building capacity for more effective management
and is lake-wide in scope.



The project supports the following specific regional and
national program of activities: (a) management of
fisheries, including the establishment and operations of
the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organizations (US$2.3 million),
improvement of fisheries research and the information base
for fisheries (US$13.3 million), strengthening extension,
monitoring and enforcement capabilities of national
fisheries administration (US$14.1 million), and studying
and implementing a Fish Levy Trust (US$2.0 million); (b)
management and control of water hyacinth (US$8.3 million);
(c) management of lake pollution and water quality,
including strengthening and harmonizing national regulatory
and incentive frameworks and enforcement capabilities, and
establishing a lake-wide water quality monitoring system
(US$9.6 million); improvement of research and the
information base for pollution control and water quality
(US$4.3 million), pilot investments in industrial and
municipal waste management (US$ 1.7 million), and priority
waste management investments (US$ 4.0 million); (d)
management of land use in the catchment, including
improvement of research and the information base for
pollution loading from catchment, assessment of agro-
chemicals, and pilot investments in soil conservation and
afforestation (US$ 9.2 million); (e) wetland management,
including improving the information base (US$ 3.4 million),
and pilot investments in sustainable management of wetland
products (US$ 1.5 million); and (f) support for
institutions for lake-wide research and management, and
pollution disaster contingency planning (US$ 4.0 million).
I.A.4. Project Location: The project is located entirely
within Tanzanian portion of Lake Victoria and its
catchment. Project activities occur throughout the
catchment and the Lake itself.
Bi. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [X}, C [ 1,
FI [ ], TBD [ I
Comments: The environmental classification for the
original LVEMP remains. The proposed Supplemental Finance
will not result in any new or expanded activities (only
covering project activities that would have been undertaken
had unforseen circumstances not resulted in a delay of 18
months in project implementation). The Environmental
Classification remains a "B" as determined during project
preparation in 1995-1996.
The Project was rated as category "B" under OD 4.01 by the
original preparation/safeguard team in 1996. Th OD in
place at the time required "something less" than a full
Environmental. On the basis of this requirement, and
clearance of the Project rating by the African Regional
Environmental Department, an environmental analysis was
prepared as part of project preparation in November 1995.
The Project also underwent full evaluation by the Africa
Regional Environmental Department at Appraisal and SAR
-2 -



Yellow Cover review, as required under OD 4.01. The Staff
Appraisal Report (June 1996) summarized the 30-page
environmental analysis as follows:
"The [Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project] is in
effect a regional environmental action plan for Lake
Victoria, having as its central objective improving the
environmental conditions of Lake Victoria and its
catchment. However, the program will encompass a wide
range of different interventions and investments, and has
been designated as Category B for environmental analysis to
ensure that adequate attention will be given to the many
overall positive impacts as well as to individual
components which might have adverse local environmental
effects."
The Project Staff Appraisal Report described the positive
impacts of the project, concluding with the observation
that "the area in which the project would make the most
economic difference would be in heading off developing
instability and possible serious collapse of the valuable
lake fisheries."
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
I.C1. Table on applicability                            Yes     No       TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)        [XI      [ I     [ I
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                    [1      [XI    [I 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                            [XI     [I [I 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                              [1      [XI    [I 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                [1      [XI    [I 
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                       [ ]     [XI     [ I
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             [1      [XI    [I 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                            [1      [XI     [I 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)       [ ]     [XI     [ I
Projects on Inter'l Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)[X]         [ I     [ I
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
II.D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues The main activities
to be supported by the Supplemental Finance will be
continuation of environmental baseline data collection and
specific pilot-level activties in the Lake and its
catchment. The largest cost items to be funded by the
Supplemental would include:
a) Whole Lake Water Quality and
Physical/Chemical/Biological Limnology sampling program -
This is a harmonized sampling program conducted over a 1-2
week period every month by all three countries. The Lake
(second largest in the world) has been by divided into
sampling grids with specific sampling sites (found by GPS).
Three large vessels, with teams of up to 20
scientists/technicians on each vessel, sample at each of
the stations in the Lake. There are also moored monitoring
equipment placed in the Lake that are serviced during these
-3 -



cruises (thermistor chains etc);
b) River Water Quality and Discharge, Lake Littoral,
and Lake sediment sampling- Also done on a monthly basis.
This also requires servicing of data loggers and taking
discharge measurements;
c) Wet/Dry atmospheric deposition sampling
Soil erosion estimation/mapping through soil erosion plots,
remote sensing and GIS;
d) Wetland sampling program- Locating, undertaking
digital baseline mapping, water quality assessment and
nutrient stripping within, and uses of products from
natural wetlands;
e) Identifying, locating and quantifying effluent
characteristics of all major point-source pollution in the
catchment
Identifying agrochemicals used in the basin and making an
initial assessment of the fate of the most important of
these once applied;
f) Continuing with community-managed hillside
vegetation protection, community-based water management
programs, microprojects, on-farm soil conservation/water
harvesting and sustainable wetland products utilization
pilots;
g) Biological and manual water hyacinth control;
h) Biodiversity sampling and protection of satellite
lakes in the catchment (the Project has discovered that
satellite lakes to Lake Victoria are actually more
important as refuge for biodiversity than the main Lake and
these need much more study and protection;
i) Continued support to the 500+ village co-
management units established at fishing beaches for the
purpose of managing the fishery resource of the Lake;
j) Conduct a second, whole-lake, fishing pressure
survey in association with Uganda and Kenya;
k) Information dissemination- there is a
comprehensive program to provide information collected
during the LVEMP to stakeholders at all levels.
Dissemination occurs through radio and TV, handout and
pamphlets, public meetings, scientific journals, newspaper
articles, etc.
The LVEMP is an environmentally beneficial project and is
recognized by stakeholders as being the main proponent of
biodiversity protection and environmentally/socially
sustainable development in the Tanzanian portion of the
Lake catchment..
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts
associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts. Ongoing activities already shown to be
environmentally positive. Not applicable.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to
application of more than one safeguard policy or due to
- 4 -



multiple project component. Ongoing activities already
shown to be environmentally positive. Not applicable.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to
anticipated future activities in the project area. The
Project is mainly baseline data collection aimed at
identifying impacts of economic development on Lake
Victoria and its Basin. The Project is therefore designed
to detect harm associated with development in the
catchment, and is not likely to have long-term negative
impacts.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of
alternatives (if required) N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address
safeguard issues N/A
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the
mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project has an ambitious public dissemination plan to
reach all stakeholders at all levels (local, national,
regional and international). NGO's are partners in
implementation of most components and the local communities
are involved through microproject implementation. Project
reviews by QAG, the GEF, and various bilaterals (SIDA and
NORAD) have all been positive.
The Project-wide environmental analysis is described in
paragraphs 5.25-5.31 of the Staff Appraisal Report (June
18, 1996).
E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is
determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis
of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an
individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[ 1 S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible
impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but
effects are limited in their impact and are technically and
institutionally manageable
[ 1 S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development
funds, community driven development or similar projects
which require a safeguard framework or programmatic
approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements- Expected Date Actual Date
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank              1996
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1996
- 5-



Date of submission to InfoShop 1996
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors     N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop           N/A
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop           N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure          N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                   N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank              N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop           N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is
not expected, please explain why. Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader: William Lane      Date:October 1, 2001
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator    Serigne Omar Fye
Date        October 18, 2001
Comments
Sector Manager   Karen Brooks    Date November 2001
Comments
-6-



