243952
THE VYORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frec of overty O
'InfoShop
I I,  ,V  . W J I L, -t
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/19/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC         Project ID: P075006                       2
Project: LA - Land Titling 11 Project             Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout
Authorized to Appraise Date:. April 24, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 9, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                              Sector: AG - Agency Reform; VM - Natural
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Resources Management
Status: Lending                                  Theme: RURAL DEVELOPMENT
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The proposed Land Titling II Project will be the second phase of the long term land titling program. The
objectives of the project are to (i) improve the security of land tenure; (ii) facilitate the development of
land markets; and (iii) improve government revenues from property related fees and taxes.These
objectives would be achieved through formulating and approving land policy and regulatory changes,
strengthening institutional capacity and project management, accelerating land titliig activity in areas of
high demand, developing and implementing a community-accepted land registration system,
strengthening land valuation systems, and implementation of systems to lease State land.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will include the following components:
Component 1: Development of land policy and regulatory framework.
(a) Development of government capacity to formulate land policies.
(b) Formulation of key land policies for land administration.
(c) Development and Drafting of decrees and ministerial instructions.
Component 2: Institutional Development
(a) Long term institutional development to land administration agencies at the central and local levels
(Department of Lands, National Geographic Department, and Land Planning and Allocation
Department).
(b) Development of the High Diploma on Land Management Education Program in the Polytechnic.
Component 3: An accelerated program of systematic and sporadic land titling
(a) Information dissimination and community participation.
(b) continuation and acceleration of the systematic land titling activities initiaed under the first project.



2
ISDS
(c) continuation and expansion of sporadic and semi-systmatic land titling activities specially in the rural
areas.
Component 4: Development of a modern land registration system
(a) Re-engineering of land office functions.
(b) Development of procedures and regulatory framework for land registration.
(c) Capacity building and training to ensure sustainable land registration system.
(d) Support of decentralized land office functions by establishing new land office.
Component 5: Strengthening and Expansion of Property Valuation Functions
(a) Strenthening land valaution department in DOL.
(b) Expand land valuation to the four main cities in Laos.
Component 6. Project Management
(a) Technical Assistance to Support project implementation.
(b) Support to the Project Support Unit and the Provincial Project Support Units to implement the
project.
(c) Monitoring and Evaluation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in the following provinces:
Vientiane Prefecture and the provinces of Vientiane, Luang Prabang, Savannakhet, Champassak,
Khammoune, Bolikamxay, Xayaboury, and Saravane. The project will focus on the urban and
peri-urban areas and will move slowly to title agricultural land. No titling will be done in Forest
areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is classified as a category B project because it is not expected to have a significantly
adverse environmental impact. Other than the construction of new land office buildings and training
facilities, the project will not support civil works, land conversion, resource extraction, industrial productior
or any other activity that could potentially damage the environiment. All buildings will be designed and
constructed with sound architectural and engineering practices and will make appropriate arrangements for
dust and noise control, solid waste disposal, sanitary facilities and worker safety.
The project will issue land titles to urban, peri-urban and agricultural land. Great care will be taken to ensure
that individual land titles are not issued in forested areas. The project will assess the legal basis on which to
issue communal titles for indigenous peoples (in the relevant areas) and, should the legal basis be adequate
and prove satisfactory to the Bank, the project will issue communal titles.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          *          Yes 0 No S TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      OYes *No QD TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              '-Yes S No * TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                O Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  0 Yes * No S TBD



3
ISDS
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         Yes   .No   * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                C Yes iC No   0 TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                ZYes * No     C TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           C Yes 0 No       TBD
Projects in Intemnational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)    _        Yes 0 No   . TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prc/udice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevtnt questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Project implementation will be a continuation of the activities initiated under the first project.
Experience from the first project shows that there is no large scale, significant impact of the
project. To confirm this, social assessment has been commissioned and results will be
incorporated in the design of the project.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
This will be determined during project preparation.
II.D. l c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
NT II dam is one of the major projects which will be built in Khammuane province. The project will
title land in urban and peri-urban areas. There will be no titling of land covered by the site of NTII.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
This will be discussed during preparation.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
To be done during preparation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During preparation, the task team will determine the applicability of the safeguard policies.
Disclosure will be done here in the info shop as well as in the country. Group consultations will be
done as appropriate.
Other Issues
Indigenous Ethnic Minority Issues. The first project focused on urban and peri-urban areas and,
therefore, had no dealings with communal lands or with lands of indigenous ethnic minorities.
During project preparation, the proposed second project will determine whether titling will be
expanded to rural areas. If so, it will consider dealing with the above two items . It is highly likely
that the two are linked in that the indigenous ethnic minorities practice communal ownership of land
and other resources. The project would like to be able to provide the option of communal titles.
During preparation, it will assess the legal basis to issue such titles for indigenous ethnic minority
groups. The study on Land Tenure will provide valuable infonnation for the project team in their



4
ISDS
review and assessment of the feasibility of communal titles and other alternatives.
Whether an IPDP will be needed will be determined during preparation. More likely, an IP strategy
will be a better instrument for promoting the welfare of the indigenous ethnic minorities. However,
all this is TBD. The project will not provide titling services for the government's resettlement
program and focal sites.
Land Acquisition and lnvoluntary Resettlement. No land acquisition and involuntary resettlement are
anticipated in the project. However, this will be confirmed during project preparation. If the project
has plans to provide for the construction of office space and/or training centers, then a policy
framework or resettlement plan will be prepared.
Social Assessment Study. The study is currently underway. It vill make an assessment of the effects
and initial socio-economic impact of the first project's interventions in the communities already and
currently being served and conduct a scoping exercise in selected sites which may be potential
expansion areas for the first project as well as the second one. While the first activity determines the
overall effects of the project, the parallel activity will aim to establish the potential sites' current
situation as regards suitability, demand and special issues affecting implementation in the second
project. The findings of the SA will help to provide input to the social safeguard aspects.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/17/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/17/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



5
ISDS
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Wael Zakout                                 6/13/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Mary P. Judd/Person/World Bank         6/13/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Glenn S. Morgan/Person/World Bank      6/14/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          6/14/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Mark D. Wilson                              6/19/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH   __   I FEEDBACK     SFTE MAP       SHOWCASE       s



