Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC172 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 22, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic Republic 
Project ID: P075531 
Project Name: Second Southern Provincial Rural 
Electrification Project (SPRE2) 
Task Team Leader: Barry Trembath 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
GEF: 4 
IDA: 25 
Estimated Board Date: August 19, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: EASEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan 
(APL) 
Sector: Power (90%);General public administration 
sector (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); 
Regulation and competition policy (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Patchamuttu Ilangovan (environment); Youxuan Zhu, Lars 
Lund (resettlement and social aspects) 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
Provision of electricity to about 80,000 rural households providing them an improved living standard and the basis 
for increased income opportunities. 
 
Previous studies in Lao PDR
1
 have shown that provision of electricity to rural households immediately increases 
their disposable income since the cost of electricity is less than means previously used for lighting (kerosene, 
candles, car batteries, dry cells etc.  Electricity also provides the opportunity for future increases in living standard 
by enabling increased economic production through activities that require affordable electricity (e.g. rice milling, 
ice-making, irrigation pumping) or that require lighting to extend productive hours. Longer-term effects have also 
been demonstrated as longer student study hours are reflected in increased years in school. 
 
The 1999 ESMAP study provided initial data on energy expenditures in households and willingness to pay.  As part 
of preparation for the proposed project, it is proposed to carry out surveys of sample villages electrified under three 
earlier Bank projects and proposed to be electrified under the proposed project (grid connected and off grid).  The 
objective of these surveys is to utilize past experience to define linkages between electrification and economic 
development and poverty alleviation, to establish patterns of demand growth with time in electrified villages and to 
obtain data to enable determination of economic benefits and impact on poverty of proposed project. The study will 
also provide baseline data for income and other poverty indicators for sample villages and households to be 
electrified under the project. 
 
                                                          
 
1
 Institutional Development for Off-grid Electrification. ESMAP June 1999. 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
Investment Component
.  
The proposed investment component will focus on grid-connected and off-grid 
distribution since preliminary arrangements have been made with other financiers for planned sub-transmission in 
the southern and central provinces.  This will also enable IDA and EdL to build on the experiences and lessons 
learned during the previous IDA financed projects. 
 
Initial EdL proposals for the grid-connected component provide for connection of 50,000 to 75,000 households 
(compared with 50,000 for SPRE).  Similar proposals by MIH for the off grid component provide for connection of 
about 18,000 households utilizing solar, village hydros, diesel gensets or other mini-grid options. 
 
The exact scope of the project will depend on: (a) the economic and social benefits of the various proposed sub-
projects; and (b) the amount of IDA support that is available.  Similarly the distribution of available funds between 
on-grid and off-grid will require further analysis during the project preparation period. 
 
Sector Reform Component
.  This component will focus on priority activities identified in the Lao PDR Power 
Sector Policy – Strategy for Implementation of Proposed Reforms.  Studies to define this component will be carried 
out during the project preparation phase.   
It is expected that the component would consist of an action plan with  activities grouped into the following 
categories: (a) completing the commercialization of EdL; (b) tariff policy for EdL Grids;  (c) implementation models 
for rural electrification; (d) financing of EdL System Development and IPP Export Program 
 
Demand Side Management (DSM) Component
.  During the identification mission, MIH expressed interest in 
including a GEF financed DSM component in the project.  GEF has agreed in principle to such a component.  
Possible scope for such a component will be investigated during the preparation mission. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Southern provinces in Lao PDR, including: Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, Savannakhet,  
Saravane, Champassak, Attopeu and Sekong. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The main implementing agency of the project will be EdL, who has demonstrated project management capability 
through its successful management of three IDA projects (two completed, one on-going).  The project office that 
EdL established has competent staff who are experienced in managing donor-financed projects.  In addition, 
technical assistance was provided by external consultants in the areas of project management and construction 
supervision.  The proposed project will follow basically the same project management and implementation 
approach. 
 
For the off-grid component MIH will be the implementing agency. While they have less experience than EdL with 
Bank financed projects, they have some exposure through the ongoing SPRE project. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
In view of the likely level of impacts of distribution sub-projects (22kV and below), the 
environmental assessment process would follow a “programmatic” or “framework” approach, so 
that environmental screening would be completed prior to project appraisal to enable the overall 
scope of the project to be generally defined and costs allocated.   
 
An Initial Environmental Examination has been carried out by a consultant (Meritec) for EdL.  
Additional work will be done by the project preparation & implementation consultant (to be hired 
under PHRD soon) to develop the environmental assessment framework.   
 
[TBD ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04)
  
 
 
[N] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
The physical components (22kV and below) are likely to have only limited resettlement (including 
land acquisition).  While the preliminary definition of project scope does not include any 115kV 
transmission lines, it is possible that some proposed 22kV c
onnections would rely on the 
development of 115kV lines to be financed by other donors.  According to the new OP4.12, the 
resettlement policy will apply to all components that will “directly and significantly related to the 
IDA assisted project”. 
 
Given the programmatic nature of the project, a resettlement policy framework will be developed, 
which could also be applied to related transmission components if it is determined that the IDA 
resettlement policies would apply to them.   
 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
Based on the available information, there are ethnic minorities living in the project areas.  To 
obtain a preliminary understanding of the scope of minority population to be benefited or affected 
by the project, the following work would be carried out: (a) first of all, to list all villages to be 
benefited by the project for each province and district, based on the existing planning database, 
including total population and number of households; (b) to identify the minority groups in these 
villages and collect basic social economic information, which should provide a preliminary basis to 
assess whether the Bank OP4.20 policy would apply and an IPDP would need to be prepared 
during project preparation. 
  
[N] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[N] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[N] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Consultants will need to be hired to develop the EA Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework, as well as to 
collect basic social economic data on the possible affected ethnic minority groups and to train EdL and MIH  
personnel to prepare safeguard documents for individual sub-projects. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultation will be an integrated part of the process to develop the Resettlement and Indigenous People Policy 
Framework and the plans for the individual sub-projects. 
 
The Bank disclosure policies will be followed.  The environmental and social documents would be individually 
disclosed locally (through the client’s project offices, provincial offices, plus newspaper advertisements if 
necessary), as well as in the InfoShop. 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
The safeguard meeting (held on August 5, 2003) confirmed the assignment of Category B and endorsed the 
approach taken by the task team of incorporating institutional development into project preparation.  
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
One month prior to departure of the appraisal mission (approximately February 2004). 
 
