Report No. 23990
Report No: i077326 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/02/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC        Project ID: P077326
Project: LA-Poverty Reduction Fund Project       Task Team Leader: Christopher
Chamberlin
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 25, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 18.96
Managing Unit: EASHD     Sector: SF - Social Funds
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Government of Lao PDR has invited the Bank to support its efforts to
deliver development resources at the village level, targeted to the
poorest districts in the country and mediated through strong participatory
processes and decentralized decision making. The agreed objectives of the
project are therefore:
(i) Assisting villagers themselves to develop community public
infrastructure and gain access to services;
(ii) Build capacity and empower villages in poor districts to manage their
own public investment planning and subproject implementation in a
decentralized and transparent manner; and
(iii) Strengthen local institutions to support participatory
decision-making and conflict resolution processes at the village, khet,
and district levels, involving a broad range of villagers, including
village poor and women.
The project aims to deliver resources to poor villages, efficiently and
effectively.   Villagers themselves will decide on how resources are
allocated and will directly manage project funds and the implementation of
agreed upon subprojects. Extensive facilitation and training provided
through the project will be structured to ensure that poor villagers,
including women, participate in the decision-making process and also
benefit from project inputs. The project will build local community
capacity by providing technical support for villagers on a continual basis
over a number of years, to solve problems they identify and to resolve
conflicts that might arise. The project will increase demand for services
and build access to services and infrastructure, eventually linking
villagers more closely to local government development efforts.
These objectives will be achieved through the financing and implementation
of three project components:
(i) Sub-project Grants
(ii) Local Capacity Building
(iii) National Project Management



The Poverty Reduction Fund Project (PRFP) builds on the preparatory work
done on a Social Fund Project, primarily in the legal architecture. In
other respects the operational objectives and mechanism are fundamentally
different, and therefore the PRFP supplants the earlier operation. Two
other projects, both outside of Lao PDR in East Asia, have provided key
concepts and operational mechanisms for the PRFP: the Cambodia Social
Fund Project and the Indonesia Kecamatan Development Project.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component One
Sub-project Grants: This Component will finance sub-grants for eligible
sub-projects identified by the khet. The project is designed to allow
villagers to quickly obtain funding for a wide range of negotiated and
agreed to prioritized public capital goods (village infrastructures) and
training (in subject matter identified by villagers), limited by the
resources available and local capacities. Villagers will be assisted in
determining feasibility and availability of resources and capacity by the
provincial technical support teams. Facilitators and staff consultants,
in cooperation with local government, provide villagers information
required to make informed choices, but choice rests completely with
villagers themselves, through a district-based, inter-khet deliberation
and negotiation process. It is expected that menu options will expand as
the project progresses and the capacity of villagers, facilitators and
consultants as well as local governments increases. The village
infrastructure allowed will include: access and transport infrastructure
(such as roads, bridges, culverts, etc.); schools and nurseries; clinics;
community halls and other public buildings (but not local government
administrative offices); communal water supply systems or structures
(well, gravitational flow systems with tanks and piping, small ponds or
reservoirs, etc.); irrigation and drainage systems; and local markets. A
limit on the total cost of any sub-project has been set at US$25,000,
though in general works are expected to be small, averaging $6,400. Joint
projects involving 2 or more villages within a khet cannot exceed
$50,000. Other village needs and priorities not allowed in the first year
will be studied and considered for possible inclusion later:
scholarships, livestock, interventions to deal with food insecurity or
disasters etc.
Anticipating requests for capital for community micro-enterprises and
social services, the project may pilot such activities starting in year
two, depending on demand and results of the first year's project
implementation. Pilots for community micro-credit and/or revolving funds
are also possible beginning in year two.
Recurrent costs will not usually be provided for by the project, but
villagers can propose to include in their sub project proposals a
multi-year allowance/incentives for teachers and health clinic workers to
ensure that they provide services in the more remote villages. Small
allowances for supplies may also be requested in such cases.     Because the
project will be working with the same districts and villages over time,
the financial management of such payments can be treated as another
activity in the annual district sub project disbursement cycle. All
investment sub-projects are expected to be completed within one year.
Component Two
-2-



Local Capacity Building: This Component will finance the hiring of
technically qualified consultants to form Provincial Technical Support
Teams. It will also finance district facilitators and khet facilitators
in the currently active operational districts. The Technical Support
Teams will be placed in each project province to provide technical
assistance to khet project teams preparing project proposals. Most of the
provincial PRF consultants will be civil engineers, but the provincial
technical support team will also have consultants to provide financial
management assistance and oversight as well as assistance in procurement
method choice, community development and information dissemination.
District facilitators would be locally recruited, with a mix of social and
technical facilitation skills. All would receive training, paid out of
Component Three. In addition to the consultant fees, Component Two will
also finance all costs related to the operational work of the consultants,
i.e. travel, operating costs not covered by Government counterpart,
motorcycles and vehicles (if necessary) for provincial and district
staff, and office equipment for provincial and district staff.
Component Three
National Project Management: This component will finance the costs of
staffing, managing, monitoring, reporting and operating the Poverty
Reduction Fund at the central level. It will include salaries and fees of
PRF staff who are hired as consultants, not as civil servants; office
equipment, vehicles needed to carry out operational work; operating costs
not covered by Government counterpart; technical assistance in the areas
of training, monitoring, MIS, accounting, auditing, technical and
beneficiary assessments, procurement assessments, legal services and other
specialist areas.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be operating in a number of districts, still to be
determined, in the following three provinces:
Houaphanh, Savannakhet and Champasak. It is expected that the project
will operate in six provinces in the final years of implementation.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
Given the small scale, by definition, of village sub projects, impacts are
expected to be negligible. However, like other community driven
development projects in the region, the operational manual will include
procedures for appraising the environmental impacts of any proposed sub
project. If a project is found to include substantial environmental
impacts (highly unlikely), further procedures are included to address them
or to alter the design of the sub project. The principles of the KDP
project in Indonesia and recent procedures adopted for the Cambodia Social
Fund Project will serve as models.
In addition to environmental screening procedures that identify prohibited
projects, basic standard operating procedures to avoid or mitigate adverse
environmental impacts of small scale sub-projects will be incorporated
into the technical guidelines and training programs. The technical
guidelines include standard designs and costs for eligible activities and
-3 -



the environmental issues will include guidance on sensible site selection
criteria, good construction practices and diligent management practices in
the operational phase for different types of sub-projects. In addition,
construction contracts will include common-sense environmental clauses,
with specific expected performance standards relating to environmental
protection. These include measures to ensure that erosion is controlled
and waste materials are disposed of in appropriate manners.
In the PRF operational cycle, the Provincial Technical Support Team and
district facilitators will play an important role in overseeing the
application of these procedures, monitoring their results, and educating
village teams to their importance. The aim is to integrate environmental
and natural resource education and awareness raising at the village level
through the Technical Support Team and facilitators.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Since most subprojects are very small (maximum of $25,000 with an
estimated average of $6,400), no major environmental and adverse social
impacts are expected. The project will, by the nature of the
decision-making process, not fund any investment that is not acceptable to
a significant number of villagers involved. Decisions on the allocation
of funds are made by villagers themselves, through a negotiation process,
and with information provided by project facilitators and consultants.
However, small-scale civil works may require minor land acquisition or may
have minor adverse impacts on ethnic minorities or the environment. Thus,
guidelines have been developed, and included in the Operational Manual, as
described below.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
- 4 -



activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The following policies apply to the project: OP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment and OD 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples. In addition, screening
procedures and a negative list with prohibited activities address aspects
of the following policies: OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats, OP 4.36 on
Forestry, OP 4.09 on Pest Management, OPN 11.03 on Cultural Property and
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
For OP 4.01 and OD 4.20, few, if any, impacts are anticipated due to the
small scale of sub-projects and the participatory principles of the
project. However, small-scale civil works may require minor land
acquisition or may have minor adverse impacts on ethnic minorities or the
environment. Thus, guidelines are included in the operational manual in
order to avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts of
sub-projects and to ensure that they meet with the requirements of the
Bank as described in its safeguards policies mentioned above. The
guidelines prescribe a screening and review process for all sub-projects
that may cause adverse impacts on the environment or people; procedures to
avoid or mitigate these impacts; complaint mechanism; and procedures for
monitoring and evaluation. Screening and review will take place prior to
submission of sub-project proposals to the district meeting.
Furthermore, to avoid certain adverse impacts on the environment and
people, a number of activities are excluded from the menu of eligible
sub-project investments. These activities concern both environment and
social impacts and are described below.
The project will not support projects that involve new roads; electrical,
gasoline or diesel generators or pumps; chain saws, pesticides,
insecticides, herbicides, asbestos or other investments detrimental to the
environment. Also, no forest operations, including logging, harvesting or
processing of timber products will be supported. No new settlement or
expansion of existing settlements will be supported in critical habitats,
protected areas or areas proposed for protection. Where settlements
already exist proposals for funding should be in compliance with any local
regulations on land management and other provisions of the protected area
management plan. No road construction or rehabilitation of any kind will
be allowed inside critical habitats and existing or proposed protected
areas.
The project will not fund the acquisition of land under any conditions,
however some may occur on a voluntary basis or with compensation paid by
the village's own funds. Involuntary resettlement is not allowed and any
voluntary movement or resettlement of more than five households or
household structures will need special approval from the National
Executive Office in Vientiane prior to decision at the district level
meeting. To avoid linkage with government programs involving village
consolidation and/or resettlement, no project support will be provided in
- 5-



areas where the government has established "focal sites," based on data
from the Central Leading Committee for Rural Development and District
authorities.
Any activity unacceptable to a group of ethnic minorities in a village of
mixed ethnic composition cannot be funded without prior review.
Activities that will have significant adverse impacts on ethnic minorities
in neighboring villages cannot be funded. In addition, to these
safeguards for ethnic minorities incorporated into the planning phase as
described in the Operational Manual, the project itself has been designed
to ensure that ethnic minorities will be included and benefit in
appropriate ways. Specific measures to support the involvement of ethnic
minorities include: hiring staff, as far as possible and needed, that come
from local ethnic minorities, and providing additional training if needed;
training of project staff and facilitators on ethnic minority issues;
grievance redress mechanism that allows ethnic minorities an avenue for
complaints; and particular attention to indigenous peoples issues in
monitoring and evaluation.
In the PRF operational cycle, the Provincial Technical Support Team and
district facilitators will play an important role in overseeing the
application of these procedures, monitoring their results, and educating
village teams to their importance. The aim is to integrate environmental
and natural resource education and awareness raising at the village level
through the Technical Support Team and facilitators.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders will be the beneficiary districts and villagers included
in the project. A social assessment will consult with local communities
and authorities during project preparation and early implementation. A
large scale socialization process will inform the selected districts and
villagers of the project, including the safeguard requirements included in
the Operational Manual.
The safeguard chapter in the Operational Manual (the Policy
Guidelines/Framework) has been shared with government representatives at
national and local level. The Framework was forwarded to the Info-Shop on
April 26, 2002 after a Safeguards Review Meeting.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
- 6 -



F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/26/2002       4/26/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/26/2002       4/26/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/26/2002       4/26/2002
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Christopher Chamberlin  April 26, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Svend E. Jensby April 30, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Glenn S. Morgan April 30, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan April 30, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Emmanuel Y. Jimenez      April 30, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



