Report No. 24010
Report No: I064886 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/12/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC        Project ID: P064886
Project: LA-SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY         Task Team Leader: William B. Magrath
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 17, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 15, 2003    IDA Amount ($m): 12.00
Managing Unit: EASRD     Sector: AT - Forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objectives of the project are:
to support creation of an enabling policy and legal framework for a
long-term program to put the remaining natural production forests in Lao
PDR under sustainable management and protection;
to define the national permanent production forest area and bring large
areas of natural forests in three or four selected provinces under
participatory, sustainable management based on a co-management approach
between the villagers and the State; and
community development addressing priority poverty needs in the project
areas.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would introduce sustainable production management over natural
forests in Savannakhet, Khammouane, and one or more provinces to be
selected from among Salavan, Sekong, Attapeu and Champassack. The project
would encompass activities in formulating a national program of forest
land allocation; management of selected production forest areas; and
development of forest dependent rural communities, project management and
sectoral monitoring and control, including measures aimed at reducing and
controlling illegal and uncontrolled logging. The project would not
directly finance logging.
Public Sector Support to Sustainable Forest Management. This component
will (i) determine the potential National Production Forest Area (NPFA),
(ii) initiate a long-term program for bringing natural forest with
potential for production under sustainable management and thus turning the
NPFA into a national system of sustainably managed areas at province,
district, and village level, and (iii) strengthening capacity to provide
forest management services. Implementation of this component will be
closely linked to the sectoral monitoring component and field
implementation. It will help in prioritizing production forest areas to be
brought under sustainable management and setting benchmarks to be used in
monitoring sectoral performance. The projct will provide resources for
remote sensing assessment of forest areas, mapping, planning and forest
resource assessment.



Implementing Sustainable Forest Management. This component will provide
support to the establishment of sustainable forest management systems
based on shared management responsibilities between the Government staff
and organized villagers. The project would provide resources and equipment
for planning (remote sensing data, GIS mapping, forest inventory and field
equipment, etc.), forums and resources for participatory planning at PAFO,
DAFO and village levels, establishment of annual allowable cuts, staff
training and operational research needs (including the establishment and
maintenance of permanent sample plots to assist in monitoring growth and
yield prior to and post harvesting). It would also support improvements
in log measurement, species identification, grading and log marketing and
commercial administration of log and forest product sales. The component
would also transfer knowledge and technology to DOF, PAFO, DAFO, FMTU,
village associations and others to support initial implementation in
select project sites. Manuals, codes of practice, guidelines,
prescriptions, training materials and other resources derived in the
project would be available for application beyond the specific project
area.
The project would implement an agreed division of roles and
responsibilities among local people, PAFO, DAFO, DOF and, possibly, the
proposed Forest Management Technical Unit (FMTU), as well as benefit
sharing in accordance with rigorously defined policy and guidelines. The
project would provide resources for selected local infrastructure
development investments in participating districts and villages, resources
for implementation of selected forestry operations on all types of forest
(in the context of approved management plans) including assisted
regeneration, enrichment planting, forest protection, plantation
establishment and other operations through the management cycle. It would
also support training of villagers and staff, civil works, equipment,
training and allowances for PAFO, DAFO, DOF and FMTU
Sectoral Monitoring and Control. This component will support
implementation of MAF's/DOF's overall monitoring functions, including
monitoring of sectoral performance, and controlling and reporting
illegal/unauthorized forest operations. The project would support
acquisition of equipment, training, systems development and technical
assistance.
Project Management. This component will facilitate efficient project
implementation and coordination and collaboration with various government
agencies at central, provincial and district levels as well as undertaking
project monitoring and ensuring effective collaboration and cooperation
with relevant other projects, donors and NGOs. It will also include
implementation of the procurement plan and financial management. Other
activities include undertaking project impact, and other necessary studies
needed to improve project performance.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Natural forests in Savannakhet, Khammouane, and one or more provinces to
be selected from among Salavan, Sekong, Attapeu and Champassack.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
- 2 -



Comments: In view of the process and planning orientation of the proposed
project a Sectoral Environmental Assessment will be prepared in a parallel
with project design. This will identify specific concerns and risks, if
any, related to environmental and social impacts that could, in relation
to Bank policies, require supplemental analytic work prior to appraisal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    Yes
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Forestry operations can have significant and diverse environmental impacts
including soil erosion, siltation of waterways, alteration in wildlife
habitat, modification of forest structure and composition, access to
hunting, land use conversion and other effects. These are highly site
specific and dependent on the quality of planning and implementation,
timing of works and other considerations. Uncontrolled, poorly planned
and unmonitored operations, such as those that currently predominate in
Lao PDR, have overwhelmingly negative environmental consequence. These
impacts affect, most strongly, local populations through alteration to
water sources, nontimber forest products (including wild game and naval
stores), fuelwood and timber and religious and spiritual sites. Other
stakeholders include environmental interests, the scientific community,
tourism related interests who variously benefit from the relative natural
integrity of forest resources in Lao PDR.
The project aims to improve planning and control and to introduce, through
village forestry and through a stronger regulatory mechanism, incentives
to promote their adoption. This would aim to reduce the worst damage from
forestry operations in the without project case, but would not entirely
eliminate impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
-3-



II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project would not directly finance logging and is otherwise in
compliance with OP4.36 which calls for the Bank to assist borrowers in
addressing policy and institutional constraints limiting sustainability in
the forest sector. Attention to impacts on forests arising from Bank
projects in other sectors in Lao PDR are being addressed directly through
those projects and will be reinforced through the policy commitments to be
sought herein.
An independent consultant has been retained and is working on the
Environmental Assessment in tandem with project design to ensure
compliance with OP 4.01 and 4.04.
A Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment is to commence in February,
2002 in tandem with ongoing project preparation under terms of reference
already prepared. A draft EA will be completed by May 2002, prior to
pre-Appraisal and will be the basis for determining ex ante compliance
requirements and implementation standards required to comply with
safeguard policies concerning Cultural Property, Indigenous Peoples and
Involuntary Resettlement.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Local residents and community leaders are involved through participatory,
under the guidance of Government staff and project financed technical
assistance, in assessment of forest resources to define, delineate and
demarcate areas that form discrete logical forest management units that
can be brought under the effective control of formally structured Forest
Management Units. Written plans and contracts regarding the specific
areas, define the basis for th conduct of operations subject to compliance
with standards of practice, revenue sharing terms and other
considerations. Participation by individuals within the community is
voluntary and ranges from: involvement in consultative meetings;
managerial roles in the Village Forestry Association (including management
of funds and revenues from timber sales); forestry work performed on a
wage basis (trail clearance, tree marking, inventory and basic harvest
planning); utilization for sale or domestic use of nontimber forest
products; forest protection and patrolling; and involvement in
identification, construction and use of village projects financed from net
timber sales proceeds.
The proposed planning package will be designed to: ensure identification
of affected stakeholders; establish mechanisms for informed consultation;
provide meaningful opportunity for their involvement in planning and
operations; and negotiation of compensation and other forms of benefit
sharing. The process would involve standards for public disclosure and
notification to be assessed at appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
-4 -



Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
[X] Si. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[   S3. - No safeguard issues
[   SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      6/14/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 7/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   6/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        9/27/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        William B. Magrath      March 14, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Glenn S. Morgan March 19, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan March 19, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Mark D. Wilson  March 20, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



