ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                             AWorld Free of Povorty  i
InfoShop241
-br W104 InLtoA                                                         June 11, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/11/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Pro ect Data
Country: LATVIA                                   Project ID: P064595
Project: Second Health (Phase 2 APL)              Task Team Leader: Dominic S. Haazen
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 19, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 20.00
Bank Approval: September 26, 2002                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD                              Sector: HB - Basic Health
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective for Phase I of the APL is to create a framework for a modem and
effective health care system, including policy reforms, institution building and skills development for the
health financing system, health investment policy, primary health care reform, hospital restructuring and
effective public health programs. This phase was approved by the Board on November 12, 1998, and the
project was effective on March 23, 1999. The mid-term review for this project was held in March, 2001.
Phase II (current project) would provide support to a Consolidated Health Investment Program
(CHIP) to directly support investments into health service restructuring, and would also continue reforms
in the areas of primary health care and effective public health interventions. The development objective
of this phase is to institutionalize the approaches created in Phase I and to rationalize health services in
Latvia using this framework.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Phase II will continue many of the initiatives started during Phase 1, and would provide support to a
Consolidated Health Investment Program (CHIP) to directly support investments into health
services restructuring, and would also continue reforms in the areas of primary health care and
effective public health interventions. The specific components will be as follows:
Component A: Health Financing Reform
Obiective: To enhance health financing sustainability
The project would complete the revisions to the health financing system by incorporating a capital
reimbursement component into the overall provider reimbursement rate. This, together with the
investment planning and approval process to be completed under Component B, would ensure that



2
ISDS
the overall health financing and capital replacement system is sustainable over the long run.
Component B: Restructuring of Health Care Services.
Objective: To further support health care services restructuring
The project would support the MOW in implementing a consolidated health investment and capital
financing policy, including: (i) further developing effective capability in the MOW, SCHICF and
RSFs to undertake health service planning, set investment priorities and monitor the investment
program; (ii) implementing the agreed methodology and training in investment project appraisal;
(iii) supporting the implementation of regional and national health services master plans. The
project would help to institutionalize the capacity for training and retraining of primary health care
providers and further support for the implementation of PHC practices. The project would also
support hospital restructuring through the funding of selected priority investments, based on the
investment program criteria and further train hospital managers in modem management methods.
Specific support would also be provided to modernize the management, administrative structures
and operations of the emergency medical services system, and to continue priority health
promotion and disease prevention programs with a view to institutionalizing such activities on a
sustainable basis. These interventions would include smoking cessation, mental health, accidents
and road safety and TB/AIDS.
Component C: Health Reform Communications Strategy
Obiective: To enhance MOW capacity of communication
The project would continue to strengthen the capacity of the MOW to design and implement health
policy communication strategies. The counterpart for this component is the Public Relations Unit
of the Ministry of Welfare. The project will finance local and foreign technical assistance, study
tours, seminars, print materials, TV and radio spots, public opinion surveys and incremental
recurrent costs of campaign management. Public health awareness will be incorporated into these
spots.
Component C: Project Management.
Obiective: To ensure effective management and timely implementation of the project
This component will continue to ensure effective management and timely implementation of the
project, support would be provided to strengthen the PCU of the MOW.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Hospitals, ambulance stations and primary health care clinics throughout Latvia.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments: The project will support the Government of Latvia's Consolidated Health Investment Programme.
Funds will be pooled at the level of the Ministry of Welfare. Fund allocation to and appraisal of discretionary
investment projects is managed by the MoW, using standardized investment criteria and approval
procedures.



3
ISDS
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes C No    0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      O0 Yes * No   C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               C Yes * No    O TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No   O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                C Yes * No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                C Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         O0 Yes 0 No   0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No major environmental issues are associated with the project. Minor environmental and safety
impacts can be associated with the rehabilitation of hospitals, refurbishing of primary health care
facilities and in general with the disposal of hazardous waste (asbestos and lead paint) and debris.
Potential impacts and proposed mitigation measures will be detailed in the project Environmental
Management Plan developed based on good practices from Phase I - Consolidated Health
Investment Program (CHIP).
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Project Implementation Unit (already established for Phase I activities) will be responsible to
hire and oversee the required architects, engineers and contractors. They will also supervised the
work performed by the architectural/engineering firms to ensure that they are applying adequate
standards and are following the agreed upon procedures, as well as, the agreed upon environmental
plan. The Borrower must ensure compliance with the requirements of the EMP (as will be reflected
in the legal agreement). The Project Implementation Unit will be responsible for the implementation
of the EMP and for ensuring that local environmental standards and procedures are applied. The
Borrower will also ensure that good practices developed under Consolidated Health Investment
Program from the Phase I will be followed.



4
ISDS
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The methodology for Social Assessment will include both focus groups as well as broader social
survey of public attitudes toward the planned health reforms. In addition the preparation of Phase 11
will be based on a participatory approach with consultation of key stakeholders - representatives of
health facilities managers, communities, private associations, NGOs, international organizations
such as UNDP, WHO etc. This will mainly be done through meetings and workshops. Furthermore,
when discussing project aspects with key stakeholders, the Environmental Management Plan
requirements will be disclosed.
E. Safeguards Classif cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 6/17/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             6/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              6/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



5
ISDS
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Dominic S. Haazen                            06/07/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Bernard Baratz                            06/11/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Armin H. Fidler                              06/11/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCHH.    ; FEEACK                        T ,  ETE UMAP rs.  LSHGOWCASE



