                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/12/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: LATVIA                                              Project ID: P081439
Project: Education 2                                         Task Team Leader: Ana Maria Jeria
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 2, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m): 35.00
Bank Approval: September 1, 2004                             IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD                                         Sector: Secondary education (70%); Tertiary
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           education (30%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);
                                                             Education for all (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The project development objective is to support the ongoing EIP I reforms, build on achievements
in general education and expand the scope to include higher (tertiary) education improvements
which are vital to Latvia' s engagement with the knowledge economy. The project aims at
improving professional capacities of school teachers and principals, supporting optimization of
schools networks and energy efficiency, improving higher education and strengthening
management capacities in the education system.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):


It is envisaged that the project would consist of four basic components:

Component 1: Teacher Development would provide support to teachers expected to change their
teaching according to the new curriculum and educational standards. Teacher development would
be enhanced in two ways. First, all teachers would be helped to understand the essential features
of the curriculum and assessment reform. Second, mathematics and science teachers in general
secondary schools would be supported to upgrade their knowledge, skills and ways of thinking
related to teaching and learning of these subjects. This project would make an input on the
national educational innovation system by disseminating good practices from Latvian schools and
bringing in relevant ideas from international experts. This component also aims at creating
professional standards for school principals that are based on international experience on school
management. The project would finance program design, training of regional and local trainers,
design and printing of information materials, work on professional standards, and piloting of
models.

Component 2: Efficiency of Resource Utilization would aim at promoting the optimization of
schools network by supporting MES to build the technical capacities of the local education
authorities to develop and introduce a methodology for schools network optimization. The
project would also build on the experience of the ongoing Bank-financed education project and
provide support towards cost effective renovation and energy efficiency measures, improvement
of teaching environment standards, safety measures and improved efficiency of utilization of
educational facilities. The project would finance plans and methodologies for optimization of
schools, training in the preparation of plans, transportation, and publishing of materials. It would

                                                        2
                                                                                                           ISDS



also finance design of renovation works, renovation of educational establishments, monitoring of
project benefits and training of stakeholders.

Component 3: Higher Education Quality and Relevance would aim at improving the tertiary
education system's response to society's needs for relevant, high quality human capital and for
technological knowledge that will enhance Latvia's competitiveness in the global market. The
project would promote greater quality and labor market relevance in the preparation of tertiary
education graduates, and strengthen the structures of higher education governance. It would deal
with improvements of teaching quality of advanced teaching programs (PhD) in natural sciences
and engineering, strengthening of teaching relevance at regional higher education institutions, and
the improvement of management capacities within higher education institutions. The component
would finance integrated projects via a competitive fund for teaching quality enhancement. It will
also finance competitive block grants for selected regional higher education establishments. It
will also finance program development, training, technical assistance and software development.

Component 4: Capacity Strengthening would aim at strengthening MES and local capacities and
manage the EIP II project. In order to strengthen the MES capacity, the project would provide
support to define the role and responsibilities of the MES, develop and implement a human
resource development plan, create a common MES framework for system government, and
operationalize a comprehensive EMIS covering higher education. Project support would be
provided to further strengthen the MES Education Policy Department and the Communications
unit, as well manage the project activities. Also, capacities of university managers, municipalities
and school directors would be strengthened. The project would finance provision of training,
equipment, facilities and materials to improve the working environment, technical assistance, and
teaching-learning materials.



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The Project would operate throughout all Municipalities (and Novads, which would be the new
administrative structures after the territorial reform is implemented) in Latvia. At this point, the
educational establishments that would be subject of the individual renovation projects are not known.
Renovation may include works, such as thermal insulation, renovation of heating system, repairs to
improve hygienic conditions and safety, or improvements to university teaching facilities or labs.
However, no participating establishments are expected to be located in proximity to any protected areas,
or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas. One of the project
targets is to improve schools in poorer areas of Latvia. Therefore, it is likely that many individual
projects would be located in rural areas.


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments:

Under Component 2: Efficiency of Resource Utilization, the project would support the renovation of
educational establishments located throughout Latvia. The renovation works (say sub-projects) would be
financed from the loan funds extended by the Government of Latvia to Municipalities and/or Novads,
responsible for these educational establishments. The sub-projects would be selected during the
implementation of the project, based on the criteria set up by the Borrower and agreed with the Bank. The

                                                      3
                                                                                                     ISDS



Municipalities/Novads would be responsible for the implementation of their sub-projects. Thus PMU would
function as a financial intermediary, and ensure that the renovation sub-projects observe requirements set in
the provisions of the national environmental law. Since investments will not be known at the time of project
appraisal, the environmental category for the Project is proposed to be FI (Financial Intermediary).

Latvia is undergoing currently a process of territorial administration reform. As a result, the
current Municipalities would organize themselves into districts called Novads. The whole country
would be divided into five Regions. The proposed reform is implemented based on the law
adopted in 1998 and is foreseen for completion in 2004.

A Safeguards Consultation meeting was held on June 10, 2003. The meeting agreed that the
environmental issues in the project are limited and mainly concerned with the proposed
renovation works in about schools and higher education establishments. To mitigate these the
project will follow good construction practices and ensure proper handling and disposal of
asbestos and other hazardous materials.

Since the specific investments are not known, it was agreed that the proposed environmental category FI
and safeguards category SF are appropriate. An environmental chapter of the Operations Manual should
be prepared, describing the procedures and arrangement for the subproject screening and environmental
assessment. The national environmental regulations applicable to the project should also be described.
The environmental chapter should be sent to ECSSD for review and disclosed in the country (in local
language) and at the Bank's Infoshop (in English) prior to Appraisal.



C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                    Policy                                         Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes      No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes      No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes      No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes      No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes      No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes      No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes      No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes      No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes      No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes      No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. There are no environmental
issues related to three of the Project Components, namely Teacher Development, Higher Education

                                                        4
                                                                                                         ISDS



Quality and Relevance, and Capacity Strengthening. Component 2: Efficiency of Resource Utilization
would comprise sub-projects to renovate the educational establishments. The projects would be of a
small size and of rehabilitation nature. The civil works will mainly involve the rehabilitation of the
existing structures. Therefore, no major environmental issues are anticipated under the proposed EIPII
project. However, some of these sub-projects may include energy efficiency measures consisting in
replacement of old piping, valves or boiler plants that may be insulated with materials comprising
asbestos that will require special mitigation measures for handling and disposal of such materials.
Environmental concerns will be mitigated in the selection and implementation of sub-projects, as
described in Section II.D.3. below.

The Latvian Environmental Law sets adequate mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental
screening, preparation of environmental assessment and review of its results. The legal framework on
environmental issues is set out in the Law on Environmental Protection (Vides aizsardzibas likums)
adopted on August 6, 1991. Other laws that address environmental issues and are related to the
renovation investment are set out in: (i) Law on assessment of impact on environment (Likums par
ietekmes uz vidi novertejumu) adopted on October 14,1998; (ii) Law on pollution (Likums par
piesarnojumu) adopted on March 5, 2001; (iii) Building law (Buvniecibas likums) adopted on August
13,1995; (iv) Law on administrative territorial reform (Administrativi teritorialas reformas likums)
adopted on October 21, 1998; and (v) Regional Development Law adopted on April 9, 2002.

The ministry responsible for implementing environmental policies and protection is the Ministry of
Regional Development and Environmental Protection. At the local level, currently, the Municipalities
are responsible for environmental protection activities. The Construction Council of the Municipality
conducts a case-by-case review and sets requirements for the environmental assessment (EA) that are
conducted by local specialized firms. The investor is responsible for the EA. Under the ongoing
Bank-financed project (EIP I), project staff reviewed the environmental issues during the selection of
individual projects and is monitoring identified mitigation measures as well as achieved environmental
effects. While the current laws and capacity, both at the Ministry and local level, is assessed as
sufficient, institutional arrangements and capacity, after the territorial reform has been completed, is
difficult to assess at this point of the project design. The project team will re-assess the capacity before
project appraisal.

No land acquisition is expected. Renovation activities would be conducted inside educational
establishments, and on parcels belonging to these establishments. If the focus is on rehabilitation,
impacts in the form of chance architectural finds and removal of small encroachments from public
right-of-ways are expected to be minor. The project team plans to build in mechanisms (Policy
Framework) to deal with these in the Operations Manual.

During the Safeguards Consultation Meeting, the Social team noted that the project does not foresee land
acquisition, and that all renovation activities would be inside educational establishments and on land
already owned by these establishments. The Project team rightly plans to build in mechanisms in the
Operations Manual to deal with chance architectural finds, but the review meeting has determined that
the O.P on Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) is not triggered as rehabilitation will be largely limited to
insulation, setting up new heating systems, electricity repairs etc.

In addition, concerns were raised regarding stakeholder participation and equity. The team will discuss
possibilities of including issues related to staekholder participation in the TORs of the proposed project
preparation studies.

                                                         5
                                                                                                        ISDS



II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

N/A

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

No potential long-term impacts are envisaged at the present time.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

To ensure compliance with applicable safeguard policies, namely environmental, the Ministry of
Education (MES), responsible for implementation of the Project, would include environmental criteria
within a set of eligibility criteria for participating sub-projects and, when appraising the proposed
sub-projects, would screen them for environmental impact. Environmental assessment, either
full-fledged or limited, would be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Latvian laws.
Energy savings from the sub-projects are expected to produce financial savings that would be reinvested
in education. Each Municipality or Novad applying for financing under the Project would prepare the
plan for such reinvestment that would include environmental aspects.

In order to ensure proper handling and disposal of materials containing asbestos during project
implementation, requirements for bidders to present how they plan to protect their staff and others
present at the site against influence of asbestos and how they are going to dispose of it in the cases when
it is identified, would be included in the bidding documents. There could be a concern related to
renovation of laboratories. However, no such projects have been identified at this stage. Once these are
identified, environmental risks and a plan on how to mitigate them would also be identified
The implementation arrangements, including procedures to identify environmental impact and mitigation
measures for ensuring full consideration of environmental safeguards, would be described in the
Operational Manual (OM). The OM would also spell out needs for staff training on how to screen
sub-projects for environmental aspects, as well as review EAs and ensure that mitigation measures are
included in the contracts for project implementation. The role of project stakeholders would also be
described. The proposed project will build up on the existing capacity of PMU and MES. The ongoing
project was rated "C" category at the time of approval. And while the responsibility for environmental
issues remained mostly with the municipalities, PMU activities also included those dealing with
environmental aspects. Strengthening of PMU capacity for environmental screening and assessment
through training is envisaged to ensure full compliance with the environmental safeguard policies.



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

While no criteria and methodology for selection of sub-projects has been decided at this stage of
project preparation, the proposed project envisages wide participation both at the
Municipal/Novads level as well as the regional and project management level. At the sub-project
identification stage, the Project management would ensure a promotion and information campaign
to get interest at the local level. The Municipalities/Novads would discuss needs for the

                                                       6
                                                                                                        ISDS



renovation projects in light of their priorities with local communities and would investigate their
capacity and institutional arrangements for identifying, preparing and implementing the projects.
During preparation local communities would collaborate with technical specialists on assessing
the environmental impact of the sub-projects and incorporating appropriate mitigation measures.
The implementation stage would involve local authorities and communities in the management
and supervision of the project. Once the project has been implemented, they would monitor
achieved effects and results and report to the PMU. The PMU would be responsible for overall
assessment of the Project with regard not only to its direct impact, such as achieved
environmental improvement through decreased emissions or improved hygienic conditions, but
also indirect ones such as increased local capacity, participation and organization, attitude and
local government relations. These factors would contribute to ensure sustainability of the project
activities. The new project would follow the experience of the ongoing project, in terms of public
consultation in the identification and preparation of projects under the local government bodies.



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[X] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               1/30/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           2/27/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            3/19/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure

                                                    7
                                                                                                    ISDS



Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ana Maria Jeria                                    June 12, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                           June 11, 2003
Sector Manager/Director              Annette Dixon                                      June 12, 2003
Comments
Cleared by Maureen McLaughlin, Sector Manager, ECSHD

