Report No. 23579
Report No: I074042 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/23/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LEBANON         Project ID: P074042
Project: BA'ALBECK WATER AND WASTEWATER PROJECT           Task Team Leader: Mohammed
Benouahi
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 29, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m): 39.52
Bank Approval: May 2, 2002       IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF     Sector: WY - Other Water Supply & Sanitation
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The major development objectives of the proposed Ba'albeck Water and
Wastewater Project-BWWP (the project) include:
(a) developing and strengthening the capacity of the Ba'albeck Hermel
Water and Irrigation Authority (BHWIA) and the Zahle and Chamsine Water
Authorities (ZWA and CWA);
(b) improving the access of the customers of the Ba'albeck Hermel Water
and Irrigation Authority (BHWIA) to satisfactory water supply and
wastewater services;
(c) involving the private sector in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of the water and wastewater facilities; and
(d) rationalizing the use of water through the introduction of water
meters.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would consist of the following five (5) components:
1. Institutional Development. This includes the provision of a Technical
Support Unit (TSU) for the BHWIA, ZWA and CWA, as well as training
activities that aim at improving the capabilities of the water authorities
to design, develop and implement public-private partnership in the water
and wastewater sectors.
2. Improving and increasing service coverage for water supply. This
includes the following:
Implementation of house connections corresponding to 2500 service
connections at US$500 per connection. The Phase-I house connections serve
about 4,500 consumers for the following villages : Nabi Chit, Serrain
Fawka, Serrain Tahta, Serrain Gharbieh, Hellaniye, Chimiye, Sifri, Haouch
Nabi, Al Khodr and Khraibeh.
Operation and Maintenance of the Phase-I house connections and all water
facilities including the newly added distribution lines. This is
equivalent to 10t of the value of the capital investment made under the
house connections and the additional distribution lines (US$2,300,000), in
addition to 10t x works completed under the ERRP located within the
Phase-I area (US$6,700,000).



Construction of additional water distribution lines that represent 15 km
of HDPE pipes with all their related fittings and accessories including
the connections to the already executed network for the same villages as
above. The average price of the meter is US$70 (around US$1,050,000).
Construction of the house connections for all villages which are not
included in Phase 1. This amount covers the construction of 13,500
service connections at a unit rate of US$500 (US$6,750,000).
O&M for transmission pipelines (49 km) with diameters varying between 80
mm and 350 mm, boreholes (14 No.), reservoirs (10 No.) with a capacity
varying between 150 and 600 cu.m. and electromechanical works consisting
of 15 pumping station and their related chlorination stations. O&M equal
to 10t of the above-mentioned capital investment (US$9,000,000).
3. Improving and increasing service coverage for wastewater collection.
This consists of the following activities:
Construction of wastewater network to cover Ba'albeck city and the
surround, i.e, Douris, Ain Bordai, Iaat, Tel Abiad at a cost of US$90 per
meter with a total length of 160 km of pipeline with diameters varying
from 150 mm to 600 mm (around US$14,400,000).
Preparation of a storage area for the sludge effluent at the WWTP.
Tertiary treatment at the WWTP.
Extension of the effluent discharge pipe at the WWTP.
Measures to improve the engineering design of the WWTP.
4.   Consulting services.   This consists of preparation of tender
documents, conduction of a number of studies in the wastewater sector, as
well as monitoring and supervision.
5.   Service Contract.   The Service Contractor will be responsible for
operating and maintaining all water and wastewater facilities such as
transmission pipelines, boreholes, reservoirs electromechanical works such
as pumping and chlorination stations. The SC will be also responsible for
the O&M of the WWTP and the sewerage network and for implementing the
water and wastewater quality monitoring program.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area comprises the city of Ba'albeck and surrounding
communities.  The location of the project area is approximately 85 km
North East of Beirut. The city of Ba'albeck hosts an important
archeological site, which are the Roman temples. The proposed project
will not have any negative impacts on the historical site. On the
contrary, the project will have a positive environmental impact, as it
will eliminate the uncontrolled flows and discharges of wastewater into
the water channels flowing along and through the archeological site of
Ba'albeck.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The proposed project would finance the provision of house
- 2-



connections for water supply, the laying of wastewater collection
pipelines and potential water re-use for agriculture and/or irrigation.
These activities could not have irreversible environmental impacts. On
the contrary, their implementation should result in a number of positive
environmental and health benefits.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment OP. 4.01.
This OP is triggered because:
(a) An EA was not undertaken prior to the construction of the WWTP which
was funded under ERRP.
(b) Potential adverse impacts during the construction and implementation
of the water supply and wastewater networks.
(c) Potential adverse impacts on water reuse.
During project preparation, a post review was undertaken with respect to
the sitting, engineering design, technical and environmental performance
as well as any potential risks related to the construction or operation of
the WWTP (see Annex 16 - Attachment A7). A wastewater treatment plant
based on sludge activated process plus chlorination was constructed under
the ERRP for treating municipal wastewater. The capacity of the WWTP is
12 500 cu.m./day with the possibility of extension to 25 000 cu.m/day
after the year 2008. The treatment plant is designed to give a treated
effluent that would conform to the Lebanese standards with BOD = 35 mg/l
and suspended solids = 30 mg/l. A full EA was not performed prior to the
construction of the wastewater treatment plant. The project will mitigate
the environmental issues identified in the post review, and an EMP was
prepared for that purpose.
Potential environmental issues that require mitigation measures relate to:
(i) disturbance during construction including dust, noise, vibration,
access restriction, closure of roads and increased traffic; (ii) safety
- 3 -



hazard from construction activities; and (iii) inappropriate disposal of
excavated materials and construction debris. These environmental issues
will be minimized through appropriate mitigation measures, which are
normal construction operation practices. Requirements for the works to be
performed following specific provisions in the EMP and good construction
practices are included in the contract documents for civil works.
Other issues that will require special attention during the operation of
the project are: (i) monitoring and control of the water quality source
being used for water supply; (ii) monitoring and control of the operation
of the wastewater collection and of the existing treatment facility; (iii)
monitoring the re-use of the treated effluent and sludge from the
treatment plant; and (iv) adopting adequate guidelines for the re-use of
treated effluent for irrigation purposes.
The project through the implementation of the EMP is not anticipated to
have significant negative environmental effects and will pose no risk to
human health. The project will not entail any expansion of existing
structures or construction of new structures. Civil works will
predominantly entail laying of water and wastewater pipelines, which
include pavement demolition, trench excavation, pipe laying, trench
filling and pavement reinstatement. All works will be executed within the
premises of existing facilities or within the right of way of public
streets. The project will not affect any known archeological or
historical site or any critical natural habitats, nor it will affect
indigenous people.
Cultural Property. The construction of sewerage lines within Ba'albeck
Municipality, a World Heritage archaeological site, raises the possibility
of chance archaeological finds. The extent of the area of the old Roman
town that would be most likely to be affected has recently been mapped by
Italian technical assistance. During project preparation, archeological
surveys were conducted to investigate potential risks to known
archeological sites and to identify areas where there is potential for
finding archeological remains. The survey indicated that no water or
wastewater pipelines are intersecting visible archeological remains.
However, there is possibility that archeological remains be discovered
during excavation. Areas with archeological potential were delineated and
will be included in the contract documents. Moreover, chance finding
procedures were developed to address the management of unknown
archeological materials that may be encountered during the course of the
construction activities and will be incorporated in the construction
contracts. The Department of Antiquities will be notified in advance of
the schedule of works, an archeologist of the Department of Antiquities
will be present during construction in areas with archeological potential
and the contractor will be explicitly bound by the chance finds clauses
that have been prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement. The preceding ERRP involved land expropriation
by CDR of portions of some 200 properties, of which all that were under
private ownership have been fully compensated according to the provisions
of the Lebanese law of expropriation. No physical relocation or economic
activities were involved. The sites were physically visited and the
documentary evidence was reviewed by a Bank social scientist in July
2001. A detailed report presenting and summarizing the situation
(including areas expropriated and amounts of compensation awarded) was
provided to the Bank by CDR in November 2001. Compensation awarded, done
- 4 -



by independent judicial commission, has been judged to be a fair
reflection of prevailing replacement value and therefore to meet Bank
standards. In a few individually identified cases (because of the death
of the owner, owner's absence from the country, failure to respond to
notification, or failure to provide satisfactory evidence of title) some
owners have not yet collected their compensation.
Wherever possible the proposed works have been located (and exact location
adjusted as necessary) to maximize siting on pubic land and minimize the
impact on private property. One hundred plots will be partially
expropriated under this project through the excision of 3 m strips to
allow the gravity sewerage network to be laid. Expropriation would be by
Ministerial decree. The Consultant has already submitted the relevant
expropriation files to CDR. The latter is expected to review and process
the files by the end of November 2001. The Council of Ministers' approval
and the issuing of the Ministerial Decree (which is a condition for
effectiveness) is expected by February 2002. The socio-economic impact of
acquisition can be easily determined from comparable works already
undertaken in the region, and is minimal. Where private property will
have to be expropriated, it is almost invariably barren and uncultivable
land away from immediate settlement, and does not involve any relocation
of residences or displacement of economic activities. Land compensation
amounts and rates cannot be known in advance of the expropriation process,
because judges have absolute discretion, but there are ample precedents
and local knowledge to permit estimation that full and fair prior
compensation will be paid. Land acquisition procedures require prior and
public notification, full prior compensation by independent adjudication
and right of appeal against the amount of award by either party. The
availability of funds is now a prior requirement for CDR to initiate the
process of expropriation.
A Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared before appraisal and a
detailed list of plots to be expropriated will be provided to the Bank.
Once the expropriation process is completed and compensation is paid, the
Bank would give no objection for disbursement for actual works to
commence. Based on this analysis, the project is expected to comply fully
with the requirements of OD 4.30 in respect of land expropriation.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Potential cumulative impacts could result from:
(a) Change in right of ways as a result of archeological findings.
(b) Treated effluents could reach the Al-Assi River during the winter.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
(a) In case archeological remains are found, construction will be stopped
and changes in right of ways will be undertaken;
(b) Wastewater effluents will be monitored for water quality purposes. In
- 5 -



case the BOD, COD, TSS levels will be higher than those in Al-Aassi River,
the water effluents will be discharged into the drainage canal as not to
reach Al-Aassi River.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmental Assessment (EA) report was prepared and an EMP was
developed and will be implemented as part of the project. In addition to
the project components that are financed by the project, the EMP covers
the exiting water supply sources and wastewater treatment facility.
For the construction phase, the EMP requires the contractor responsible
for the civil works to address the environmental concerns. The contractor
would be required to keep work sites clean, minimize noise and dust, and
restore the site to the original state after construction. The contractor
would be also requested to apply chance find procedures in case unknown
archeological materials are encountered during the course of the
construction activities. The BHWIA will have to supervise the contractor
and to ensure that he is implementing the mitigation measures adequately.
With respect to Cultural Property, chance find procedures were developed
and will be applied by the contractor. The Department of Antiquities will
be notified in advance of the schedule of works, an archeologist of the
Department of Antiquities will be present during construction in areas
with archeological potential, and the contractor will be explicitly bound
by the chance find clauses that have been prepared.
During the operation phase, a series of environmental monitoring
activities will be executed by the Service Contract and the BHWIA, which
will include:
Quality and Quantity of Water Supply: The laboratory analyses of the
various water sources that were conducted in November 2001 confirmed the
adequacy of these sources for drinking water supply. The likelihood of
water quality degradation and the provision of poor quality water are very
small. However, water quality testing should be conducted regularly at
the water sources (springs and wells), the reservoirs and in the
distribution network. It would be the responsibility of the Service
Contract to provide the necessary laboratory equipment, to take samples
and conduct the necessary analyses. The Service Contract should also
conduct regular maintenance of the system to avoid any contamination, over
abstraction of ground water, leakage and illegal connections. Training
workshops will be provided to the Service Contract, BHWIA, and
Municipalities on water quality testing and analysis. Municipalities will
be also trained to alert BHWIA and the Service Contract of any changes in
water quality, which would trigger an immediate water test.
The water supply sources consist of six water springs (Ain Dardara, Nabaa
loujouj, Chaghour, Ed Delbe, Sbah and Sbat) and 23 wells. The water
balance for the study area was prepared on the basis of the population
figures (246,000 for the year 2000 and 403,000 for the year 2015), the
water demand 34,452 cum/d and 54,173 cum/d for the years 2000 and 2015
respectively) and the yield of springs and wells (ref. Annex 16 -
Attachment A4). The water balance indicates that the total available
resources (springs and wells) exceed the water supply demand of the
project area for the year 2015. The Service Contract will conduct regular
- 6 -



control and monitoring of the quantities of water being extracted.
Discharge of Treated Effluent: Treated effluent will be either discharged
into an open ditch or will be re-used for irrigation purposes. The
existing outfall from the treatment plant, an 800 mm diameter pipeline in
which treated wastewater flows by gravity around 1.2 km, discharges into
an open ditch. Manholes have been installed along the outfall to enable
pumping of the treated effluent for irrigation purposes.     To avoid any
environmental and health impacts that might arise from the discharge of
the treated effluent, the outfall will be extended 1.5 km and will
discharge into a drainage channel that leads to Al-Assi River that is
located around 25 km from the discharge point of the treated effluent.
Moreover, the water quality in the drainage channel will be continuously
monitored by the Service Contract to ensure that no pollution is arising
from the discharge of treated effluent.
Treated Effluent Quality: The design of the existing wastewater treatment
plant allows the production of a good quality treated effluent that
complies with the World Bank standards (Pollution Prevention and Abatement
Handbook) for discharge into receiving water bodies. However in view of
water scarcity and the high demand for irrigation water in the project
area, there is a great possibility that treated effluent would be re-used
for irrigation purposes. To avoid any health impacts that might arise
from the re-use of treated effluent, the following activities will be
implemented: (i) continuous monitoring of the treated effluent to ensure
that it complies with World Bank and WHO standards (i.e the World Bank
Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook and WHO guidelines for the
Reuse of Wastewater) will be conducted by the Service Contract; (ii)
guidelines for the re-use of treated wastewater will be developed with the
assistance of a consultant and in close coordination with concerned
ministries, the guidelines will be complemented with soil analysis to
identify the type of crops that can be cultivated and irrigated with
treated effluent; (iii) training workshops on treated effluent re-use will
be provided to all concerned stakeholders; (iv) awareness campaigns will
be conducted and Arabic pamphlets will be distributed to all farmers,
highlighting the adverse health and public safety impacts resulting from
the use of treated effluent; and (v) filters for the removal of nematodes
will be installed incase monitoring of the treated effluent indicate the
presence of nematodes
Use of Dried Sludge: Dried sludge will be used by farmers as soil
conditioner or fertilizer. Before distributing or selling the sludge,
regular analysis will be carried out to ensure that it complies with Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and WHO guidelines for the use of
sludge in agriculture including the limit of less than one intestinal
nematode egg per 100 gm of dry solids. In addition to the sludge
treatment processes that have been included in the existing treatment plan
(thickening, aerobic digestion, sludge dewatering and lime stabilization),
the project will finance the construction of sludge drying beds for
one-year storage period to ensure that the sludge will be free of
nematodes. Moreover, national guidelines for sludge re-use would be
developed in coordination with line ministries and concerned stakeholders,
taking into consideration the results of the soil analysis that will be
conducted under the proposed project and the identified types of crops
that could be cultivated and irrigated with treated effluent. These
guidelines would set out good standards of practice and monitoring and
-7 -



define roles and responsibilities. Training workshops on re-use of
treated sludge will be also provided to all concerned stakeholders.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Throughout the preparation of the project, the technical, financial,
environmental and social issues associated with the project were discussed
in meetings attended by design consultants, contractors, representatives
of the Municipalities, BHWIA and various other stakeholders. The common
view held was that the Project should be implemented as soon as possible
without further delays. The farmers of the project area emphasized the
need to provide proper irrigation storage and distribution of the treated
effluent. They welcomed the use of treated sludge as soil conditioner.
Following the preparation of the project and the draft EA, a public
meeting was held in Ba'albeck on November 2, 2001 and was attended by the
environmental committee of the municipality and representatives of
environmental NGOs. The primary concern was that the project should be
implemented in an environmentally acceptable manner. High quality
construction, the need to minimize environmental impacts that could arise
during the construction phase and the proper maintenance of the water and
wastewater networks were expressed by all attendants. The re-use of
treated effluent for agriculture irrigation was also requested.
Representatives of environmental NGOs indicated that the provision of
wastewater collection will greatly improve the environmental conditions,
yet at present a large area of agriculture lands is being irrigated with
raw sewage and will loose its source of irrigation once the wastewater
collection network is constructed. Therefore, it would be necessary to
provide theses agricultural lands with treated effluent as an alternative
source of irrigation.
The EA and the environmental post-review of the exiting wastewater
treatment plant will be disclosed prior to appraisal in the BHWIA, at the
Bank's country office in Lebanon, the library of the CDR, the Ministry of
Environment and the Bank's Infoshop.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/15/2002
-8-



Date of "in-country" disclosure 2/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop 2/15/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Mohammed Benouahi        11/20/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Concepcion Esperanza Del
Castillo/Person/World Bank       01/22/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Sherif Kamel F. Arif/Person/World Bank
01/10/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     01/10/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Emmanuel Forestier       01/22/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-9-



