ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                AWorld Frec of Povorty
AfWShop
Ilic W:.wld Kuk
Report No AC68
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/12/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LEBANON                                 Project ID: P050529
Project: CULTURAL HERITAGE AND URBAN             Task Team Leader: Mohammed D. E. Feghoul
DEVELOPMENT
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 28, 2002      IBRD Amount ($m): 31.50
Bank Approval: April 17, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF                             Sector: Other industry (30%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (20%); Central
Status: Lending                                 government administration (20%); Roads and
highways (20%); General water; sanitation and flood
protection sector (10%)
Theme: Other urban development (P); Municipal
governance and institution building (P); Civic
engagement; purticipation and community driven
development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The proposed Cultural Heritage and Urban Development project (CHUD) has two key development
objectives: (a) to create the conditions for increased local economic development and enhanced quality of
life in the historic centers of five main secondary cities; and (b) to improve the conservation and
management of Lebanon's built cultural heritage.
These development objectives apply to five key secondary cities (Baalbeck, Byblos, Saida, Tripoli, and
Tyre) which still show serious effects of damage, decay, poverty and economic stagnation resulting from
the civil war. The cultural heritage assets of these five cities are of such outstanding worth that they must
be integrated into municipal development plans and strategies for local economic growth and poverty
alleviation. The CHUD objectives therefore reflect the recognition of the intrinsic value of built cultural
heritage and its importance as an asset for sustainable economic and social development. By setting the
two interrelated objectives the project aims to harvest the economic value of cultural heritage, capture the
synergy between cultural heritage and urban development, and integrate cultural heritage preservation,
local economic development, and poverty alleviation. It will also raise the awareness and appreciation of
local inhabitants of the value of cultural heritage.



2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project has three components: (a) rehabilitation of historic city centers and urban
infrastructure improvements; (b) archeological sites conservation and management; and (c) institutional
strengthening.
E      Component I - Rehabilitation of Historic City Centers and Urban Infrastructure
Improvements. These activities will be carried out in and around the old towns of the five
project cities of Baalbeck, Byblos, Sa'da, Tripoli and Tyre. This component includes: (a)
upgrading of and improvements to public spaces; (b) conservation and adaptive reuse of
monuments and historic buildings; (c) support to cultural heritage related productive and
commercial activities; (d) support to the rehabilitation of the housing stock; (e)
enforcement of city center zoning regulations; (f) traffic and parking improvements for
historic centers; (g) protection and landscaping of coastal and green areas; and (h)
studies for urban redevelopment adjacent to historical cores. In the case of Tripoli and
Tyre, they will be implemented in conjunction with a parallel project addressing the
deficiencies of water and wastewater infrastructure.
L      Component 2 -Archeological Sites Conservation and Management. These activities will
take place primarily in Baalbeck and Tyre, two of the main archeological sites of
Lebanon, both inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage list. Additional activities will
take place in Tripoli. This component includes the following complementary activities:
(a) research and documentation; (b) conservation of surfaces and structures; (c) site
presentation to visitors; d) site management; and e) further archaeological studies.
o      Component 3 -Institutional Strengthening This component includes the following
complementary technical assistance and capacity building activities: (a) management of
historic centers by municipalities and DGU; (b) strengtheniing municipal support to local
economic development and cornmunications; (c) reform  of the cultural heritage
institutional and regulatory framework; (d) restructuring and strengthening of the DGA;
and (e) CDR project management.
Components:
1. Rehabilitation of Historic City Centers and Urban
Infrastructure Improvements
2. Archeological Sites Conservation and Management
3. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will assist the government of Lebanon to tackle the most pressing conservation and
management issues on its 2 biggest archaeological sites of Baalbeck and Tyre, inscribed on the UNESCO
World Heritage List, and representing a serious challenge from the point of view of archaeological works
and management. Targeted urban rehabilitation activities will also be supported in the old towns of
Baalbeck, Byblos, Saida, Tripoli, and Tyre. The archeological sites have had a very low level of upkeep
and overall management for over a quarter of a century. Valuable archeological remains are left exposed
to ambient effects and unregulated human presence, which together with time accelerate deterioration of
unearthed foundations and mosaics. The famous Qala'a archeological site in Baalbeck receives around
100, 000 visitors a year who wander freely on the fragile site. The still standing structures of the temples



3
ISDS
represent significant visitor safety hazards. Being integral parts of the urban areas, the sites are
threatened by wastewater that, in case of Baalbeck, pours into the archeological area untreated. As a
general rule, modern constructions and infrastructure are encroaching on the existing archeological sites
and are expanding over the areas that are still held as archeological reserves for future study. The
municipality of Tripoli has 128 buildings which are officially designated as national monuments, out of
which 75% are in the specially designated historic zone. Unfortunately, listing and even designation of
the monuments or groups of buildings have not produced a desirable effect, and most protected
monuments continue to be in unsatisfactory condition, either closed to public or squatted and used for
storage. Old town centers, such as in Saida and Tripoli despite rich history and unique identities, are
witnessing rapid degradation of the built stock and urban environment. Due to lack of context-sensitive
urban regulations, construction activity in the historical centers leads to the loss of their unique character.
Unregulated replacement of old urban fabric by modern constructions, street-widening, together with
collapsing old buildings is eroding the stock of heritage buildings and changes the traditional use of
space within the historic areas. The deplorable condition of the built stock is a reflection of the
underlying socio-economic problems of the historic urban spaces. Lack of economic opportunity for the
local residents generates a vicious cycle of progressive impoverishment and degradation of the once most
vibrant and culture-rich urban areas. Given their complex street pattern and marginal role in urban
economies, city centers also suffer from lack of adequate environmental amenities, such as sanitation,
drainage, solid waste management. Some archeological sites, such as the Roman quarry in Baalbeck, are
used as solid waste dump-yards. Fragile coastal zones, rich with marine archeological remains, like in
Tyre, are exposed to dumping and illegal uses. Priority environmental measures include: land use
planning sensitive to protection of the natural setting of archeological sites; creation of green spaces and
public parks and gardens, coastal zone treatment in old port cities; traffic management; and waste and
waste water management.
Very little economic benefit is derived presently by local residents from the rich cultural assets that are
found within their communities. Currently, the benefits of tourism to Lebanon are either captured by
foreign tour operators, or by a small group of Beirut-based agencies and hotels. Municipalities are not
able to program and implement investments that would create jobs and ensure an additional source of
revenues coming from fees, property and professional taxes levied on rehabilitated and re-used historic
properties. Historic towns still host a number of traditional productive and commercial activities that go
hand in hand with the built environment and that are characteristic of the souqs: spices, perfumes, soaps,
jewelry, pottery, sweets, fabrics, furniture and the like. However, as the commercial life of the city
centers becomes progressively impoverished, such activities tend to be crowded out by the resale of banal
imported commercial goods.
Lack of green areas, or predominance of historic buildings that can not, unless rehabilitated, host modern
communal services, like medical facilities, retail banking, cinemas, cultural centers or even sports
facilities, reduce the quality of life of the local population, and especially women and girls.Old town
centers, despite rich history and unique identities, are witnessing rapid degradation of the built stock and
urban environment. Due to lack of context-sensitive urban regulations, construction activity in the
historical centers leads to the loss of their unique character. Unregulated replacement of old urban fabric
by modern constructions, street-widening, together with collapsing old buildings is eroding the stock of
heritage buildings and changes the traditional use of space within the historic areas. The deplorable
condition of the built stock is a reflection of the underlying socio-economic problems of the historic
urban spaces. Lack of economic opportunity for the local residents generates a vicious cycle of
progressive impoverishment and degradation of the once most vibrant and culture-rich urban areas.



4
ISDS
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is expected to improve environmental conditions in the five project sites by
promoting the development of sustainable and environmentally sound tourism. It directly addresses the main
environmental problems of air pollution, sewage overflows, visual intrusions and vehicular congestion
through land use planning in protecting the natural setting of archeological sites; creation of green spaces
and public parks and gardens; coastal zone treatment in old port cities; traffic management; and waste and
waste water management.



5
ISDS
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               * Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Safeguard Issues Given their complex street pattern and marginal role in urban
economies, city centers suffer from lack of adequate environmental amenities, such as sanitation,
drainage, solid waste management. Priority environmental measures include: land use planning sensitive
to protection of the natural setting of archeological sites; creation of green spaces and public parks and
gardens, coastal zone treatment in old port cities; traffic management; and waste and waste water
management.
The primary adverse environmental impacts are associated with the construction period. In addition,
there would be temporary impacts associated with the re-routing of traffic around the construction areas
during the rehabilitation activities in the various cities. These impacts can be minimized by careful
planning of the staging used for construction and rerouting of traffic, careful supervision of construction
activities and use of environmental monitoring to support management decisions by the CDR and other
parties. Sihce one of the main objectives of the CHUD project is the attraction of a larger number of
visitors/tourists, it is expected that increased solid waste and wastewater generation rates will occur.
Various projects/programs are underway in the involved cities. The capacity of these projects/programs
once completed will easily accommodate the increased rates associated with the implementation of the
CHUD project. Another potential negative environmental impact during the operation phase relates to
increased vehicle-induced emissions associated with the attraction of larger numbers of visitors/tourists.
These emissions are best mitigated through the improved traffic circulation and parking management in
and around old city centers anticipated through the CHUD project.
Involuntary Resettlement: While every effort has been made to minimize displacement and to upgrade the
areas with the populations in situ, some displacement cannot be avoided, especially where the integrity of
the site or technical requirements apply. In particular, interventions to improve urban infrastructure and
those to rehabilitate historic city centers, especially that of housing clusters and public spaces, may
require temporary displacement or involuntary resettlement of people and businesses. Almost all are
small in scale, and all will be dealt with as development interventions. A Resettlement Policy Framework



6
ISDS
and a Resettlement Action Plan for one site have been prepared. Other Resettlement Action Plans will be
completed at appropriate phases during project implementation.
The following subprojects will or may require involuntary resettlement:
(a)    urban infrastructure improvements to manage vehicular access to historic centers, construction of
parking and commercial facilities in Baalbeck, Byblos, Saida, Tripoli and Tyre;
(b)    archeological site renovation in Tyre includes the removal and relocation of an illegal
construction that is infringing on the site;
(c)    the rehabilitation of the Khan El Askar in Tripoli will require involuntary settlement of up to 60
families. (These families were temporarily housed there by the municipality after they lost their
homes in the disastrous 1958 Abu Ali floods and have yet to be appropriately housed. The
project enables the municipality to fulfill its long standing intention to rehouse the very poor
families and businesses in modern affordable social housing immediately nearby. This will
enable the Khan, a building of considerable historical value and intrinsic aesthetic worth, to be
converted into a local visitor and commercial center as part of the economic and physical
rehabilitation of the medina. Phase I of this sub-project is described in a RAP prepared
concurrently with a policy framework);
(d)    rehabilitation of the medinas of Tripoli, Tyre and Saida (especially the rehabilitation of public
spaces and housing clusters).
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
TI.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Improved quality of life for residents who obtain better housing, preservation of cultural heritage sites,
improved tourism, environmental conditions and economic activities.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
IL.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Project preparation included preparation of an environmental assessment, a Resettlement Policy
Framework and a Resettlement Action Plan. The environmental assessment contains an Environmenital
Management Plan with a special cultural heritage component to address issues related to cultural
property. Implementation of the environmental management plan and resettlement action plan would be
an integral part of the project supervision process, and environmental and social specialists from the
Bank would participate in supervision missions, mid-term review and the ICR to monitor these
implementation activities.
The direct involvement of the Directorate General of Antiquities (DGA) in the implementation of this
project, and the project's central objectives of cultural property preservation and enhancement, will
ensure ample compliance with Bank policy
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



7
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
a. Primary beneficiaries and other affected groups:
[x] Name and describe groups, how involved, and what they have influenced
[ ] Not applicable (describe why participatory approach not applicable with these groups)
An extensive consultative stakeholder analysis was conducted during project preparation. Key
stakeholders are local municipalities, the local populations in and around key heritage sites (segmented in
different interest groups) ; key government ministries and departments responsible for urban planninlg,
heritage conservation and tourism; and a range of interested NGOs and civil society organizations.
Except in one location (SaYda), there is no organized forum or structure outside the project for these
stakeholders to participate; the key institutional forums will be set up at the level of the five
municipalities where key stakeholder units will be represented in project steering committee activities.
Project investments comprise elements that respond to the interests of each stakeholder (heritage
conservation; municipal development; upgrading and economic stimulus activities for local citizens and
NGOs); and the municipalities have an intrinsic interest in building local bases of support.
The only practical method of incorporating these stakeholder interests is in the project context at the
level of the municipality concerned. The municipalities consult with stakeholders on a regular basis,
althouglh the quality of this consultation varies from place to place. A potential site-specific stakeholder
issue arises between the interests of landlords and tenants/occupants in the renovation of privately owned
rented buildings. These issues were highlighted in the SA and care will be taken not to promote
investments that would result in the economic displacement of poor people to their disadvantage.
b. Other key stakeholders:
[x] Name and describe groups, how involved, and what they have influenced.
[ ] Not applicable (describe why participatory approach not applicable with these groups)
Consultations were held with other key stakeholders such as NGOs, the hotel industry, university
departments etc. These fall broadly into three groups: the conservationists; the tourism developers, and
other developers. Major stakeholders will be incorporated into project management at national and
municipal level, and stakeholder analysis at national and local levels will be included in project
preparation and implementation.
Stakeholder interests cover a wider range of project issues, including the conservation of cultural
heritage, its restoration and presentation, cultural heritage tourism development; the enhancement of
secondary economic benefits, and the integration into the municipal development planning process. The
many stakeholders in cultural heritage and tourism development include government ministries and
institutions; municipalities; non-governmental and voluntary organizations and prominent individual
citizens; teaching and research institutions; private sector and commercial institutions; local populations;
external agencies, both multilateral and bilateral, and other affected special interest groups (such as
property owners, tenants, the Sunni Waqf and small business owners).
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or



8
ISDS
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



9
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requiremtents
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          6/24/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            12/23/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               6/14/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/14/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            12/23/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Mohammed D. E. Feghoul                      03/25/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Hocine Chalal/Person/World Bank       03/25/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour/Person/World Bank  03/25/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif                    03/25/03
Sector Manager/Director:      Emmanuel Forestier                         03/25/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
| SEARCH  ~    EED5- - ACKJ__  SIre M AP



