ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Free al Poverty
* - LZ    .L2-       S'
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/03/2002                             24265
Section I - Basic Information                                   June 3, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: LEBANON                                  Project ID: P034038
Project: URBAN TRANSPORT DEVELOPMENT             Task Team Leader: Mohammed D. E. Feghoul
PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 15, 2000       IBRD Amount ($m): 65.00
Bank Approval: June 13, 2002                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF                              Sector: TU - Urban Transport
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: TRANSPORT
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's development objective is to provide the city of Beirut and the Greater Beirut Area (GBA) with
the basic institutional framework, which it now lacks, and critical investments needed to maximize the
efficiency of the existing urban transport infrastructure. These investments will provide the foundation for
future development of an efficient transportation system for the city and its metropolitan area.
Specifically, the project would seek to:
(a)    Improve traffic manage 'ent by supporting: (i) establishment of a Traffic Management Organization
(TMO), with intelligent transport system (ITS) capabilities, as an autonomous metropolitan agency to
monitor and control traific operations within the GBA; (ii) capacity building for traffic operations;
and (iii) installation of traffic signals and layout improvements for all significant intersectionls in the
GBA (about 200 intersections).
(b)    Regulate on-street parking in selected zones through: (i) capacity building in the area of parking
management; (ii) installation of pay-and-display parking meters, along with necessary parking
signage to control aboui: 6,500 on-street parking spaces; and (iii) development of appropriate
regulations, pricing, an(d institutional arrangements for on-street parking control. Concession
arrangements will be agreed between the Traffic Management Organization and the GBA
municipalities for operating their on-street parking programs.
(c)    Improve traffic flow along seven major corridors (Beirut entrances) by financing the construction of
grade separation facilities at 19 highly congested intersections.
(d)    Improve transport planning and organize public transport services through: (i) transport planninig
studies to fomiulate an integrated urban transport development strategy; and (ii) capacity building Hi
the areas of regulation and organization of public transport services.



2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would consist of the following five components: (a) traffic management program; (b) parking
improvement program; (c) corridor improvement program; (d) technical assistance to the Ministry of Public
Works and Transport for capacii'y building, transport planning, public transport regulation, air quality
management and transport feasibility studies; and (e) project management.
(a)    The main objective of the traffic management program is to improve the effective capacity and
performance of existing infrastructure through the use of ITS technologies to minimize traffic stops
and delays, respond to traffic incidents, and provide information to road users. E fficient traffic
management systems would reduce congestion, transport emissions and traffic accidents. This
component would include (i) establishment of an autonomous metropolitan organization - the TMO,
to manage traffic within the Greater Beirut Area; (ii) layout improvement works and installation of
traffic signals for all significant intersections in the GBA (about 200 intersections); (iii) installation
of a pilot video surveillance system using Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) at about 30 sites along
four corridors to pilot the use of freeway management systems and prepare plans to cover other
corridors in the future; (iv) establishment and equipping of a TMC to monitor and control traffic
operations through ITS technologies, (v) technical assistance and training services to build capacity
for traffic control operations and use of ITS technologies; and (vi) traffic enforcement equipment and
training services for the traffic police.
(b)    The objectives of the second component, the parking improvement program, are to increase capacity,
improve access to business, encourage the use of public transport services, and remove impediments
to smooth traffic flow. It would consist of (a) installation of about 580 pay-and-display multi-space
parking meters to control about 6,500 spaces under concession contracts with GBA municipalities;
and (b) technical assistance and training services to build capacity for parking management
operations and conduct public awareness campaigns.
(c)    The objectives of the third component, the corridor improvement program, are to increase capacity
along seven main highly congested corridors entering Beirut through grade separation at about 19
intersections. These intersections are grouped into two lists according to their priority. The first list
consists of 12 intersections, which have been appraised and are taken into account in the project's
cost estimate. This component includes implementation and monitoring of environmental mitigation
measures, adoption of special provisions for management of cultural property that may be uncovered
during construction, implementation of a Resettlement Action Plan covering a limited number of
households to be resettled, and land acquisition.
(d)    The fourth component c;onsists of technical assistance to strengthen the Ministry of Public Works
and Transporl's capacity in transport planning and regulation of public transport services. It would
(i) support engineering, transport economic, and environmental studies to assist in the formulation of
an urban transport strategy for the GBA; (ii) assist in updating and refining urban transport plans and
programs; (iii) support t:ransport feasibility studies; (iv) help regulate and organize public transport
services; (v) assist in developing an air quality management program for the GBA; and (vi) support
training activities.
(e)    The fifth component provides resources for overall project management, including technical
assistance services, and fees of local individual consultants to staff a Project Management Unit
(PMO), which would have overall project implementation responsibility; including environmenital
and social issues.



3
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Beirut urban area has an extensive history of human settlement and includes a wide range of
archaeological and historical sites. Such sites may exist buried under the intersections at which grade
separation improvements are planned. In order to address this concern, the environmental assessment,
consistent with the provisions of Operational Policy Note 11.03, "Cultural Property" contained an evaluation
of potential impacts to cultural heritage, which included site specific evaluation of potential risks, provisions
for archaeological investigations and monitoring during the construction phase and use of "archaeological
chance find" procedures in case significant materials are encountered. In order to address these issues,
which have been linked to the environmental assessment process, the Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) includes a special Cultural Heritage Component (EMP-CHC) that is described in Annex 12 of the
PAD. The Beirut urban area does not include any protected areas or critical natural habitats.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: The overall project lias been placed in environmental screening category "A". The proposed
components of the project have been individually reviewed and placed in environmental screening
categories on the basis of their potential impact: (a) Traffic Management and Transport Planning
Component (Category "C"; (b) Parking Improvement Program Component (Category "B"); (c) Corridor
Improvement Program (Category "A"); (d) Technical Assistance Component (Category "C") and (e) Project
Management Component (Category "C"). The primary environmental issues concern implementation of the
Corridor Improvement Program that will involve modifications of existing grade separation design at a
number of major intersections. The interventions under this component are the focus of the EMP and
EMP-CHC described above.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes C, No   ., TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes *No       TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes *No        TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   *Yes C) No    CTBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       C Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes    No   . TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 < Yes *No      lTBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           C' Yes * No     TBD
Projects in International Waterxways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        C- Yes * No   C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obiain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental impacts. The project is classified as Environmental Category A. The environmental



4
ISDS
assessment found that the project will result in an overall improvement in urban environmental quality in
Greater Beirut as a result of reduced traffic congestion in the vicinity of major intersections and access
routes, and through complementary improvements in parking that will also improve overall traffic flow.
The primary benefits will come from reduced noise from vehicles, especially horns, lower emissions
from quicker-moving vehicles, and reduced light at street level in the evenings. The primary adverse
environmental impacts are associated with the construction period and are discussed in detail below. In
addition, there will be temporary impacts associated with the rerouting of traffic around the construction
areas. These impacts can be mitigated by careful planning of the staging used for construction and
rerouting of traffic, careful supervision of construction activities, and use of environmental monitoring to
support management decisions by the CDR and other parties.
The Environmental Assessment found that the greatest potential environmental impacts will occur during
the construction phase, particularly with respect to dust and noise emissions and from the temporary
rerouting of traffic. Impacts include the following:
(a) Construction impacts. Temporary impacts from the construction phase of the proposed project
include: (i) noise, dust, vibration and light from demolition and construction activities; (ii) disruption of
existing access roads during the construction process including noise and air quality impacts from vehicle
emissions; (iii) establishment of temporary construction sites at intersections; (iv) damage to structures
from dust and vibrations; and (v) improper disposal of waste oil and lubricants from construction
equipment. Other important impacts are damages tolandscaping in public areas, temporary alterations in
drainage patterns, and expansion of existing quarries for construction materials. Given the significant risk
that unrecorded buried archaeological sites may be encountered during the excavations required for grade
separation investments, an archaeological assessment was prepared. It includes mitigation and monitoring
measures and is discussed in Section E, below.
(b) Operational impacts. The primary operational impacts associated with the project include: (i) visual
intrusion of overpasses constructed at certain intersections to improve traffic flows; (ii) routine traffic
noise and vibrations in areas ad jacent to the improved intersections and their access corridors; (iii) air
quality impacts associated with emissions from trucks, buses and cars using the road; (iv) impacts
associated with landscape maintenance measures; and (v) localized impacts from routine road
maintenance activities.
Involuntary resettlement and land acquisition. The project is implemented in a densely developed
and inhabited urban environmenit not originally designed for modern traffic conditions, and subject to
some destruction and unplanned development and reconstruction during the war. The grade separation
component of this project requires a modest amount of land acquisition, demolition of structures, and
relocation of residents and economic activities. The project involves three types of impacts: a) the
resettlement of some 200 persons, owners or renters and their families, through either loss of residence or
relocation of small business locations (33), or both; and b) the expropriation by decree of a total of about
3.1 ha of land from more than 200 lots in the form of strips and edges for alignment, affecting 1,437
landowners (because of multiple ownerships, mostly of apartments). The impacts of land acquisition on
the great majority of these property owners is very minor because the land expropriated is on the property
margins and its value is distributed among many co-owners.
Cultural heritage. The safeguard issue is in respect only of chance finds. The Beirut urban area has a
long history of human settlement and includes a wide range of archaeological and historical sites. Such
sites may exist buried under the intersections at which grade separation improvements are planned.



ISDS
I.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The potential negative impacts descirbed above are not cumulative.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Given the highly urbanized nature of the project area, the UTDP is not anticipated to have significant
impacts from project-induced growth or land-use changes. More than 90 percent of all land in the vicinity
of the intersections and along their corridors has been built and is largely occupied by inedium and
high-rise commercial and reside.ntial buildings and, at some locations, industrial facilities and
warehouses.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The analysis of alternatives for the UTDP was conducted at three levels: (a) a strategic analysis (b)
Project component alternatives; and (c) field-based site-specific design alternatives for the
grade-separations. (a) Strategic alternatives. The GBATP evaluated two contrasting scenarios of
transport patterns, which included a heavy mass transport network and a road-oriented network, and
proposed a compromise between the two to determine the components of the immediate, medium-term
and long-term action plans. The UTDP improvements in traffic management and parking will decrease
the level of congestion required to operate public transport, beyond service taxis, at an acceptable
level-of-service. The environmental assessment noted the importance of moving forward with the design
phase of the mass transit element in order to identify and obtain the land and right-of-ways required for
terminals, stations, and park-and-ride facilities. (b) Project component alternatives. All project
components were analyzed from an engineering, environmental, and social perspective. This analysis
supported the decision not to proceed with construction of the proposed underground parking garages
beneath established parks in central Beirut, which would have resulted in significant construction period
impacts. In the case of the parking facilities, the work focused on the identification of areas most
appropriate for on-street parking and selection of the metering approach. Grade separation investments
were evaluated for a range of potential sites and the type of structural changes that would be considered
for implementation at each location. In addition, an analysis was made of alternative communication
systems for use by the Traffic Management Center. (c) Site-specific alternatives. Analysis of
site-specific alternatives focused on proposed grade separation improvements at major intersections. The
focus of this analysis was the identification of measures that could minimize potential adverse
environmental impact during the construction and operation periods. Adopted alternatives focused on
changes in sequence of construction, modifications in the layout of structures, and adoption of design
revisions. These alternatives were discussed at the two national consultation meetings, Nvhich included
the use of questionnaires to assess views in a structured manner. They were also presented at local public
consultation meetings, during which design drawings were reviewed and changes proposed and discussed
with participants.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A. Environmental Management Plan. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared
by the CDR, in consultation wilh the Ministry of Environment. It has a special component for addressing
cultural heritage that was developed in consultation with the Directorate General of Antiquities (see
Section F below). Mitigation actions would focus on environmental supervision of the construction
contractors and actions to reduce traffic flow problems during the construction phase. The key mitigation



6
ISDS
activities of the EMP include: (El) Design phase. The detailed design process will finalize alignment of
roads and layout of grade separation improvements, including lighting at intersections and supporting
infrastructure. This process has incorporated final review of the designs by environmental specialists
working on the project team. Issues addressed through a highly interactive process between
environmental and engineering staff include: traffic routing schemes, air quality measures in open areas
and tunnels, technical measures for noise control, actions to reduce impacts of landscape and visual
intrusion, provisions for erosion control and drainage, and evaluation of options for proper disposal of
waste materials. Applicable health and safety laws, regulations, and procedures have been evaluated. (b)
Construction phase. Specific measures to reduce potential construction phase impacts will be
implemented through provision; in design and construction tenders, consideration of these issues in the
construction process, and performance monitoring by environmental consultants. Mitigation measures
include rerouting of traffic around sites and extended construction hours; technical interventions to
control air quality impacts, especially dust; actions to control noise from construction activities and
rerouted traffic; provisions for protection of existing vegetation; planting of greenbelts and use of
appropriate colors; erosion and water management; and clear guidelines for disposal of waste materials.
(c) Operational phase. The project will address operational impacts through a combination of carefully
detailed design approaches, increased enforcement of noise limits and, over the medium term, application
of vehicle standards, maintenance requirements and routine monitoring. The elements of the
Environmental Mitigation Plan are provided in the Project Implementation Plan.
Measures for construction contracts. The EMP includes special measures for construction tenders and
contracts: (a) Construction tenders. All construction contracts will include specific provisions concerning
environmental, health, and safely measures. The EMP includes detailed briefings of potential
construction contractors concerning their responsibilities to address these issues during a pre-tender
conference. These briefings wil I outline the specific provisions of the construction tender documents and
contracts. (b) Pre-tender conference. All pre-qualified contractors will be called to a pre-tender
conference at which environmental, health, and safety issues of special interest or concern will be
outlined. (c) Bid documents. To support the stipulations of the pre-tender conference, contract bid
documents will include specific requirements and procedures concerning environmental, health, and
safety issues. In addition, the set of final engineering drawings will identify areas that require special
measures due to their environmental sensitivity. Provisions will also be included concerning the proper
transport and disposal of demolition, excavation and construction wastes at authorized disposal sites. 14.
Environmental Monitoring Plan. The Environmental Monitoring Plan will be implemented by
consultants working under the CDR in coordination with the Ministry of Environment. Environmental
monitoring will undertaken during both the construction and operation phases to check the accuracy of
the impact analysis, evaluate efifectiveness of mitigation measures, respond to unanticipated
environmental impacts, and improve traffic management and environmental control based on monitoring
data. This will include provisions for: (a) Continuous monitoring. The monitoring plan will provide for
continuous monitoring, during the construction phase, of health and safety conditions at the work sites
and along the routes used for moving materials and personnel to and from the construction sites.
Measures will also be included to ensure that demolition, excavation, and construction waste is disposed
of at authorized sites.
(b) Quarterly monitoring. The rnonitoring plan will provide for air, noise, and water quality
measurements, which will be conducted on a quarterly basis to provide baseline and trend data to support
management decisions. It will also include collection of monitoring data on a quarterly basis for traffic,
landscape conditions, and vehicle and pedestrian accidents at intersections and traffic access routes as
appropriate. Monitoring will be undertaken in and adjacent to equipment and vehicle service areas and
fuel storage to reduce soil contamination and water pollution from improper management of waste
materials. (c) Provisions for site access. Regular and frequent site inspections will be required to permit



7
ISDS
effective monitoring of the contractor's compliance with applicable environmental, health and safety
guidelines, regulations and statutes, and contract specifications. For the EMP to be effective it will be
necessary, during the course of c,onstruction and operation, for environmental consultanis to have
guaranteed access to all sites, related to any project component, at all times. Provisions to allow this
access will be included in all contract documents and operating agreements. The Environmental
Monitoring Plan is included in the Project Implementation Plan.
Environmental Monitoring Reports. The consultant would prepare Environmental Monitoring Reports
on a quarterly basis as an element of the overall reporting for the project. Monthly reports on health and
safety monitoring, which will be summarized in the quarterly reports, will also be provided. These
reports should contain an overview of progress achieved in implementation of the EMP. They should also
note any areas of governmental and/or contractor non-compliance with the EMP and provide remarks on
the recommended actions to be taken to address these issues. The significance of any non-compliance
should also be noted. Copies of these reports should be sent to the CDR, the supervising engineer, and
the contractors for their action.
Estimated cost and implemen tation schedule for the EMP. The CDR and consultants, in coordination
with the Ministry of Environment, have prepared cost estimates for implementation of the EMP. A
separate budget has been prepaied for the EMP-CHC due to the number of actions required (see Section
E). In addition, the CDR and the consultants are preparing a comprehensive implementation schedule that
integrates the activities of the EMP into the overall schedule. The costs for implementation of the - 120 -.
environmental elements of the mnitigation plan during the design and construction phases have been
included in the cost estimates for these activities. During the operational phase, the costs of the
mitigation actions will be assumed by the municipalities in which the investments have been made, and
will be an element of their operation and maintenance budget. It is currently estimated that the quarterly
and continuous monitoring activities under the EMP for the construction phase will have a total cost of
about US$0.6 million. The monitoring will be carried out by the supervision consultant, who will be
commissioned for the overall supervision of corridor improvement. The supervision consultant will
perform the monitoring activities either directly or through subcontracting to qualified consultants. A
budget and schedule is provided in the Project Implementation Plan.
B. Involuntary Resettlement and Land Acquisition. A Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared
by CDR and cleared by the Bank. It uses prevailing local practices and institutions to the greatest
possible extent, supplemented with provisions to ensure compliance with Bank policy. Lebanese law
enshrines the principle of full and prior compensation for land and other assets expropriated in the public
interest and there are effective, judicially independent institutions to implement expropriation and
compensation. A social assessrnent examined the concerns, estimated losses and estimated compensation
of those affected and ascertained that compensation would be adequate for residential and business
relocation. However, a special provision of the law permits the taking of land for roads and highways
without monetary compensation with respect to the first 25 percent of the original lot area. This
provision is based on the presumption that the owner's compensation will come from the increased value
automatically accruing to the property as a result of the project. In the case of UTDP, it is accepted that
this latter provision cannot be fil-ily applied because the concerned properties have already benefited from
most of the value-added resulting from their being adjacent to long-established major roads. The
expropriations to adjust the right of way (ROW) in order to accommodate the works will not
automatically bring further value-added to adjacent properties, although in specific cases some value mav
accrue to the owners. With the exception of the owners of about 43 plots, all property owners who lose
assets through expropriation will receive equitable compensation for lost value under current
expropriation practice, and in the majority of cases the impacts are minor. The RAP details what this



8
ISDS
compensation would comprise and how it would be determined. However, some cases require individual
evaluation: in particular, the owiners of about 43 lots affected by expropriations that total over 10,000 m2
apparently risk significant loss tor which, within the existing expropriation mechanisms, the RAP has
adequate measures to ensure and verify that owners receive equitable compensation for their losses.
These measures are as follows:
(a)    Where the UTDP alignment decrees (or associated implementation of earlier decrees) result in
taking of any asset without automatic entitlement to compensation, the Expropriation
Committees shall estimate the impact of the expropriation on the owner and provide equitable
compensation for lost a,set value.
(b)    To enable the Expropriation Authority to undertake this work (see para 1), a ministerial decision
will place at its disposal the necessary additional expertise in land evaluation from the Ministry
of Finance or from other qualified sources.
(c)    The Expropriating Authority (CDR) will ensure the availability of funds sufficient for the
estimated level of compensation awarded. For each intersection, the Expropriating Authority
will prepare a report that will document in a format agreed upon with the Bank the details of
expropriation and compensation awarded in respect of each lot. Every intersection will be
submitted to the Bank for formal clearance before disbursement.
Squatters. Squatters, by definition, have no legal claim and thus do not fall within the competence of
the Expropriation Commissions. The 25 squatter families who will be required to move, and the 6
squatter businesses, will be enabled to move through financial assistance from the Displaced Persons
Fund (DPF) under the Ministry of Displaced Persons, access to which is a common motive for
maintaining squatter status. Pas;t experience shows that compensations paid by the fund have been
generous, and mostly exceed compensation paid to a tenant renting an expropriated building. They are
usually sufficient for 12-18 months' rent.
Monitoring. CDR will submit the actions taken on each grade separation site to the Bank for its
approval using the attached monitoring form, which was developed specifically for this project. The
form will enumerate the different losses incurred by expropriation and show the compensation for each
lot, justify any assumptions of increased property values, and detail actions taken in respect to squatters.
The Bank's approval is required before disbursement for the site in question. Supervision missions will
include Bank social science stalf, who will verify the socioeconomic outcome. The implementation of
the RAP will be assessed as part of the Mid-Term Review and evaluated for the ICR.
Institutional Arrangements
The legislation, institutional arrangements and procedures for expropriation and compensation are
presented in full in the RAP. The exercise of eminent domain for expropriating private property in the
public interest is governed by the Expropriation Law of 1991, wvhich sets out in detail the different types
of expropriation and compensalion. Under the provision for expropriation of land in the public interest,
the Council for Development and Reconstruction prepares a draft roads alignment decree for signature by
the Minister of Public Works, the Prime Minister, and the President. Annexed to the decree are: (a) a
sketch of the project; (b) a plan of the land expropriated; (c) a comprehensive list from the registry of
lands showing the registration number of each property, its location, the names of all the owners and
rightholders; and (d) drawings of any affected structures. Once the decree is signed, these documents are
publicly available. An alignment decree is in force until amended or annulled by another decree.



9
ISDS
The decree places the properties under servitude (they may be bought and sold, and buildings may be
maintained, but no improvements may be made until the expropriation process has been completed.
Properties are not held to have been expropriated until the decision of the Expropriation Commission is
handed down, which decision is communicated to the Lands Registry for amendment of title and map. A
decree may apply to any portion of a property. It is up to the owner to request full expropriation.
The Expropriation Commissions, of the first instance and appeals, are established by law in each
province. The constitution and powers of the commissions of the first instance have been described at
the beginning of the preceding section. They attempt to contact every owner in person, and every holder
of a legal right is entitled to be heard. Individual landowners normally represent themselves at the first
instance (often obtaining informal guidance from a lawyer or another expropriated person), but appeals
require legal representation. The appeals commissions-again one for each province-are similarly
constituted, but with more senicr members. They hear appeals from either party, and may confirm
awards or revise them upward or downward. Their decision is final.
CDR has an experienced expropriations unit staffed by a lawyer and expropriations expert which
prepares the decrees and provides additional services to the expropriated persons, including free
professional counseling and advisory services to affected persons on certain weekdays. It also liaises
with the Ministry of Displaced ]'ersons with respect to squatters, and may frequently settle disputes or
complaints amicably.
C. Cultural Property and Archaeological mitigation plan. The archaeological assessment was
designed to provide findings and recommendations that could be directly used to support project
planning and implementation. li: included: (a) Evaluation of archaeological sensitivity. All proposed sites
for grade separation improvements were evaluated with regard to the potential types of archaeological
materials and their state of preservation, archaeological periods that may be represented at the site, and
the risk of encountering special features such as ancient graveyards with skeletal remains. The
archaeological assessment, including the site visits, did not identify the presence of any cemeteries or
individual graves in or around the areas proposed for construction activities; however, the possibility of
unrecorded graveyards and burials cannot be ruled out given the long human occupation in Greater
Beirut. (b) Review ofproposed ,.onstruction-related excavation. Representatives of The American
University of Beirut (AUB/ACRE) worked closely with design engineers and surveyors from TEAM
International to review the construction drawings for each intersection to determine the nature, extent,
and depth of proposed construcr.ion-related excavations. This was followed by site inspections conducted
by surveyors and archaeologists to check the drawings on the ground. (c) Site evaluationl methodology.
On the basis of the evaluation of archaeological sensitivity and type and extent of proposed
construction-related excavation for each intersection, recommendations have been prepared concerning
proposed site evaluation methodology. These vary, from evaluation excavations in selected areas subject
to disturbance, through a watching brief where an archaeologist is available to inspect areas as
construction-related excavation is undertaken. (d) Chance find procedures. The consultants has prepared
chance find procedures that would be used by the CDR, Directorate General of Antiquities, engineering
and archaeological consultants, and the construction contractors to provide timely and cost-effective
measures should unanticipated archaeological materials be encountered during the construction process.
If, in the course of construction activities, graves are discovered, the CDR's engineering consultant and
cultural heritage consultant will immediately stop work in the area and consult with municipal and
religious authorities to determine appropriate measures for the removal and reburial of the human
remains in the graves.
The approach adopted in the archaeological assessment is that measures for identification, excavation,



10
ISDS
recording, and possible conservation of archaeological sites and/or cultural materials uncovered during
the course of project-supported construction activities will vary according to the character, significance,
size, and location of the site, and the nature of the threats affecting its integrity. Included in the
archaeological assessment is a cletailed overview of site-specific mitigation measures, which will be
conducted by archaeological consultants working under the supervision of CDR. In addition, CDR,
working in coordination with the Directorate General of Antiquities, is prepared to work with the
construction contractor to modi-fy the plans for grade separation improvements, when well justified, to
avoid and/or minimize adverse impacts to significant finds. The planning process used in project
preparation will minimize the need for salvage operations, and the use of chance find procedures
provides a framework for actions required if unanticipated materials are located.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Beneficiaries. With one car for every four persons, and 83 percent of trips being by private car or taxi,
the inhabitants of Greater Beirut are direct and indirect beneficiaries (mainly time saved) of improved
traffic flow and improved parking availability and management. Indirect public consultations were held
through the environmental assessment, by means of two higher-level national consultations and direct
public consultations through smaller local consultations in selected affected areas. A series of 1 7 local
consultation meetings were held to discuss proposed grade separation improvements. In addition to the
environmental consultant team, a social scientist was present at many of these meetings, and the views of
this expert were incorporated to the extent possible into the technical designs.
Other affected persons. Residents approved the overall intentions and designs, with the exception of one
area where there is some local rninority opposition to the changes induced by increased traffic flows.
Many special interest groups may potentially be affected by the project, such as taxi drivers, pedestrians,
schoolchildren, business operators, and employees, whose particular interests will be taken into account
as the traffic management capability develops. A focused social assessment in one area surveyed the
attitudes of the residential and transitory population (owners, managers, residents, and employees) to
parking problems and reforms. A regular public information campaign will ensure that the reasons for
innovations are appreciated by the public and, consistent with the project, enable their views and
representations to be taken into account, particularly through systematic incorporation into a follow-up
project.
Other key stakeholders: Key institutional stakeholders include the Ministry of Public Works and
Transport, Ministry of Interior and Municipalities, Ministry of Environment, Directorate General of
Antiquities of the Ministry of Culture, Governorate of Greater Beirut, Beirut Municipality, and 15
individual GBA municipalities. The institutional environment is complex, with different and overlapping
jurisdictions, and consultations with key stakeholders led to their agreement to establish a Traffic
Management Organization. Preparation of the environmental assessment included consultations with the
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Health, Directorate General of Antiquities of the Ministry of
Culture, National Scientific Research Council, municipal governments, Lebanese universities (American
University Beirut, Arab University, Lebanese University), SOLIDERE, merchants associations and other
private sector parties, community organizations and non-governmental organizations (Beirut Issues,
Development and Environment Media Association, Green Forum, Lebanese Environment Forum, Order
of Engineers, Rotary Club, etc).
The environmental assessment and the Resettlement Action Plan were prepared following a process of
consultation are available at the Info Shop, Resident Mission, and at a number of locations in Beirut. The



11
ISDS
EA Executive Summary has been distributed to the Executive Directors of the World Bank.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institul:ionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               6/21/2000
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/21/2000
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            7/27/2000
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED                2/15/2000
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           10/24/2000
Date of submission to InfoShop                                             10/24/2000
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Mohammed D. E. Feghoul                      05/30/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Allan Rotman/Person/World Bank         05/30/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour/Person/World Bank  05/30/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:



12
ISDS
Approved by:                    Name                                             Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif                           05/31/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Hedi Larbi                                     05/31/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH          FEEDBACK    .   SITE MAP        SHOWCASE       m



