Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC177 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 19, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lesotho 
Project ID: P075566 
Project Name: Integrated Transport 
Program 
Task Team Leader: Gylfi Palsson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 15 
Estimated Board Date: July, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%); 
General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P); Administrative and civil service reform 
(P); Regional integration (S); Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (S); 
Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Edeltraut Gilgan – Hunt 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The program will support the goal of the GoL to contribute to economic growth and poverty 
reduction through provision of sustainable transport infrastructure for its citizens, affordable 
transportation services and reliable access of isolated areas and the poor to markets, services and 
opportunities. As a means of progressing towards this goal, the program will support the 
following objectives: 
 
\01\02
Enhance road sector policies and prepare for reform of road institutions;  
\01\02
Further develop local private sector involvement in provision of transport infrastructure 
and transport services; and 
Page  2
 
 
\01\02
Generate employment opportunities by promoting labor based work methods for road 
maintenance 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
a. 
The project aims at continuing progressing reform of the road sub-sector initiated by 
RRMP, but possibly in the context of a more comprehensive approach to the transport 
sector at large. (i) On the basis of consultant studies, a MoPWT Steering Committee 
is detailing reform recommendations for GoL policy decision-making. These are 
aimed at formation of a Roads Board overseeing a semi-autonomous Road Agency 
with substantial strengthening of competencies, privatization of work units, 
development of road construction and consultant industries, amplification of 
environmental, social and HIV/AIDS competencies, and strengthening of the existing 
Road Fund. The rationale is expected substantial cost savings and ultimately lower 
transport costs, by having a more competent and efficient organizational structure. (ii) 
The project would include rehabilitation and upgrading of rural roads using labor-
intensive work methods and rehabilitation and upgrading of priority sections of the 
national road network. The size of the components and selection of specific roads and 
road sections is still under discussion. A more limited support may be considered for 
the following: (iii) A comprehensive study on urban transport is proposed. (iv) Yet to 
be defined, but likely marginal involvement in the aviation and railroad sub sectors 
will be considered, particularly as these links with road transport infrastructure and 
services. (v) The project will support efforts at reducing cost of transport services. 
(vi) Road safety, HIV/AIDS, social and environment management components are 
priority elements and will be tailored to match the rest of the project. 
b. 
An appropriate lending instrument is still being considered but is likely to be a SIL. 
c. 
The project supports a sector program, and as roads and road transport is the 
backbone of all transport in Lesotho, its institution building component is the key 
developmental element of the program.  
d. 
The IDA credit available for the project is $15 million and would likely support the 
following activities: (i) Moving institutional reform agenda along and strengthen 
capacity within the road sector (studies, management systems, equipment, technical 
assistance, support to privatizing construction industry, training, redundancy costs); 
(ii) Civil works, including rural, national and urban roads upgrading, rehabilitation 
and bridges (civil works and consultancies); (iii) project management. A more limited 
support may be considered for following activities: (iv) Road safety and traffic 
management (consultancies, equipment); transport services, urban transport, Maseru 
City management and physical planning (study); HIV/AIDS, environment and social 
interventions (studies, technical assistance, small grants). 
Page  3
 
 
e. 
Partnership in form of donor coordination of the program and parallel financing is 
being sought with EU, AfDB, DCI and other potential donors. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will support road rehabilitation throughout the country. Works will be selected based 
on (i) whether these are part of maintainable identified core network, (ii) economic and social 
criteria. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The borrower has through its Department for Rural Roads integrated labor intensive techniques 
and social aspects of transport in works it finances. These will be built on in the project. Capacity 
for environmental management has been weak in the MoPWT, but it is foreseen that the 
proposed Road Agency will have an Environmental Management Unit. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[N] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[TBD] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[N] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
During project preparation a transport sector environmental assessment and a resettlement policy 
framework will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to Project Appraisal.  Separate 
individual environmental assessments and resettlement actions plans, as needed, for first year’s 
works will also be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to Project Appraisal. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultation process is part of the EA and RPF preparation, implementation and supervision.  
All safeguards documents will be disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to Project 
Appraisal. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: October 8, 2003 
 
  
 
      Gylfi Palson
 Alain 
Labeau
  
 Task Team Leader 
Acting Sector Manager 
 
Page  5
 
 
        AFTTR 
AFTTR 
 
 
 
 
Walton Thomas
 
Lead Regional Coordinator 
AFTDS 
 
