Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC240 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 27, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lesotho 
Project ID: P076658 
Project Name: Health Sector Reform Phase 
II 
Task Team Leader: Julie McLaughlin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 12.00 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (75%);Central government 
administration (10%);Health insurance 
(10%);Sub-national government 
administration (5%) 
Theme: Health system performance 
(P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S);Nutrition and food 
security (S);Fighting communicable 
diseases (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  TBD 
Other financing amounts by source: 
114.00 ($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
The overall development objective of the reform program is to increase equitable access to 
quality preventive, curative and rehabilitative health care services in Lesotho.  The objective of 
Phase II: Policy and Institutional Reform (2003 - 2006) is to pilot or test, critically assess and 
revise proposed reform strategies.  Strategies include financing and financial management 
reforms; performance management systems; revised protocols for more effective delivery of 
essential health services at district level; and new approaches to pharmaceutical purchasing and 
distribution.  Phase II will also support the construction of a new national referral hospital-QE II 
(see 3b).  These strategies will lead to improvements in the efficiency of public expenditures in 
health and services delivery with the expected result of improving health status of the Basotho. 
 
C.  Project Description 
a)  What are the alternative development interventions or approaches being considered? If an 
approach is favored, what is the rationale for it? 
This is a second phase APL, part of a ten-year IDA commitment to the health sector reform 
program.  Details of the overall program are outlined in the initial Project Appraisal Document, 
Report No: 19854-LS.  The timeframe required to realize sustainable institutional change, 
combined with the opportunity to tie allocations to achievements, is strongly supported by the 
Page  2
 
 
APL.  The triggers agreed upon for moving from phase I to phase II have been either been 
achieved or are achievable within the preparation period for this operation.  Simple, measurable 
triggers for moving to the third phase will be identified during preparation of this operation.
 
 
b)  If the proposed operation is to support a sector program, what would be the key elements of 
the program and how would the proposed project fit into it ? What project components are being 
considered ?  Can indicative costs be identified ? 
The proposed project will support further policy and institutional reforms by testing, critically 
assessing and revising reform strategies. 
 
 
The health sector reform program is sector-wide and comprises several components.  Detailed 
description of the components of the program are outlined in the PAD referred above.  The key 
elements of the program include: i) sector financing, ii) human resource development iii) district 
health services, iv) decentralization , v) pharmaceuticals, vi) partnerships, and vii) infrastructure.  
 
The component on improving health sector financing will build upon the work done on financial 
management and information system in the first phase of the program, and will support the 
development of a health sector financing policy.  The health financing policy will address the 
role of public sector, efficiency in mobilization and allocation of public financing and the 
strategies for ensuring sustainable financing. 
 
The component on human resources will build upon the analytical work done on human 
resources in the first phase and support the testing of innovative approaches required to address 
the severe constraints in human resources identified in the first phase. The role of a MOHSW 
human resource strategy will be affected by consideration of options to increase partnerships 
with the private sector, out-sourcing and the definition of service  
delivery standards in the District Package.  
 
The infrastructure component will support the construction of a new Queen Elizabeth II hospital.  
The government is committed to replacing the present QE II hospital because of its dilapidated 
state.  The alternative to IDA financing of the construction of a new QE II is the government’s 
use of private financiers.  This is likely to result in an over-proportioned facility that does not 
rationalize secondary and tertiary care. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will support the government’s comprehensive program of sector reform.  Activities 
thus will be undertaken at headquarters, districts, health service areas, and individual service 
facilities.  The construction activities envisioned are limited to repairs of existing facilities and 
the new hospital to be located on the outskirts of Maseru.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The implementation of the first phase of IDA support has focused on establishing the required 
capacity.  Financial management, monitoring, program management, procurement, maintenance 
and planning capacity have all improved under the first phase.  The results are evidenced by 
progress towards the triggers, improved budget execution and the annual joint reviews. 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
The project will support construction 
of a new National Referral Hospital.  The selected site is outside the city center in 
an undeveloped area near other health facilities.  Although neither contentious or 
high risk, the design and construction will need to be assessed to ensure that 
construction and hospital waste does not pose environmental hazards.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
This might apply of the construction 
site is found to be occupied.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
To address safeguard issues, (a) an Environmental analysis of the construction activities; (b) a 
medical waste management plan for the project; and if found to be necessary (c) a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared during preparation of the project. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
Consultations will take place during the preparation of the afore-mentioned safeguard 
documents. The final documents will be disclosed in Lesotho and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to 
appraisal 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
Modifications have been made the to PCN and ISDS as a result of feedback following the PCN 
Review. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
January 15, 2004  
 
wb85487 
Q:\My Documents\Personal\LESOTHO\APL II P076658\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - Concept Stage.doc 
September 20, 2003 3:28 PM 
 
