24391                                            ISD
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                      AWorid Frc ol Poverty  e
af e'f      S h  . p'.     S',1~                                                                ;
m~lfoShop
1ki %Vor Klkk
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 06/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MACEDONIA, FORMER YUGOSLAV                      Project ID: P066157
REPUBLIC OF
Project: Education Modernization                         Task Team Leader: Peter Darvas
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 3, 2002                IBRD Amount ($m): 15.00
Bank Approval: September 26, 2002                       IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD                                     Sector: EY - Other Education
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
1.     Improve school based learning and attendance at the local level and empowering schools and
school communities to strengthen school level planning and management and improve performance.
2.      Build systems and capacity to operate in a decentralized education system as set by the
Framework Agreement including improving strategic planning, management, and monitoring in the
education sector at the national level and efficient allocation and use of resources at local level.
The Framework Agreement was signed by the major Macedonian political parties and by the European Union representatives and includes "an
agreed framework for securing the future of NMacedonia's democracy and permitting the development of closer and more integrated relations
between the Republic of Macedonia and the Euro-Atlantic community. It calls for the development of decentralized government with
significantly enhanced competencies of local elected officials in education and a law on financing of locai self-govemment to ensure an adequate
system of financing. The agreement also calls for equal access to primary and secondary education (in all languages spoken in Macedonia) with
uniform standards for academic programs.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project Components:
1. School level planning and incentives
The primary objective of this component is to strengthen capacities of school level management and
administration as well as school board participation to improve attainment and quality, plan, manage and
monitor local use of funds, support school based initiatives, improve teacher competence and monitor
outcomes
1. 1 School level planning Indicative budget: USD 1,500,000



2
ISDS
The objective of the subcomponent is to establish adequate capacities and procedures to improve
accountability and performance (including quality of learning, attendance and attainment) at school level.
The component will include three sets of activities:
*      Establishing a new modus operandi, adequate capacities and procedures for schools to develop
education improvement plans, monitoring quality, attendance and attainment,
*      Training school board and school management (school directors and administrators) to do
planning, allocating resources designated for school improvement and monitoring.
*      Establishing competitive services to schools including teacher and management training and
schools to make strategic choices in using inputs, providers, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to
meet the planned objectives.
12. Schiool improvementgrants (SIG): Indicative budget: USD 11,000,000
The objective of this subcomponent is to set up a sustainable institutional framework for a competitive
scheme of school improvement grants as a model incentive for school level quality assessment (SIGi)
*      Establishing approval, monitoring and evaluation processes,
*      Setting up and training regional boards to carry out the SIG activities at regional level.
*      Piloting the SIG system
*      Allocating funds to schools that present plans and proposals and make commitment to improve
quality of leaming, teaching performance, attendance or attainment.
*      Implementing a monitoring and evaluation system for the SIG and, during the last stage of the
project, planning steps towards sustaining the model beyond the project's lifetime.
2. Education Decentralization
The primary objective of this component is to build systems and capacity to operate a decentralized
education system; including improving strategic planning, management, and monitoring and
accountability procedures in the education sector.
2.1 Education administration and management
Indicative budget: USD 3,200,000
The objective of the sub-component is to help establish adequate central, regional, local and school level
authorities and management procedures as well as to provide training to improve the education system's
overall efficiency, the quality of programs, the capacity of the administration to measure and improve
outcomes, use of inputs and the incentives for the local and school level authorities to use funds
efficiently and to improve access and attainment. Specific activities include:
*      Harmonizing the laws and bylaws determining the role and authority of central regional/local and
school level management;
*      Restructuring the Ministry and central authorities of education, provide training to meet new
requirements in line with a decentralized environment;
*      Developing an Education Sector Budget Framework, public fund allocation mechanism and
adequate financial monitoring system in line with the ongoing Public Administration reform and the
upcoming Law on Local Government Finances; improve accountability mechanisms
*      Strengthening the assessment capacities at the center and locally (for schools, municipalities and
regional authorities) to define outcome based standards, establish empirical data collection procedures
for measuring education quality and improve monitoring and evaluation systems to assist both central



3
ISDS
policy and local innovations.
2.2 Education management information system (EMIS). Indicative budget: USD 2,000,000
The objective of this sub-component is to improve overall information management in the education
sector to assist policy developmnent and planning at central and lqchhkic'Sfinancial,
demographic, institutional and educational quality data. Specific activities include:
*      Providing technical support, software and goods to develop and pilot software modules at
central, regional and municipal levels,
*      Establishing system hardware,
*      Providing training to school and municipal managers and central government staff and develop
benchmark standards to full implementation of the EMIS including a framework which will support
per-capita funding of education.
2.3 Certification and accreditationfor in-service staff training
Indicative budget: USD 800,000
The objective of this subcomponent is to establish a system of in-service training and professional
development for teachers and school administrators in which quality is assured via professional standards
and transparent accreditation procedures and training services are provided by multiple public and
private (non-profit) providers. Specific activities include:
*      Establishing procedures and/or an agency of quality assurance and accreditation for a
competitive system of education service providers in specific areas including in-service staff (teacher and
education administration) training;
*      Creating a training for trainers program for potential providers of in-service training
*      Monitoring the training activities, which will have been based on the new procedures and paid
for by the schools using SIG.
2.4 Project Coordination
Indicative budget: USD 1,000,000
The objective of this subcomponent is to establish the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) as the agency
responsible
* for the administrative and fiduciary responsibilities related to the project (e.g. financial management,
procurement, disbursement, monitoring and reporting.) Specific coordinators for the various project
components will be appointed by Appraisal.
* for ensuring effective evaluation of project achievements and outcomes during the project, and
managing a monitoring and evaluation budget. The main responsibility for evaluation under the
project will be the monitoring of the outcomes of the school improvement grant scheme (see
explanation below).
* as a general coordinator of donor activities in the education sector in support of the government
strategy and-education reform.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites



4
ISDS
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will affect about 3/4 of all the schools throughout the country, with about 200,000 students. No
protected areas or sites or critical natural habitats or other culturally or socially sensitive areas will be
impacted given the nature of the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No    C' TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes 0 No    C! TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               I Yes 0 No     - TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 G Yes 0 No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   3 Yes 0 No    C TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)          i! Yes 0 No                   TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                C Yes 0 No     3TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 ID Yes O No    OTBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           3-) Yes O No  C' TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No    ;TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
not applicable
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
not applicable
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
not applicable
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
not applicable
not applicable
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



5
ISDS
The key stakeholders who need to participate in the project design are representatives of the
municipal governments, school administrators and school boards, parents, teachers, students and
non-governmental organizations active in the field. During and following pre-appraisal,
workshops will be organized to involve them in the project preparation. During project
implementation, representatives of the stakeholders will have key role (to be defined in further
detail) in monitoring the implementation activities and the outcomes.
Most critically, regional committees will be organized including the above mentioned
stakeholders who will run the SIG process regionally. They will also be in charge of monitoring
the local outcomes.
(details to follow pre-appraisal)
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure



6
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Peter Darvas
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:.
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Bernard Baratz                             03/22/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      James A. Socknat                              03/20/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARC    ,-FEEACK _A' SE MAP            _    S HOWCASE 



