Report No. 23525
Report No: I073689 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/08/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MADAGASCAR      Project ID: P073689
Project: Rural Transport Project - APL-Phase 2 Task Team Leader: Dieter E.
Schelling
Appraisal Date: January 28, 2002          IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 21, 2002       IDA Amount ($m): 80.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR     Sector: TR - Rural Roads
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)           Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the project is to sustainably improve the
access of rural communities to markets, schools, health centers and other
economic and social infrastructure, and to enhance the mobility of the
rural population, in order to improve their quality of life and promote
economic development.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has five components:
1) Capacity building. Assistance to the Rural Transport Unit (RTU) to
oversee the implementation of the rural transport policy and strategy
(further capacity building relevant to this project in respect of the
Provincial Road Agencies (PRA), the Provincial Road Departments (PRD) and
small scale labor based contractors is being be done under APL-1).
2) Rehabilitation of rural transport infrastructure. This component
includes the following: (i) the rehabilitation of about 8,000 km of rural
roads. The vast majority of these roads (where traffic is less than
50vpd) will be improved to "basic access standard" which is defined as the
least cost investment to make the roads all-round passable (with the
exception of short periods of heavy rains) for the prevailing means of
transport. Basic access interventions focus on the elimination of trouble
spots. For roads with higher traffic levels (50-150 vpd) full
rehabilitation to earth road standard will be sought and above 200 vpd
paving of the road will be an option. A first year program has been
selected and detailed design and bidding documents are being prepared.
Further annual programs in five tranches have been identified. These will
be reviewed and adjusted in annual provincial planning workshops. The
program will be appropriately packaged in lots for small scale labor based
contractors (about 40- of the volume) and for medium to large scale
contractors (about 60- of the volume). The program will provide reliable
access to an estimated 6 million people or 83t of the population which
currently has no reliable access or does not have road access at all.
Additionally, it is estimated that each year 5 million person-days of work
(at one dollar per day) will be provided in rural areas; (ii) the
component also includes a pilot for the improvement of appropriate rural
transport infrastructure at community level. This might include the
construction of foot bridges or appropriate tracks for ox-carts.
3) Maintenance of the rehabilitated network.     This component has been



made an integral part of the project to ensure that maintenance of the
rehabilitated network is executed adequately and appropriately, and that
this is closely monitored. Finance for this component will be provided by
the RMF (90%) and the provincial governments (10%-), and for a limited
period by the EU and the central government (which plan to subsidize the
RMF from 2002 to 2004). IDA will contribute only a modest amount in
respect of a study for the introduction of a heavy vehicle licence fee
and, possibly, the continuation of the financing of the technical and
financial audit, after expiry of the respective EU financing. The result
of the technical and financial audit will be presented to the partners at
the annual transport sector conference in May each year. A satisfactory
outcome of the audit is a requirement for the continuation of the
program. In the case of defaulting provinces, these will be excluded from
the following year program. It is estimated that an additional amount of
2.5 million person-days of work will be created on average each year by
the maintenance program.
4) Rehabilitation of the corridor Fianarantsoa-Manankara: This corridor
relies heavily on the FCE Railway (Fianarantsoa-C¶te d'Est) and the Port
of Manakara. Government has committed itself to concession both the
railway (by the end of 2002) and the port (by the end of 2003). The
163-km long railway runs through a very unique ecosystem of some of the
last remaining primary forest on the highlands. If the railway were to
cease operations, this forest would be gravely threatened because the
people living along the line could no longer rely on their export crop and
would resort to slash and burn farming (see chapter E.5). About 100,000
people have no other access than the train and depend on the transport
services for their livelihoods; additional 1,000,000 people live in the
region that is served by the railway. A consortium of donors, let by
USAID, carried out a series of studies (CBA, financial analysis,
beneficiary assessment, environmental assessment) which showed the
viability of the railway (IRR of 16%) and decided to finance emergency
rehabilitation under the condition that the FCE be concessioned. IDA
would complete the financing gap for this rehabilitation once the
concession agreement has been signed. The port of Manakara is classified
as a secondary port and the tonnage handled has declined from a high of
80,000 tons in the early 1970s to some 20,000 tons today. The port has a
comparative advantage for oil from Tamatave to Fianarantsoa and for basic
goods from Tamatave for the region of Manankara.     On the export side it
would serve primarily for agriculture exports, such as coffee, bananas and
litchis. Following years of neglect the port is in urgent need of
repairs, especially for the quais, oil pipeline and dredging. Following
cost-benefit analysis, the IRR for the basic investment option stands at
33%.  USAID is currently financing emergency works and the project would
complete infrastructure improvements once the concession agreement has
been signed. It can be assumed that after the rehabilitation of the
corridor Fianarantsoa would be become attractive for the establishment of
an export production zone (EPZ). EPZ are currently the main driver of
economic growth in the country.
5) Promotion of intermediate means of transport (IMT): This component
would put into practice the first strategic axis of the Government's rural
transport policy. National and international experience with the
promotion of IMT has rarely gone beyond very limited pilot projects and
this would be the first initiative to up scale. Intensive networking and
- 2 -



implementation assistance would be required to ensure successful
execution. Despite road improvements in recent years, much transport in
Madagascar involves walking and head-loading. The project would aim to
improve rural mobility by increasing the overall number of IMTs in use,
increasing and diversifying their uses and improving the technology used.
The project would also promote water and river IMTs which so far have been
largely neglected. It is expected that within a five-year period, as many
as half a million people would directly or indirectly benefit from
increased use of IMTs. Four broad categories of IMTs would be promoted
through information campaigns, networking and micro projects: (i)
cycle-based technologies; (ii) animal-powered carts; (iii) human-powered
carts; and (iv) water-based transport (motorized and non-motorized). The
component would also include spot improvements of waterways and jetties.
Components:
(1) Capacity Building
(2) Rehabilitation of Rural Roads
(3) Maintenance of the Rehabilitated Roads
(4) Rehabilitation of the Fianarantsoa to Manakara corridor
(5) Promotion of Intermediate Means of Transport
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
About 8000 kilometers of existing provincial roads will be rehabilitated
to basic access standard (focus on trouble spots). These provincial
roads are widely distributed all over the country.
The project will also finance the rehabiliation of the Fianarantsoa to
Manakara railway (163 kilometers) and of the Manakara port. This railway
lies in the Fianarantsoa province and connects the highlands with the
eastern coastal port Manakara.
B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comments: Though only pre-exisiting infrastructure will be rehabilitated
with low impact measures and no realignments are planned, it was
determined that an environmental and social impact assessment, and a
framework for the involuntary resettlement would be prepared.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
- 3 -



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
A) Road Rehabilitation
Road rehabilitation has a positive overall impact, particularly on the
social and economical environments. The major potential downsides are
physical (soil, flora, fauna - loss of habitat, deforestation) and social
(disruption of life, resettlement, loss of cultural sites).
The potential effects of road rehabilitation on soil, flora and fauna have
been assessed on every road, especially in the biologically diverse
eco-regions. Five of the 350 roads provide increased access to sensitive
areas (national forests). This could intensify the pressure that already
exists on primary forests and on the endemic fauna. Nevertheless, these
effects will be reduced by measures such as the creation of the Gestions
Locales de Securite (GELOSE) and other similar institutions to protect the
environment in close collaboration with EMPs for each affected road
segment. About 25 roads go through sensitive areas which have already been
damaged or are near primary forests. For damaged areas, rehabilitation
will have a fairly positive impact, whereas for nearby primary forests,
rehabilitation may have a fairly negative impact. For these roads, a
detailed EMP, including responsibilities and follow-up mitigation
measures, will be prepared during detailed design studies and implemented.
For roads going through damaged areas, environmental measures
(reforestation, drainage pits stabilization) will be appraised in the
field during the preparation of the detailed design studies. Such measures
will be adapted/modified appropriately for every road segment with any
negative environmental impact. No physical works will be implemented
until an EMP for each road segment is prepared, approved, included in
contract documentation and costed. Where project activities such as road
construction or rehabilitation will impact negatively on people living
and/or working on or near the project areas, the procedures as described
in the resettlement policy framework will become applicable. Accordingly,
people will be compensated and/or resettled for any loss that they may
incur due to project activities. Likewise, no project activities will be
implemented until a resettlement plan has been prepared, approved of (by
the governmenet as well as by the World Bank) and disclosed. The same
procedure will apply for project activities under other project components
(port and railway - see next paragraph)
B) Rehabilitation of the Fianarantsoa to Manakara Railway and Manakara
Port
The environmental assessment for the rehabilitation of the rail
infrastructure has been carried out. The 163-km long railway runs through
a very unique ecosystem of the last remaining primary forest on the
highlands. The EA for the railway has highlighted the negative
environmental and social impacts of a permanent closure of the railway,
i.e. conversion from cash crop production to staples, especially manioc
- 4 -



and rice through slash and burn techniques on steep slopes. It is
expected that an additional 110.300 ha would be put under cultivation.
Secondary impacts due to erosion and reduced rainfall in the immediate
vicinity of the corridor are estimated at $16 mio by ONE. No estimates
have been carried out for the eventual loss in biodiversity and tourism
potential. Ongoing community activities for slope stabilization have
already demonstrated the positive effects of converting fields adjacent to
the railway from manioc cultivation to vetiver, fruit trees and spice
crops. These experiences would be applied and adapted to mitigation
measures for provincial roads rehabilitation programs, where appropriate.
Several preliminary feasibility studies have been carried out for the port
infrastructure rehabilitation. A study examining the different options
for rehabilitation was prepared, however an environmental assessment of
the chosen option has not yet been prepared.    The port environment has
been assessed as part of the preparation of a GEF project which is making
available emergency equipment for oil spills. The project will finance
the rehabilitation of the port which includes rehabilitating a land-based
oil pipeline and container facility.
The corridor relies heavily on the FCE railway and the port of Manakara.
Government has committed itself to concession both the railway and port.
It has been established that the Project will not finance any works under
this component until this concessioning agreement has been met. It is
estimated that it will take approximately a year for this to be
completed. It has been agreed that in order to comply with the national
environmental regulations and that of the Bank, an environmental audit and
EMP be prepared for the rail infrastructure rehabilitation and an
environmental assessment and EMP be prepared for the proposed port
infrastructure rehabilitation within this timeframe. This
requirement/condition has been articulated in the project's legal
agreements in the sector policy letter within the DCA package.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
not applicable
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Potential long term negative impacts of improved access could be increased
unsustainable agricultural activities, deforestation, and increased
touristic activities with negative impacts on the environment. Such
issues will be addressed, where applicable, in the respective
environmental management plans.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
A study examining the different options for port rehabilitation was
undertaken. This will be followed up with an EA of the chosen option.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Under APL 1 of the transport program, several environmental management
recommendations were implemented. PES has recruited an environmental
specialist who will receive technical assistance to not only, implement
and monitor the EMPs of all APL activities, but also to take over the
- 5-



leadership of the "Environmental and Social Protection Component" of the
project. The Environmental and Social Component will also include
resettlement specialists who will be responsible for implementing
resettlement/compensation measures and will be concerned with all issues
concerning affected people. This project will continue to support
improving the environmental management system in the transport sector, and
in particular as it relates to the rural transport. International
technical assistance is currently being put in place at the PES to
reinforce local staff.
The socio-economic baseline study, will be an integral and ongoing
instrument of the project's M&E system and will monitor poverty impact of
the project. Surveys in 90 villages along the alignment of the rural
roads selected for rehabilitation, including some control villages where
access is not expected to improve, have been carried out and the data are
currently being collated. Data collection included both economic data,
such as cost of traveling to the nearest market town and prices of
consumer goods and basic staples; as well as socio-development data, e.g.
number of children completing primary school, incidences of diseases, and
assistance of agriculture extension workers. Follow up studies are
planned after rehabiliation of the respective sections of the road network
to measure impact.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
During project preparation intensive consultations have been held with the
affected population along the alignments of the roads to be rehabilitated
(for that purpose the engineering consultants who prepared the preliminary
designs of the roads where strengthened by environmental and social
specialist). Participatory workshops where held in each province, in
October 2001, where the first year road rehabilitation program was
selected. Similar workshops will be held annually. The environmental and
social impact assessment and the framework for the compensation of
affected people has been cleared by the National Environmental Office
prior to disclosure.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
-6-



Date of receipt by the Bank      9/14/2001        10/10/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 10/25/2001        1/17/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   10/25/2001       1/17/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        10/25/2001      1/17/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      9/14/2001        10/10/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 10/25/2001        1/17/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   10/25/2001       1/17/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Dieter E. Schelling      01/08/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Nina Chee/Person/World Bank      01/16/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     01/17/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard      01/17/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



