Report No. 23388
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MADAGASCAR      Project ID: P076245
Project: SECOND MINING SECTOR REFORM PROJECT     Task Team Leader: Paulo De Sa
Appraisal Date: January 22, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: May 21, 2002         IDA Amount ($m): 35.00
Managing Unit: CMNPO     Sector: BD - Decentralization; NN - Mining & Other
Extractive
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall objective of the project is to assist the Government of
Madagascar (GoM) in implementing its strategy to accelerate sustainable
development and reduce poverty in Madagascar through: (i) the
strengthening of transparency and governance in the management of mineral
resources, with special emphasis on small-scale and artisanal mining; (ii)
key institutional reforms for the decentralized management of mineral
resources; and (iii) the promotion of private investments and value-added
in the mining sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project which would be implemented over a period of five years
consists of four components:
Component 1 - Strengthening transparency and governance in mining. This
component would support measures aimed at improving governance in mining,
like the completion of the sector's legal and regulatory reform and its
enforcement, with the publication of the remaining diplomas, (arrotes,
directives, etc.), as well as programs facilitating the integration of
small-scale and artisanal mining in the formal economy, such as the
certification of gemstones, and the simplification of marketing channels
as a way to fight smuggling and fiscal evasion. A priority would be to
support the set-up of Zones d'Activites Economiques Speciales (ZAES) as a
way to control the proliferation of rushes for gemstones, avoid the
generalized smuggling of output, and mitigate their negative impacts on
the environment and the social tissue of affected communities.
Component 2 - Key institutional reforms for the decentralized management
of mineral resources. This component would support Government's strategy
for the building of institutional capacity at a decentralized level with
appropriate management and planning tools, through the transfer of
competences to the provincial and municipal levels. This would be
accompanied by a fiscal reform that would allow the decentralized
administration to collect part of the sector's taxes, giving them a direct
interest in the monitoring and supervision of these activities. A crucial
element of this transfer would be the integration of mineral resources
management in the communities' participatory development plans, in order
to obtain a fairer share of revenues to the affected population. This
would be pursued through further integration with the Community Driven
Development strategy aiming at integrating mineral resources management in
the participatory development plans, in order to obtain a fairer
distribution of revenues to the affected population. This component would
also include a robust training program and a communication strategy for
the diffusion of the reforms nation-wide.



Component 3 - Promoting private investments and value-added in the sector.
Because the investment climate was not conducive to the security of
private investments, mining in Madagascar has seldom reached the
industrial stage. The geological potential is not known, the artisanal
mining methods employed lead to a substantial waste of resources and
substantial damage to the environment, and most of the production is
smuggled out of the country with little fiscal and economic impact. In
order to address this situation, needs to create favourable conditions for
private sector investment and develop a track record of successful
projects in this sector. Four programs would be contemplated in this
component: (i) technical assistance for improving the performance of
small-scale and artisanal mining through the establishment of a
promotional agency for mining: this activity, aimed at providing
decentralized extension services for small-scale and artisanal mining,
would build on the pilot projects of integrated management of operations
currently being implemented under the MSRP; (ii) support to cutting and
polishing of gemstones : this program would be a complement to the
previous one, supporting the formalization and promoting the efficiency of
value-adding activities for gemstones in the country, essentially through
capacity building and training; (iii) strengthening of Madagascar's
geoscientific infrastructure and updating of geological information:
Madagascar urgently needs to update its basic geological information
because it is a powerful tool for private investment promotion and would
provide advanced indicators for future potential eruptions of rushes on
gemstones; and (iv) a monitoring and evaluation program for the activities
of the project.
Component 4 - Project coordination and management. Project management
would build upon the existing Project Implementation Unit (UCPM) that has
shown proven skills in project procurement, financial management and
reporting.
Components:
Strengthening transparency and governance in mining
Key institutional reforms for decentralized management of mineral
resources
Promoting private investments and value-added in the sector
Project coordination and management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Nationwide
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project will contribute to the improvement of management of
the mining sector, particularly with regards to small-scale and artisanal
mining and the development of special economic zones. Torwards this end,
an Environmental Management Plan will be developed which identifies
measures to be taken to ensure that these mining activities proceed in an
environmentally and socially sustainable manner. To ensure that the
appropriate measures are incorporated in the proposed project, the latter
has ben classified as a B.
-2-



C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
While the project itself does not raise new safeguard issues, potential
environmental and social issues will have to be addressed effectively in
the Environmental Management Plan (to be prepared) to ensure that the
reforms planned for the sector are successful.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Capacity building to Central and Provincial Governments will be provided
under to project to adress any safeguard issues that might arise from
development of the mining industry in the country. The Borrower will
prepare an Environmental Management Plan as part of the proposed project
which will be disclosed at the Infoshop and in the country.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The reform of the mining sector has been discussed at length at various
occasions and in several rounds of public discussions with different
stakeholders. The National Council of Mines (a sort of embrionary Chamber
of Mines) has been closely associated with MSRP implementation and will be
deeply involved in project preparation. Small-scale and artisanal miners
-3 -



and a certain number of mining associations have been directly involved in
the implementation of the small scale mining pilot projects under the
MSRP. They will be directly associated with project preparation. A number
of selected villages will prepare their own plans for mineral resources;
the methodology was developed and is being tested under the MSRP, with
full collaboration of the villagers. A few NGO's and private firms
participated to provide training and carry out studies. They will be
involved in the discussions during preparation, mainly from the
environmental and social areas.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      12/20/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/14/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/24/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        1/29/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Paulo De Sa     12/13/01
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt/Person/World Bank 12/13/01
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
-4-



Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Serigne Omar Fye         12/13/01
Sector Manager/Director:         James P. Bond    12/12/01
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



