ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorld Frea ol rovtrty
1 "InfoShop
Report No AC22
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated 04/09/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MADAGASCAR                               Project ID: P074235
Global Supplemenital ID: P074236
Project: Third Environmenit Program Support Project  Task Team Leader. Martien Van Nieuxwkoop
Authorized to Appraise Date May 26, 2003          IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval August 6, 2003                      IDA Amounlt ($m) 35.00
Global Supplemenital AmouLnt ($m): 8.00
Managing Unit: AFI'ES                             Sector. Forestry (80%); Renewable energy (20%)
Lendinig Instrumnent Specific Investmenit Loan (SIL)  Themile: Biodiversity (P), Environmenital policies and
Status: Lendinig                                 institutiolns (P); Other environ-ment and natural
resources management (P)
I.A 2. Project Objectives
The proposed project supports finanlcing the third phase of the National Environmental Action Plan
(NEAP). The NEAP was adopted by the Governmenit of Madagascar in 1989, while implementationi
started in 1991 with the support of a broad coalition of bilateral donors (Germany, France, Switzerland,
USA), international agencies (GEF, IDA, UNDP) and NGOs (WWF, Conservation Interinationial) Ahead
of its timie, the NEAP was designed from its inception as a fifteen year investimienit progradivided into
three five-year phases. The first five year phase aimed at creating a proper policy, regulatory and
institutional framework so as to generate the conditionis for genuine country ownership of the
environmenltal agenda whichi prior to the NEAP used to be set and driven by the donor commuillty The
second phase of the NEAP aimied at consolidatinig the programs initiated ulider the first phase by puttil1g
the established national institutions firmily in the driver's seat.
The third phase aims to achieve the mainistreamiilg of environment inito macr-oeconomic management and
sector programs as well as putting into place sustainable finanicinig mechaniisms for the environlmienlt
The project finaniced by the World Bank and GEF is geared towards assisting the GoM in the
implemenitation of selective elements of the thir-d pilase of the NEAP. It is against this backgrOuLind that
the development objective of the project is specified as: setting natural resources managemiienit and
biodiversity protection in critical ecological regions on an effective and sustainable footing withi active
participation from local populations and other relevant stakeholders, while at the same time incorporatilng
environmenital dimensionis in public policy making and investimenit decisions.



2
ISDS
I A.3. Project Description:
The goal of EP3 is stated as follows: "The importanlce and the quality of natural resources are conserved
and developed in support of sustainable economic growthl and a better quality of life". It distinguishes
seven results that are stated as (1) sustainiable development activities are developed; (2) forest
ecosystems and water resources are sustainably managed; (3) sensitive ecosystems are conseived and
made valuable as protected areas and "conservation sites"; (4) the potential of coastal and marine
ecosystems is sustainably maniaged; (5) a positive chanige in behavior vis a vis the environimlenit is
observed, (6) the financial basis for sustainable financing of rational managemenit of natural resources
and the environimienit is established, and (7) better environmental policies and governance are developed
The proposed project to be finanlced by IDA and GEF would support selected elements EP3 by focusinlg
on results (2), (3), and a number of activities ulider (5), (6) and (7). Based on this orientation, the project
would be organized into three components, (i) protected areas management, (ii) forest ecosystems
management, and (iii) environimiiental mahistreamililg. GEF financing administered by the Bank would be
concentrated under componenit (i): protected areas managemilenit. The IDA/GEF project would not focus
on result (1) as it is felt that the on-going IDA-financed Rural Development Support Project could assist
the EP3 in this field. The lAD/GEF project would not cover resLilt (4) as it has been agreed that GEF
financing administered by UNDP would be concenitrated in this area
Protected areas management
(i) Aligillenit and representativeniess of the Protected Area System GEF and IDA resources will finance
the implementation of the Protected Areas Code (COAP) and the Protected Areas Management Plan
(Plan "GRAP") ained at ensurinlg the representativeness of ecosystems under the nationial protected area
system Implementationi of the plan would include creating a limited number of new protected areas as
well as re-delineating boundaries of a numliber of existing protected areas The contributioni to
implementationi of EP3 will also support research activities aimed at developing a better understandinig of
practices for biodiversity conservation and managemilent.
(ii) Conservation, surveillance, monitorinlt and investments to consolidate the emerging PA System:
IDA/GEF would also finance consolidationi of monitorinig and surveillanice activities as well as
conservation practices and infrastr-ucture IDA/GEF would finance the establishment of critical visitor
infrastructure and services so as to increase revenues from park entrance fees as well as to stimulate the
local (eco)-tourist industry.
(0ii) Community participation and capacity building IDA/GEF would ain to increase participation of
local commullities In the maniagement of protected areas by strengthening and expanding the mandate of
the Regional Orientationi Committees, partnerships with NGOs, and community-driven initiatives.
IDA/GEF would also help developing the establishmenit of so-called volunitary private and comillunial
protected areas. Last but not least, IDA/GEF would finance participatory biodiversity conservation
training and investment program for communities located in the buffer zones of protected areas.
(iv) Long-term finanicial sustaiiability of the PA system:
IDA/GEF would support the emergence of a Foulidationl to be tasked with the financial management of
the protected area system. A Trust Fund Steerinig Committee (TFSC) appointed by the Minister of the
Environment in 2001 is currenitly workinig on the establishment of a trust fund for protected areas In
Madagascar. This prospective trust fund will be managed by a Madagascar Protected Areas Founidation
to be set up by the end of 2002 and will represent a pillar to the larger sustainiable finanice agenda. The
Foundation is expected to lead to mobilizatioll of substantial fuLidinig necessary to gradually cover the
core costs of the protected area network and its expansion, selected projects in support zones, and thc
sustainable development of priority ecological corridors The proposed "Madagascar Protected Areas
Foundation", would be established as a fouLidation under the Malagasy Foundation Law No 95-028. It is
expected that the proposed Madagascar Protected Areas Foundationi would be established initially with



3
ISDS
pledged seed money from WWF and Cf.
Forest ecosystems management
Under this component, the project would address the mountinig governance problems of the sector by (i)
setting the concession rights allocation and fee collection system on a more competitive and transparenit
footing, (ii) institutional capacity building, and (iii) improving the mandate and capacity of the forest
sector observatory. The project would finance the fornulationi and implementation of forest zoninlg and
managemenit plans, includinig the set-up of a viable eco-ceitificationi schemile. An important activity under
this component, would be the transfer of forestry management rights to local communities under
GELOSE/GCF contracts. The project would also puL-sue the creation of conservation sites, reforestation
reserves (Reserves Foncieres pour le Reboisement, RFRs) and support reforestation and forestry
management activities for carbon sequestrationl purposes. To reduce pressure on forest ecosystems, the
project would also support introducing improved fuel wood management utilization practices as well as
communication and extension activities ained inducilIg local populations to discontinue ecologically
hanrful slash-anid burin practices These activities would be accompanied with the development and
establishmenit of alternative energy sources (other than rural electrification) to reduce pressure on forest
resources and lower green house gas emissions. Specific energy issues to be covered include among
other: (i) fuelwood supply policy and "filiere" maniagement; (ii) charcoal supply policy, technology and
"filiere" management, (iii) improved stoves; (iv) inter-fuel substitutioll options to (a)woodfuels and (b)
imported petroleum-based household fuels; and, (v) other demand side manlagemenit support activities
To allow for improved detection of forest fires, the project would set-up surveillance capacity based on
satellite imagery. The project would stiminulate diversification of revenue-generating opportunities in
critical eco-regions by launciiing a research and development program for non-wood forestry products.
Finally, the project would support activities aimed at protecting and improving the management of
wetlands under this component.
Environmental Mainstreamning
Under this componenit, the project would finance a series of st-ategic ElAs aimed at improving the
consistenicy of environmental legislation and procedures across sectors and in line with interinational
conventionls. To improve application of and complianice with environmental impact legislation and
procedures (MECIE), the project would strengtheni existing environmental units in the sector ministries.
To enilanice monitoring of environimental quality at the field level, the project would finance the
establishment of a comprehelisive environmental management inlforimiationi system and support
"greening" of the nationial accounts To ensure improved public support for the environment, the project
would fiiiance a program of environmental education and communication. Under this componient, the
project would also support numerous initiatives to put financinig for the environment on a more
sustainable footing. First, the project would help establishing a trust fund for the national parks system.
Second, the project would develop and help setting-up markets for environimienital services, coveriig
areas sucih as bioprospectiig, carbon sequestrationi and the like Third, the project would support a
program aimed at improving cost-efficiency of enviroiinmental institutions by streamlining and realigning
existing structures Fourtil, the project would pursue initiatives aimed at "greening" the tax system so as
to respectively maximize positive and nminimize negative external effects of taxation on the environment
Fifth, the project would support the establishment of autoregulation mechanisms for environmienital
management through eco-certification/labeling schemes, ISO certification etc.
I A.4 Project Location: (Geographic location, inforimiationi about the key envirolimental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other cuiltul-ally or socially sensitive areas.)



4
ISDS
Activities under the EP3 would be carried out in so-called Priority Intervenition Zones (ZPls). AlthougIl a
final agreement about the definition of ZPls has not yet been reached, they are currently identified following
four criteria (i) biodiversity importance, (ii) degree of pressure and threats, (ill) experience of previous
project interventions; and (iv) dynamics of local and regional enviromnental initiatives. Based on these four
criteria, the proposed intervenition area of the EP3 would cover up to 571 communILes (out of 1,359 or 42%),
thereby encompassinig about 5 million people or about one-tlhird of the Malagasy population It would
include the three major habitats that are commonly distinguished as key priorities for biodiversity
conservation in Madagascar: (i) the dense, humnid forests of low and median altitudes; (iH) the dry forests in
western Madagascar; and (iii) mangroves and coral reef resources. All existing protected areas (about 1.7
million ha or 3% of the counltry's surface) as well as future protected areas are covered under the ZPls. In
addition, it includes the vast majority of the country's classified forests as well as about 3 million ha of
forests that could potentially be transferred to communlities under corresponding managelmlenit contracts.
However, because of criteria (iii) and (iv), it is felt that the ZPIs are defined too broadly and that there is
scope to narrow them down, wvithout excludinig key conservation priorities.
B. Clheck Environmenttal Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments Althoughi the previous phase of the Project had environimenital classification C, it is considered
that for the proposed thilrd phase a category B designation wvould be more appropriate in light of identified
social issues The project is being designed to ensure complianice with the requirements of the Bank
umbrella policy on Environmental Assessment ( OP, BP and GP 4. 01, OP, BP and GP 4.04, GD 4.20 ). As
the GoM is committed to the principle of "parks with people", relocation of people as stated in OP/BP 4 12.
is not expected to take place. However, in order to guide restrictions of access to natural resources in
protected areras, a resettlemenit process framework will be put in place in line with OP/BNP 4.12. OD 4 20
on indigenious people is considered applicable as far as the establishment of the Mikea forest protected area
is concerned where a relatively small populationi referred to the as the "Mikea people" is locally and
nationally recognized as being indigenious Despite the largely positive or reversible project impacts
anticipated, submission of an EA and respective EMP is considered prudent to ensure confornmity with the
aforementioned Bank Policy. The borrower submitted the draft EA in November 18, 2002 and will deliver a
more complete draft early 2003. Key provisions of the EA will be incorporated within the project's
operational manual whichi will be a condition of effectiveness. In view of the exclusively protective nature
of the proposed forest related activities unlder the project, the actual applicable "old" version of OP4.36
would not be triggered. However, with the new OP4 36 launched shortly after the PCD Review Meeting of
the project (on December 1 0, 2002), the intention of the task team would be to prepare the Forest
Ecosystems Managemenit componenit in the spirit of the new OP.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environlmiiental Assessmiient (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                0 Yes IC No    C, TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                              * Yes C No    C, TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4 36)                                        CJ Yes * No   C, TBD
Pest Managemiient (OP 4.09)                                  0 Yes * No    Q TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 1 1.03)                                0 Yes * No    C, TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4 20)                                 * Yes 0' No    C TBD
Involulitary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes     No  C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  ZYes *No      C'TBD
Projects in lnternationlal Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7 60)*                  C Yes * No    C' TBD
*By stuppor ting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' clainms



5
ISDS
on the dispuited areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Suimmary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant qluestions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken lo obtain necessary data
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible ilmpacts
Being a stand-alone environmenital operation, the project is specifically geared towards achieving a
positive impact on the environmenit compared to the witilout situationi A draft EA prepared by the GoM
pursuant to OP4.01 confirms that large-scale, significanit and/or- irreversible environimenital impacts are
not expected The EA does point out a numiiber of relatively minor environmental and social issues that
should be taken care of in the design of the project and its implementationl arrangements.
Protected Areas Managemenit The project would actively pursue the conservation of natural habitats
under the proposed protected areas component. Field activities ulider this component are small scale,
involving the construction of guard posts, small buildings and trails in protected areas. There may be
impacts from induced activities related to tourism developmenit in buffer zones. Sustainable economic
activities planiled within buffer zones (e g. agro-ecological production, sustainable harvesting of
non-timber products, bioprospecting activities, etc.) may also generate minor impacts. The issue of
modifying protected areas' boundaries for the sake of improving the representativeness of the system in
terms of ecosystems coverage as proposed tlider the project would trigger OP4 04 concerning Natural
Habitats.
As far as the establishmenit of new protected areas is concerned, this agenda is relatively limited ulider
the project. It is proposed that three newv terrestrial protected areas would be established in Mikea,
Anjozorobe, and Maorolambo. In addition, four new marine parks would be created, covering. Nosy
-lara, Nosy Ve, Nosy Radama-Sahamalaza, aiid Belo-sur-Mer. Even thoughi existing revenue sharing and
income and employment-generating activities should provide benrefits to local communities, there could
be negative impacts affecting them in the short-term. These would include both the local poor who
presently engage in clandestine exploitation of protected area resources and influenitial business interests
who also benefit from these activities. Key potential negative impacts on these social groups may
mnvolve- (i) restrictions on the use of natural resouices within protected areas, and (ii) the need to set up
an agreement witlh local communities through transfer of management and/or any contiactual instrumenit
to rationalize the use of public forest areas in buffer zones and corridor areas. The GoM is committed to
the principle of "parks with people" and therefore no resettlement is expected to take place Therefore, in
Ine with OP 4.12, a resettlemenit process framework would be developed as part of the project
preparation process. Under this framework, the arrangemenits for compensation for loss of access and
property to people within protected areas would be specified.
The creation of the Mikea protected area requires special attention as the dry Mikea forest in the
south-west of Madagascar is inhabited by the Mikea people who are generally considered as indigenous
people with an identity linked to living in the forest and using forest resources as a means of subsistence
Althoughi the livelihood of the Mikea people is being progressively redtIced throughi deforestation caused
by in-moving migrants practicing slash-and-burin productioll practices and they stand to gain from
improved protection of the Mikea forest under PA status, there is a need to ensure that corresponidinig PA
managemenit plans and envisaged PA use (e.g. eco-tourism, bio-prospecting etc.) do recognize and are in
line with the long-term interests of the Mikea people. In line with OP 4.20, an indigenous peoples
development plan would be elaborated as part of the project preparation process so as to ensure that the
establishment of the Mike forest protected area benefits the livelihood of the Mikea people in ways and



6
ISDS
means that they themselves consider important.
Forest Ecosystems Management As far as the forest ecosystems management component is concerned,
the project is considered exclusively environmentally protective in that it seeks the conservation and
sustainable management of natural forests with the active participation of communities throughi among
other the transfer of management rights under GELOSE/GCF contracts The latter is expected to induce
expansion of village and comimluniity-based plantationi efforts and the rehabilitationi of woodlands. The
project aims at bringing logging activities under strict forest maniagement rules, full law enforcement,
transparent procedures and active participation of local populationls. The project would not directly or
indirectly stimulate, promote, encourage or finanice activities leading to increased levels of logging in
Madagascar. The project would actively work to stop all commercial forest use activities that are
conducted outside the framework of approved forest managemenlt plans. Consequenitly, negative impacts
on those that are currently engaged in illegal logging activities are to be expected. The zoning plan would
better clarify the challenge of maintaininlg the forest cover and the mandate and role of each stakeholder
involved in the maniagemenit of a particular forest area.
lf.D.I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component
Cumulative impacts are not expected, except for the Mikea PA vli'ere construction of eco-tourism park
infrastructure in the to be newly established Mikea Forest PA should be done in a manner so as to both
conserve natural habitats as well as ensure the way of life of the Mikea people in accordance with their
preferences. However, at this point in the project preparation process the scope and nature of
eco-tourism infi-astructure in the area, if any, has not yet been determined
Il.D.lc Describe any potential long term Impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area
Long-term impacts are those that may be associated with induced activities related to tourism
development in buffer zones. However, it would be quite a stretch to envisage at this point in time that
the environmental impact of large-scale tourism infrastructure development would be among the most
critical determinants of sustainable natural resource managemenit in PA buffer zones Besides, the GoM
has already put in place enablling environmental legislation (MECIE) that calls for EA and corresponding
mitigation measures in case such developments might be proposed at some point in the future.
Another category of long tern impacts would be those that are associated with the sustainability of
natural resources management Linder GELOSE/GCF contracts. Commullnity-based natural resources
managemlienit has only been formalized and introduced in the recent past ulider the Environment Program.
Althougil initial results are promisinig and positive, there is a need to ensure that transferred
responsibilities represent an appropriately balanced mix of rights and obligations; and that existing
institutional capacity of communities is adequate to meet obligations and enforce rights under
GELOSE/GCF contracts This observation is also relevant concerninlg natural resources that are expected
to be transferred to the private sector under concessionls
lI.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if requiired)
To address potential impacts, an Environmental Managemilent Plan would be developed during the project
preparation process. As far as protected areas are concerned, the Plan would include: (i) a diagnosis of
potential environmenital impacts due to infrastructure construction in protected areas, covering among
other building ancd campsites, road and trail maintenance, ecotourism, (ii) a definitioni of preventative,
corrective and compensatory measures to manage identified potential impacts, (iii) a specification of
envirolimental criteria that would guide boundar-y re-delineating of protected areas; and (iv) a description
of environilimenital assessmenlt procedures in protected areas As far as the financinlg of small sub-projects



7
ISDS
in buffer zones are concerned, the Plan would incorporate environmiental screening procedures along the
liies that are currently being applied by ANAE as well as the Bank supported Rural Development
Support Project This Plan would subsequelntly form the basis for the implemenitation of site-specific
environmental screening and assessments in relation to investimients that are proposed to be finaniced
under the project as part of aniually agreed operative plans As far as identified social issues
(resettlement, indigenotis peoples) are concerned, a social assessment will be carried out as part of the
project preparation process. The assessment would. (i) examinle the social opportunities, constrainits and
likely impacts relevant to the project; (ii) assess the role of key stakeliolders mainly commuLnities living
in and around project areas in project design and implemiientationi; (in) identify and monitor the project's
expected social development outcomes and social risks; and (iv) identify measures to mitigate adverse
impacts and address social tensions and conflicts regarding mainly land and natural resource uses.
11 D.3. Describe arrangemenit for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Systematic screening mechanisiims would be put in place for subprojects in buffer zones and in park
tourism infrastructure. A transparent system of logging permits would be set-up in line with
specifications of the corresponding forest managemilenit plan. Environmental units in sector ministries as
well as the independenit Forest Observatory would be strengthiened so as to be better positioned to
enforce environimental legislation on the groulid. Lastly, EA would be maiistreanied systematically in
key sectors at national and decentralized levels (mining, fisheries, agriculture, livestock, minilng, tourism,
forestry, industry, transport ) and managed by the corresponding environiment units. As far as social
issues are concerned, the following measures would be developed during the project preparation process
and subsequently put in place during implementationi. First, to ensure effective feedback concerning the
application of the resettlemenit process framework and the Mikea indigenous peoples developmenit, the
proposed M&E system of the Environment Program would include arrangements for participatory M&E
assessments with relevant stakeholders. Second, an adequate conflict resolutioll system would be
developed in close collaboration with all stakeholders concerned that would seek to resolve disputes
througil mediation and arbitrage by an agreed third party Third, the Environment Program wouIld
contract the necessary human resources to effectively deal with social Issues. Fourthi, restrictions of
access to resources within newly established protected areas would be effectuated in line with the agreed
resettlement process framework.
11 D.4 Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principal stakeholders of EP IIl will be the following (i) the commuLilties in the Priority
Intervention Zones, (includinig the peripheral zones of PAs). Support will be provided to these
communlities to enable them to become legally empowered to control access to their common resources,
to protect these resources and to develop sustainable, commercially oriented, maniagemiient of these
resources. (ii) The communlity-miianiageinenit structures will be key stakeholders as will user groups and
the private sector businesses that transport, process and market the products coming from these managed
resources. (iii) Voluntary, m,ulti-stakeholder, participatory planniniig structures (especially at regional,
fivondronania and commune levels) focused on the Priority Intervention Zones (iv) Service delivery
institutions like SAGE - especially those providing services to commnunities to assist them in developiig
local capacities for planning, natural resource managemilenit, business managemenit and good governance.
(v) The National Park Service (ANGAP). (vi) The Ministzy of Waters and Forests and the Directorate of
Waters and Forest. (vii) The Miistry of the Environmenit. (viii) The National Office of the Environimilenit
(ix) Inter-Ministerial Committee for Environiiient (CIME). (x) The National Council for the Environmenit
(CN E).
As the active participation of all interest groups with a stake in the manlagemilenit of natural resources is
essential to the success of the project, a stakeholders analysis is being conducted to identify and analyze



8
ISDS
the key stakeholders and plan for their participation in the design and implemenitationi of the project.
Preliminary results of the stakeholders analysis have been used to develop the participatory approach
described below
As far as the management of protected areas is concerined, a key objective of the project would be to
strengtheni the participation of local communities In the management of protected areas. For this
purpose, the project aims to strengtheni and expand the Regional Orientationl Committees in wlhicih
communities and ANGAP collaborate under a model of joit decision-makinig as far as the managemilenit
of protected areas is concerned To facilitate collaboration between ANGAP and communities at a more
strategic level, these Committees would select one or more representatives to ANGAP's Board of
Directors
As far as the management of forest ecosystems is concerned, the project aims to move aggressively in
transferring the management of forest resources Linder GELOSE/GCFs arrangements Doing so would
contribute to the empowermieit of local communities. To facilitate resolving conflicts about natural
resources, the project would help establishing conflict resolution mechanisms that do not impose high
transactioni costs on affected parties
As far as the disclosure of safeguards policies is concerned, the draft EA report, corresponding
Environmenital Managemiient Plan, the resettlement process framework, as well as the Mikea indigenous
peoples development plan would be presented to the National Council of the Environimenlt for feedback.
It would be presented and discussed among government agencies and donors that participate in the
on-going second phase of the NEAP In addition, representatives from local governments as well civil
society would be consulted throughi public events to be organized during the project preparation process.
The EA documents: Environimenital Assessment, Environimental Managemilent Plan, Resettlement Process
Framework, and Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be disclosed In country and at the InfoShop
prior to Appraisal
E. Safeguardis Classification Category is determined by the higilest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisionis of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cullulative and/or irreversible impacts, or significanit technical and institutionial risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2 - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Finanicial intermediary projects, social development funds, communlity driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approacih to address
safeguard issues
F. Disclosure Requirenents
Environmental Asse.ssment/An7alysis/Mancagemiienit Plan.    Expected      Actulal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 3/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec Summary of the EA to the ED   Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For categomy A projectss)
ResettlemiientActcon7 Plan/Fi-citneivork:                   Expected       Actutal



9
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank                               3/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           4/30/2003
Date of submission to lnfoSlhop                           5/30/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan?/Franmewvork.          Expectecl     Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               3/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           4/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            5/30/2003
Pest Management Plan                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-couLntry" disclosure                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submissioni to InfoShop                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosLire of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Martien Van Nieuwkoop                      01/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1
Project Safeguards Specialists 2.
Project Safeguards Specialists 3.
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S Binghamii                  01/31/2003
Sector Manager/Director.     Richard G. Scobey                          01/31/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
JEAFRCH  __    FEEDBACK _    L srrE MAP  ; 5HOWCA^SE 



