ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                        AWorld Free of Poverty
InfoShop                                                         24229
Int * "' 'I
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/14/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MALAWI                               Project ID: P066196
Global Supplemental ID: P057886
Project: Lake Malawi Ecosystem Management Project  Task Team Leader: Francisco J. Pichon
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 8, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 3, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 18.00
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 10.00
Managing Unit: AFTRI                          Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: ENVIRONMENT; RURAL
Status: IDA Lending and GEF Grant             DEVELOPMENT; POVERTY REDUCTION
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Lake Malawi Ecosystem Management Project (LMEMP) is one of three nationally-based
ecosystem management programs, currently under preparation with the Governments of the other
two countries adjoining Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa (Mozambique and Tanzania). The project
will be the first of its kind on this Lake that is both of great economic value to the riparian
countries and of great scientific and cultural significance to the global community.
LMEMP's development objective is to contribute to the country's efforts to improve the
economic livelihood of stakeholder communities living along the lakeshore and in the catchment
of the Lake. The project will identify and demonstrate practical, self-sustaining environmental
management interventions in critical pilot zones, while simultaneously building the
constituencies and capacity of national and local-level institutions for ecosystem management. It
will have as its central aim maximizing the benefits to riparian communities from improved
fisheries management and the sustainable use of soils, forests, wetlands and other resources
within the basin to generate food, employment and income, while sustaining the ecosystem from
which these benefits arise. The Global objective of the project is to bring about joint management
and monitoring of the shared drainage basin for conservation and sustainable use of the Lake's
globally significant biodiversity for the benefit of the people who live in the catchment, the
national economies of which they are a part, and the global community.
Strategic Approach



2
ISDS
Urban and rural populations alike and Malawi's economy depend heavily on the country's
agricultural, forest, water and Lake resources for their nutritional and economic well-being. The
commercial fisheries from Lake Malawi contribute 1-2% to GDP and provide employment to
some 250,000 people, but its importance to the nation is far greater than these statistics would
imply since fish comprises more than half the animal protein intake of a chronically
malnourished population, and fishing revenues catalyze a diversity of other economic activities at
major landing sites. To Malawi, the Lake represents a vital source of fresh water, food and
livelihoods. It is also a tourist destination, it forms the basis of a local transport network, and
through its outflow into the Shire River it provides the country with its main source of
hydroelectric power. The Lake produces around 45,000t of fish annually, more than 90% of
which is landed by resource-poor artisanal fishermen. Furthermore, the fish populations of Lake
Malawi constitute a biodiversity resource of global significance, with over 800 cichlid species, of
which 99% are believed to be endemic, and 45 non-cichlid species, of which 13 (29%) are
endemic. However, fish yields fall substantially short of potential biological productivity, a result
of poor management and, in Lake Malawi, the failure of the industry to accomplish the necessary
technical and entrepreneurial development to access proven offshore resources. Lake Malawi is
therefore unusual in having substantial under-exploited offshore fish stocks while more
accessible high-biodiversity inshore stocks are over-fished by heavily subscribed artisanal
fisheries that deploy very low levels of technology.
Agricultural production in Malawi, almost 70% of which comes from smallholder farmers,
accounts for more than 90% of export earnings, contributes 45% of GDP and supports more than
80% of the population. Despite the central importance of agriculture, the basis of agricultural
production - the soil - is declining in fertility as a result of decades of neglect. Evidence for
long-term soil degradation and soil erosion includes physical measurements of soil loss,
declining yields from unfertilized crops, declining responses to fertilizer application and
impaired watershed performance. Similarly, with more than 90% of Malawi's energy
requirements met from biomass supplies and national wood consumption standing at double the
sustainable production, the country faces a looming fuelwood crisis as energy needs are met
through the liquidation of forest capital. Although environmental degradation is often quoted as
an unavoidable side effect of poverty, there is strong evidence to suggest that most users of
natural resources often lack the basic information they need to make good resource use decisions.
As a result of the above processes on the land, resource degradation in the watersheds and in the
Lake is worsening, jeopardizing both the fragile level of nutritional sufficiency of rural families
living in the watershed and the very resources on which their livelihoods depend. While the
specific causes of land degradation vary from locale to locale and even from landholding to
landholding, the causal linkages between land-based resource degradation and Lake resource
productivity and ecological health do not stop with the deposition of soil and nutrients into the
Lake. As agricultural livelihoods are threatened by declining soil fertility and the resulting drop
in the ability to meet subsistence economic and nutritional requirements, pressure on Lake
resources increases. Lake Malawi has historically served as a safety net for the rural population in
times of need and the low capital and technological requirements of artisanal fishing methods
combined with the prevailing lack of social or governmental regulation of access provides little
in the way of a barrier to entry to exploitation of the Lake's fisheries resources. The consequence



3
ISDS
has been increased pressure on the biodiversity-rich near shore fisheries, declining catch, a
heightened risk of depletion of local stocks, and possible endangerment and loss of valuable
endemic species.
The key objective of LMEMP is thus to transform the recognition of this causal relationship
between the catchments and the Lake into a commitment to act and a capacity to plan and
implement appropriate, sustainable resource management programs that are informed by an
integrated, ecosystem-based approach. The formulation of LMEMP is based on a good
understanding of priority transboundary environmental concerns, the sectoral policy causes of
such problems, and riparian recognition on the strategic actions required to address the identified
threats to the Lake ecosystem. Transboundary diagnostic analysis is the basis for the formulation
of the Strategic Action Program (SAP) by the three riparian countries. Between 1996 and 2000,
the GEF, CIDA and DFID supported the implementation of the GEF/SADC Lake Malawi/Nyasa
Biodiversity Conservation Project, an intensive regional research program on the Lake. The
project concept centred on filling the gaps in knowledge and understanding of (a) the distribution
and current status of biodiversity, and (b) catchment and limnological processes which provide
the basis of the Lake's biological productivity. This was achieved through a strong international
scientific input over four years that led to comprehensive assessments of the state of the Lake
ecosystem, the sources and severity of threats to the ecosystem, and the broad geographic and
temporal parameters of those threats. The knowledge base generated by the GEF/SADC Project
thus provides important information on baseline conditions in 1996-2000, against which future
changes can be evaluated.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The fundamental concept put forward for the Lake Malawi Ecosystem Management Project is
that the project will enable a more programmatic linkage between the Lake and its watershed in
the thinking and planning of all resource users, sector agencies, local governments and ministries
concerned. This is a significant challenge considering that at the moment natural resource
management in the Lake watershed is not the explicit mandate of any particular government
agency or institution. In this regard, LMEMP will help create a more informed constituency
within sectoral ministries and agencies, district assemblies, local level institutions and
communities for an integrated ecosystem approach for sustainable resource management of the
Lake resources. All interventions considered for support under LMEMP will be consistent with
existing government programs and policies and will be implemented through existing structures
at national, district and local levels, while supporting the district development framework in the
three countries.
It is expected that the project will consist of two broad sets of investments. The first set of
investments will be designed to identify, test and demonstrate practical, self-sustaining
management interventions to address specific environmental threats studied under the first
GEF/SADC Project, will take place in a series of selected pilot zones. The second set of
investments, which will improve information on the Lake, build a more informed stakeholder.
constituency for ecosystem management, and enhance local and national capacity for more
effective ecosystem monitoring and management, will be of necessity lake-wide in scope. All
components will contain a mixture of information gathering, monitoring, capacity building and



4
ISDS
support for community-based interventions to address the prioritized issues in the project's pilot
zones. All components are expected to receive funding from the GEF and other bilateral
agencies.
The project would support the following specific activities under four anticipated project
components:
(1)   Integrated Watershed Management component (objective and strategic approach)
A key objective of LMEMP is to protect species biodiversity and fisheries productivity in Lake
Malawi by reducing soil and nutrient loss from the Lake catchments and the loading of these
materials into the Lake. Under the Integrated Watershed Management (IWM) component, this
objective will be accomplished through a combination of improved ecosystem planning and
monitoring capacity at national level, strengthened integrated action planning and
implementation at district and area level, and community driven investments in priority
watershed management activities in sensitive catchments. The activities to be carried out on the
ground will contribute to the environmental objectives while at the same time contributing to the
national goal of poverty reduction through enhanced resource productivity.
Specific sub-components include:
A. Develop National Capacity for Integrated Watershed Management Planning and Monitoring.
The objective of this sub-component is to develop a national capacity for ecosystem-based
planning and more specifically for a watershed focus in the sectoral planning of the principal
natural resource departments. This will require the development and maintenance of relevant
databases for ecosystem management, the development of a national monitoring program, and
training in integrated watershed management planning methods for technical staff in the natural
resource departments. This sub-component will also include support for the harmonization of
policy and legal frameworks to facilitate implementation of an ecosystem approach to planning
and support to sectors to orient sector planning and resource allocation systems in accordance to
the priorities developed from an ecosystem-based approach.
B. Decentralized Capacity-building for IWM. In keeping with Government's commitment to
decentralize planning and implementation functions to the districts, this sub-component will
provide support for IWM planning at District and Area levels. Since technical capacity at this
level is generally weak, LMEMP will support the reallocation of technical resources from central
to district level in targeted districts, while providing specialized medium- and long-term training
for officers assigned at district and area levels. Logistical support will also be strengthened for
district, area and field-level technical specialists directly involved in supporting LMEMP-funded
IWM initiatives in priority watersheds and micro-catchments. NGO and CBO involvement in
supporting field-level initiatives is to be encouraged, with special attention to training and other
capacity-building needs.
C. Community-Driven Investments in IWM. There is substantial demand from resource users and.
communities for investment in improved natural resource management practices and



5
ISDS
infrastructure as revealed in the process of developing District Environmental Action Plans and
District State of the Environment Reports. There is growing awareness of the linkage between
conservation practices and productivity; what is often missing is the application of information,
organization, and funding. LMEMP will assist in providing these key ingredients by promoting
the communication of indigenous and other technical knowledge, supporting community
institutions in mobilizing people and resources for locally-defined projects in critical
micro-catchments, and providing funding through local administrative channels for projects that
have passed through district planning processes.
Approach and Justification
The first GEF/SADC Project (completed in 2000) defined fluxes of sediments and nutrients to
Lake Malawi at the river basin scale and confirmed that poor agricultural practices, deforestation
and seasonal burning are already having a measurable impact on riverine and near shore fisheries
and biodiversity, and threaten to bring about a major shift in the Lake's ecology through
eutrophication of its surface waters. A catchment modeling study undertaken in 2000 indicated
that the principal source of river-borne sediment and nutrients is the steep escarpment zone,
mostly lying within 40km of the lakeshore. These steep areas in close proximity to the shoreline
of the Lake have high slopes, fragile soils and high rainfall which give them high erosion
potential. The strongest effects of this process are felt in the shallow water aquatic communities
that are located near the biodiversity-rich deltas. Shoreline and water quality changes in the
vicinity of impacted rivers together with intensive exploitation of the highly diverse near shore
fisheries resources reduce fish production, lower local lakeshore incomes and nutritional
conditions as well as eliminate their potential to supply fish to inland areas within the riparian
countries.
The Integrated Watershed Management component will select priority river basins and will work
with communities at the micro-catchment and catchment levels to reduce excessive loss of water
and soils from watersheds, increase soil fertility, increase rates of afforestation, protect and
increase potable water supplies, empower resident communities to maintain and monitor their
watersheds, and introduce new approaches for integrated delivery of watershed management
services. Specifically, the component will support (a) integrated watershed management
planning and coordination, including the progressive refinement of existing catchment models to
improve the targeting of field interventions and the strengthening of a multisectoral
ecosystem-level approach to natural resources management within the Lake basin; (b) an
integrated program of community-based soil conservation, wetland maintenance, and forest
management interventions in targeted micro-catchments, based on existing government policies
for land resources, forestry, water, wildlife and fisheries; and (c) the monitoring of watershed
function, with particular emphasis on strengthening the hydrological monitoring network but also
including the monitoring of land use change, forest cover and in some cases river fisheries.
The monitoring activities supported under the IWM component will also contribute directly to
the tripartite Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa International Monitoring program (component 4) by
providing input information for the principal Malawi catchments. Critical basins from this
perspective are the Linthipe, with the largest urban population in the Lake catchment and the



6
ISDS
Songwe, Bua and Dwangwa where increasing pressures for agriculture may be affecting water
yields and quality significantly. These larger basins differ markedly in their impacts on the
Lake's coastal areas, but the causes are still poorly defined in terms of land uses. The project
will strengthen the relevant departments' ability to conduct assessments of larger river basin
issues and tie together sectoral information and databases into a common GIS-based watershed
database and modeling approach so that services and interventions can be targeted into critical
areas undergoing rapid loss of natural capital. Such an approach will also assist stakeholders to
generate credible predictions about the future status of the Lake, confirm causes of past changes
in loss of watershed natural capital, target critical areas for interventions, and evaluate their
anticipated impacts on the water quality and fish resources of coastal areas of the Lake.
The IWM component will be multi-disciplinary and will cut across traditional sectoral and
ministerial boundaries within national administrative structures. It will be implemented by staff
from several natural resource departments, including Water Development, Forestry, Parks and
Wildlife, Land Resources, and Fisheries, and by the University of Malawi, District Governments,
NGOs, and most critically the communities in the targeted micro-catchments. There is a large
number of possible sites on the escarpment, and the micro-catchments finally chosen for action
will vary in their size and the time required to bring about a monitorable change. But the entry
point for the implementation of these objectives will be existing policies and programmatic
approaches of the implementing agencies. LMEMP will build upon the current knowledge and
capacity of the implementing departments and will focus on strengthening those departments and
mobilizing their technical capacity at the community, district, and national level.
(2)   Fisheries Resource Management (objective and strategic approach)
The fisheries component seeks to improve the livelihoods of fishing communities along the Lake
and contribute to nutritional availability and economic productivity at both the local and national
levels by improving ecosystem-based fisheries management strategies and policies and ensuring
that fish resources are utilized sustainably while conserving globally significant biodiversity. The
component will examine the feasibility of community-based management of fishing areas to
determine sustainable levels of exploitation which reduce overexploitation of fish stocks and
minimize risks of species extinctions in the highly diverse fish communities of the Lake. It is
anticipated that trials of combinations of fishing technology, methods and intensity will
determine the type and scale of artisanal fishing which brings the greatest return on achievable
investment to the artisanal fishermen and their fishing community while minimizing risks of
species extinctions. From these trials at the community level, a coherent strategy and policy
development framework for the sector will be formulated with the support of the project.
Specific sub-components include:
A. Fisheries Management Strategy. The component will consist of a lake-wide planning
framework for biodiversity conservation and enhanced sustainable exploitation of fisheries
resources. Using data generated from the predecessor GEF/SADC Project and other scientific
studies on Lake biodiversity and fish stock, a comprehensive strategy for protecting fragile Lake
habitat and species diversity while enhancing the economic and nutritional contribution of Lake



7
ISDS
resources to families, communities and the national economy will be developed. The
development of technically sound and financially viable production strategies will be a key
component of the component. This sub-component will also support the regulatory and research
(monitoring) functions of central departments.
B. Pilot Technology and Production Methods Innovations. Scientific studies referred to above
confirm that there is a large, relatively untapped fisheries resource. These studies also reveal the
fragility of some fish stocks, the existence of over-exploitation in some near shore areas, and the
generalized threat of unregulated exploitation to the quality of Lake resources and biodiversity.
While a number of technologies and fishing methods innovations have been advanced to address
issues such as overfishing of near shore stocks, there has been little systematic assessment of the
appropriate mix of innovations to provide financially viable and technically accessible options
for fisher communities and entrepreneurs. This sub-component will provide for rigorous study
and development of approaches of technologies and fishing methods, the careful monitoring of
the impact of each production package on lake biodiversity while also assessing the equity and
social impacts of different packages. While particular attention will be accorded to packages
adapted for small-scale and artisanal fisher populations, the constraints and opportunities for
medium-scale commercial exploitation will also be addressed.
C. Strengthen Producer and Community-based Management of Fisheries Resources. While
sector-wide regulations are an important aspect of fisheries management, effective management
of the fisheries ultimately depends on the actions of local producers and fisher communities. This
sub-component will support Fisheries Department initiatives in the establishment and
strengthening of Village Beach Committees. Support will also be given to assessing the demand
for producer-based organizations for artisanal and semi-commercial fishers. Such groupings may
be of particular value in information generation and sharing regarding best practices, production
technologies, and the incentives surrounding regulatory compliance. It may be anticipated that
these groups will also play a critical role in the development and implementation of agreements
regarding managing access to fisheries. Innovations developed under this sub-component will
also require careful monitoring for the impact on vulnerable populations.
Approach and Justification
Lake Malawi possesses a number of features that make it unique among the lakes of the world.
The most well known feature is the species-rich assemblage of fishes whose diversity surpasses
that of any other freshwater fish community in the world. Of great interest to the scientific
community, this diversity, along with the fascinating breeding and feeding behavior exhibited by
many of the fish, has been studied under the first GEF/SADC Project. But for the population
living in the Lake catchment, it is fish's utility as an inexpensive source of high quality food what
makes the Lake's exceptional biodiversity so valuable. The shallow water artisanal fishery is
however in a downward spiral of deterioration as a result of localized over-fishing and increased
land degradation in the catchment, and sedimentation in sensitive habitats within the Lake.
There has been a decline in fish stocks of some key species in the biodiversity-rich near shore
areas of the Lake, which are habitat for the most diverse and endemic species of cichlids. Due to
their sedentary nature and low reproductive rates, the speciose cichlids are vulnerable to



8
ISDS
extinction from excessive fishing pressure, changes in water quality and localized
overexploitation of the near shore areas.
The principal challenge for sustainable management of the Lake's fisheries is to reduce pressure
on the fragile and highly diverse near shore stocks. To date there has been very little management
of the artisanal fisheries. Malawi and Tanzania have enacted laws to regulate the fisheries by
conventional means - through mesh size restrictions, gear prohibitions, closed seasons and
minimum landed sizes - but in practice these are not well enforced nor complied with. There has
never been any attempt to limit total fishing effort and fishing pressure is contained only by the
opportunity cost of labor (which is very low) and the industry's technical backwardness. In 1997
Malawi enacted a fisheries law that provides, for the first time, for the sharing of management
between the government and the fishing communities. This policy shift shows some signs of
promise, but it cannot yet be said to have been successful. Both Mozambique and Tanzania have
expressed interest in developing similar co-management regimes in their artisanal fisheries.
Tanzania has successfully adopted this approach on Lake Victoria.
The fisheries component of LMEMP will provide a planning framework for development of an
ecosystem-based socially and environmentally sustainable fisheries management strategy. Such
strategy will enable to manage fisheries resources in ways that are consistent with sustaining the
biological viability of fish stocks and the financial viability of the fishing industry. Currently, the
Lake's near shore stocks are under heavy pressure from artisanal fisheries, while offshore
demersal stocks are only moderately exploited and the large offshore pelagic stocks are very
lightly exploited. There exists a real possibility of complementing attempts to improve the
management of the biodiversity-rich inshore fisheries by promoting the diversification of the
fishing sector into offshore waters. This could involve investigating options for sustainably
increasing yields and generating economic opportunities by determining appropriate technologies
and fishing methods which could allow the artisanal fishery sector to sustainably develop into a
locally-based small-scale fishery based on demersal and offshore stocks. Such efforts will need
to be community based and will reduce pressure on the biodiversity-rich near shore stocks.
It is the intention of the Government to do this within the context of a well-defined management
strategy for the Lake fisheries and under a regime of close supervision and monitoring. Over the
past decade a great deal of fishery research has been undertaken in the Lake, the results and
recommendations of which are neither easily accessible to fishery managers nor in all cases in
agreement with each other. It is necessary to develop a synthesis of current understanding on the
various fish stocks and the relationships between them in order to design a coherent
ecosystem-based strategy for fisheries management. In cases where the fishery scientists are in
disagreement, the scope and implications of such disagreement must be made clear and suitable
tests embodied in the resulting adaptive management/development strategy. Monitoring is also a
vital component in any management structure, and the future fisheries resource component will
be tied to monitoring systems operating at national and local levels. Local-level monitoring will
include elements of intensive research as well as the tracking of key indicators, e.g. catch per
effort and size distribution of the catch, by members of the fishing communities.
The Fisheries component will therefore support initiatives to develop an ecosystem-based



9
ISDS
fisheries management strategy for the national fishing industry; radically improve the
management of near shore artisanal fisheries by supporting implementation of the government's
participatory fisheries management policy; propose financially viable and biologically sustainable
approaches for possible community-based offshore fishery development in selected pilot areas,
including a rigorous assessment of the environmental and social impacts of full-scale
development; investigate the feasibility of aquaculture in the lake shore zone, now favored by
market conditions, as a complementary source of fish protein, and define a sector investment
strategy to support the development of environmentally and socially proven opportunities in
offshore fishing and aquaculture to reduce pressure and improve management on the
biodiversity-rich near shore areas.
It is evident that without improved management of the resource there will be serious impacts on
the valuable near shore fisheries resources, with negative socio-economic consequences for
fisherfolk communities and the local economy. The most dramatic and direct effect of not taking
action would be the onset of increased instability in the fisheries sector and a risk of at least
localized collapses of shallow water fish stocks, with negative impacts on biodiversity. The
example provided by the chambo fisheries in the upper Shire and nearby Lake Malombe, located
south of Lake Malawi, illustrates the potential crisis that could arise if measures are not taken to
manage the Lake's fisheries in a sustainable manner.
(3)   Mobilization of Social and Institutional Capital (objective and strategic approach)
The objective of this component is to increase the awareness of and contribution to effective
resource management of key social institutions at community, district and national level involved
in the management of Lake Malawi resources. This will be accomplished in part by supporting
existing Government initiatives to build local capacity to manage the natural resources upon
which local livelihoods depend, such as the Village Natural Resource Management Committee
and the Village Beach Committee. In addition to these organizational innovations, existing social
capital in the form of indigenous knowledge and social institutions governing and informing
community organization and mobilization, resource management practices, and collective
decision-making will be acknowledged and integrated into project identification, development,
implementation and monitoring procedures. Horizontal and vertical networking within and
among stakeholder communities will be supported as a primary factor in establishing and voicing
a demand for ecosystem management and planning.
Specific Sub-components include:
A. Indigenous knowledge and Improved Resource Management. This sub-component will
actively address the integration of indigenous knowledge and practices into technical
decision-making processes for integrated watershed and fisheries management. It will also
identify constraints which limit the adoption of alternative technologies and approaches or
negotiate alternatives which may be more socially acceptable and equally effective.
B. Support for Government CBNRM and Decentralization Policy. Existing programs to establish
and strengthen community-based organizations such as Village NRM Committees and Village



10
ISDS
Beach Committees will be assessed to determine best practices. Support will be provided to
expand these organizations into pilot areas and to strengthen the capacity of relevant technical
departments to support these CBOs. Such support will include appropriately targeted training on
the resolution of resource use conflicts and the development of a conflict mitigation plan that
may be progressively refined as experience is acquired.
C. Capitalizing on Community Expertise. Study tours, local "best practices" competitions, and
other mechanisms for information exchange among community natural resource managers will
be assessed for effectiveness and promoted as a means of fostering horizontal networking and
information capital accumulation.
D. Vertical Networks: Working up the Watershed As part of the social capital strengthening
process, vertical networks linking resource users, community organizations, Traditional
Authorities, district technical and administrative officers and national policy-makers and
technical specialists will be facilitated. Watershed forums will be organized allowing for
discussion across jurisdictional boundaries as well as social and technical hierarchies. Such fora
will provide a mechanism for sharing knowledge and experiences, establishing priorities, and
evaluating the results of initiatives sponsored by this and related projects over time.
Approach and Justification
A key objective of LMEMP is to build a more informed stakeholder constituency for sustainable
resource management of the Lake resources. Through the Social and Institutional Capital
Mobilization component, the project seeks to foster a strong linkage among knowledge
(including indigenous knowledge), stakeholder participation, and co-management initiatives,
which all LMEMP components will support. A major consideration for the project is how to
institutionalize such efforts so it continues beyond the life of LMEMP.
LMEMP success will rely to a considerable extent on an informed exchange among the
stakeholders at all levels. This informed exchange includes not only the dissemination of
information generated at the center (government policies, research findings, extension
recommendations etc.) but also the contribution of (indigenous) community-based knowledge to
decision making in the co-management of the Lake resources to be supported under LMEMP.
The preparation of this component builds on earlier indigenous knowledge (IK) related activities
in Malawi dating back to 1995, and a National Science and Technology Policy approved in May
2001 which stresses the relevance of IK. This cross-cutting component will develop
multi-stakeholder information networks for Lake Malawi ecosystem management; support
vertical communication linkages that ensure a regular two-way flow of information between
resource users, local authorities and central technical specialists and policy makers; and facilitate
mechanisms for horizontal information exchange, such as fisher-to-fisher, farmer-to-farmer,
community-to-community, local government-to-local government and department-to-department.
Strengthened social and institutional capital that builds on indigenous means of communication
and organization will be instrumental in facilitating horizontal networks among stakeholders



11
ISDS
whose exchanges in the past have been either very limited or restricted to formal or hierarchical
channels. Such conditions of open dialogue for collective analysis are essential in order for all
stakeholders to collaboratively identify achievable priority actions, but most importantly, create
spaces for consultation and dialogue among themselves and with the implementing agencies and
districts on ways to achieve and monitor progress towards meeting the project's objectives. It will
enable stakeholders to advocate their interests, provide feedback to government, and monitor
progress towards achieving LMEMP objectives.
The initiation of community-based systems for the management of shared natural resources
(particularly forests, fish and wildlife) is likely to lead to a number of possible resource-use
conflicts, especially where livelihoods based on unsustainable resource use collide with emerging
natural resource management plans and institutions. This component will therefore develop a
mitigation plan for resource use conflicts, based on a growing body of case studies and
documented field experience, and implemented, where practicable, through the existing conflict
resolution role of traditional authorities. It will also provide training in conflict resolution to
field extension staff (both in Government and NGOs) and community leaders.
In addition, this component will support the integration of indigenous knowledge into project
planning and practice. This will be achieved through the establishment of an IK technical team
charged with the identification of indigenous knowledge, practices and resource management
systems that can be extended or replicated through the project's field components.
(4)   Regional Programs component (objective and strategic approach)
The objective of this component is to support the development of an ecosystem policy and
institutional framework to assist the riparian governments to eventually operationalize joint
management and monitoring of land and water resources in the Lake basin.
Specific sub-components include:
A. African Centre for Aquatic Research and Education. This sub-component will facilitate
transformation of the Senga Bay research station, home of the predecessor GEF/SADC Project,
into a regional center of excellence for aquatic ecosystem research, training and education to
serve the needs of Malawi and the riparian countries of Tanzania and Mozambique for improved
management of Lake Malawi.
B. Ecosystem Monitoring Program. LMEMP will establish a lake-wide water quality/physical
processes model and regional ecosystem monitoring system, which would form the core
transboundary program for the regional center (above).
C. Ecosystem Policy and Institutional Framework. This sub-component will assist in the design
of common strategies and compatible policies and programs for joint management of the
transboundary resources in the basin based on lessons learned from pilot projects and field
experience, including support to special studies related to transboundary issues, and support to a
Malawi Secretariat to a (future) Lake Malawi/Nyasa/Niassa management institution.



12
ISDS
Approach and Justification
As indicated earlier, LMEMP succeeds the GEF/SADC Lake Malawi/Nyasa Biodiversity
Conservation Project which was completed in 2000. An important lesson learned from the
SADC/GEF project was that the three riparian countries have different priorities and impacts on
the Lake ecosystem, and also face different constraints in their capacities to manage the Lake
resources. Although each has voiced a commitment to the actions called for under the first
project, they felt that a single large project covering a wide range of disciplines and institutions in
the three countries under a single regional management would be less manageable than a series
of nationally based projects with strong mechanisms for regional networking and the treatment of
transboundary issues. The transboundary issues of the Lake ecosystem require that in the
long-term the three riparian countries find common strategies and institute compatible policies
and programs for joint management of the resources in the basin.
The Regional Programs component is the first contribution to such networking and collaboration.
The component is coordinated with a number of other relevant initiatives related to the larger
Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa eco-region which are under consideration or in the early stages of
development, including the Lake Malawi Eco-region initiative supported by WWF, the
Tri-partite Legal Framework facilitated by FAO, the Regional Water Resources Development
initiative supported by SIDA, and a similar regional water program sponsored by Danida. Each of
these efforts is a clear expression of the strong international interest in this vital eco-region. With
the support of the Bank and the GEF, the emerging programs in Malawi, Mozambique and
Tanzania represent the countries' national efforts to develop multi-sectoral approaches to
improve resource utilization and management of the Lake and its catchments within a regional
framework of cooperation. In this sense, LMEMP rightly focuses on building local and national
capacity to address the management priorities for the Lake fisheries and key catchments feeding
into the Lake, while establishing the knowledge base and expertise required for effective regional
management of the larger Lake basin.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The geographic focus of LMEMP may be described on a number of different levels, from the
regional focus implicit in the project concept and in the Regional Programs and Social and
Institutional Capital Mobilization components, to the site-specific and village-level focus of pilot
field interventions in the Fisheries and Integrated Watershed Management components. For
example, under the IWM component, the project proposes to focus on a limited range of
catchment scales and sites that represent high risk areas for contributing excessive sediment and
nutrient loads to the Lake, rather than attempt to work in a large number of districts from the
outset. The selection of sites will be based on a procedure that takes full advantage of the data,
analytic models, and other decision support tools formulated under the first GEF/SADC Project
and further developed as part of the capacity building investments of LMEMP. The justification
for the initial restriction to core catchments is based on the limited staffing and capacity of the
key technical departments at field level and the need to demonstrate observable impact on



13
ISDS
watershed and water quality to enhance both the sustainability and the replicability (or diffusion)
of project activities and accomplishments. This is consistent with the underlying philosophy of
LMEMP that emphasizes the pairing of information with action to develop a model of
sustainable ecosystem management in the Lake basin.
Table 1, below, provides a summary analysis of project location. The rural populations with
which the project will engage comprise (a) the fishing communities along the lakeshore of Lake
Malawi (but with special emphasis on selected pilot sites), and (b) the farming communities
resident or active in critical parts of the Lake catchment, principally in the lakeshore escarpment
zone and usually within 40km of the Lake. Although the project's pilot sites have not yet been
fully determined, it is possible to make some general observations about the nature of these
rather distinct target groups.
Level                               Project location          Comment
Project concept; project oversight  Lake Malawi/Nyasa/ Niassa  The project forms part of a
and its basin within Malawi,  regional initiative, and will
Communication and Indigenous        Tanzania and Mozambique   be complemented by similar
Knowledge component                                           national projects in
Regional Programs component                                   preparation by the
Governments of Tanzania
and Mozambique
Fisheries         Master plan       Malawi, national          Higher-level institutional
Management                                                    focus
component         Fisheries         Lake Malawi; focus on Malawi The project will engage
management        lakeshore fishing communities directly with rural
communities and
institutions at district level
Fisheries pilot   Lake Malawi; focus on specific and below
initiatives       pilot sites
Integrated        Planning and      Malawi, national          Higher-level institutional
Watershed         coordination                                focus
Management        Field interventions; Lake Malawi catchments;  The project will engage
component         monitoring        focus on specific pilot sites in  directly with rural
escarpment zones           communities and
institutions at district level
and below
Table 1. Project Location
The shaded cells represent direct project interaction with its target beneficiaries.
Malawi is well known as an exceedingly poor country, with mean per capita GNI standing at



14
ISDS
$170 in 2000. Two thirds of the 11 -million population are considered poor, while one third live
in dire poverty. Children in Malawi are generally poorly nourished, and about half are physically
stunted. More than one quarter of adult men, and more than half of adult women, are illiterate.
Life expectancy is 38 years, and declining. The prevalence of AIDS among adults is fairly stable
at around 15%. Within this bleak national picture there is significant regional and urban/rural
differentiation. Poverty and AIDS are both more acute in the Southern Region than in the rest of
the country, and AIDS is more prevalent in urban than rural areas (25% and 13%, respectively).
Urban areas are characterized by a lower prevalence of poverty, but also by a more unequal
distribution of wealth: the Gini coefficients for urban and rural areas are 0.52 and 0.37,
respectively. Social development has been heavily modified by the past century of Malawi's
history. Institutions of traditional authority were weakened by the Colonial administration and
politicized by the first independent regime, and their current power and relevance vary widely
between Chiefdoms. Community based common-interest institutions were suppressed during the
pre-democratic independent era, and although they are now expected to play an important role in
agricultural development and natural resources management their development remains at a very
early stage.
The characteristics of rural people are themselves quite heterogeneous, and are conditioned by
agricultural population density, soil fertility and the presence or absence of other significant
natural resources, as well as by cultural and historical factors. The livelihoods of the lakeshore
populations depend on the Lake fisheries in addition to farming, and these groups are generally
less poor and better nourished than the rural average. The fishery sector is much less seasonal
than agriculture, and provides a year-round impetus to other business enterprises. The Malawi
Rural Finance Company (MRFC) reports better performance in its small-scale business lending
to groups on the lakeshore than to similar groups in inland areas that are less economically
diverse. Some fishing communities have been quite mobile in the past, and both permanent and
seasonal migrations have given rise to some complex ethnic issues that are analyzed as part of
the Social and Environmental Analysis of LMEMP.
By contrast, the farming communities that live on the escarpment zone tend to be poorer than
those living above, on the richer plateau soils, and below, on the fertile lakeshore plain. Those
who live and farm on the steepest slopes, i.e. those who have the potential to make the greatest
impact on their catchments, are often very poor households of low socio-economic status. In
addition, many parts of the escarpment zone are exploited by people who are not local residents.
The activities of such non-residents include farming, by households unable to expand their
upland farms and who can afford to hire laborers to clear land on the slopes, and commercial
woodcutting, often to supply the inland urban market.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: An Integrated Social and Environmental Analysis was completed by the Government and
is being discussed discussed with stakeholders, and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal. A
summary of this analysis will be incorporated within the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The
analysis has also served to create consensus on the project's social development outcomes and has
informed project formulation and institutional arrangements by guiding the design of a system for
monitoring and social learning which ensures public accountability and the sustainability of the



15
ISDS
project interventions (see below).
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                              Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                 * Yes    No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                    C Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              Yes *No       TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                Yes *No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  Yes *No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      Yes * No     TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               Yes *No      TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                               Yes * No     TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*        * Yes    No  ^ TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)      - Yes 0 No   C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
LMEMP should be viewed as an effort to design and implement an ecosystem-based
environmental and social management plan for Lake Malawi and its basin: it cannot therefore be
analyzed in relation to Safeguard Policies in the same way as a project that might envisage
adverse environmental or social impacts as the side effects of an investment for the larger
economic good. Nevertheless, there can be uncertainties associated with the implementation of
any field activities for which continued monitoring and mitigation are required as part of project
design and implementation. The Integrated Environmental and Social Analysis of LMEMP is
essentially an analysis of the key issues, opportunities, constraints, and risks involved in project
implementation, but it also assesses the safeguard actions that will be adopted, and the country
and stakeholders' capacity to monitor and implement them. These are discussed below.
Safeguard issues related to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
The Environmental Assessment Safeguard is triggered not by the expected negative
environmental impacts of the project, but by its focus on Lake Malawi, which contains a
freshwater fish fauna of unparalleled diversity and global significance.
Although the project is expected to yield strong positive social benefits within the medium term,
it must be recognized that in some circumstances the introduction of a community based natural
resources management regime, where before there was none, will in some circumstances result in
the need for some level of social re-adjustments in the short term. Within the artisanal fisheries,
the benefit of spreading fishing effort further offshore in the long run would be partially undercut
if a new cohort of small-scale fishermen were to enter the fishery to occupy the niches vacated by



16
ISDS
those upgrading their operations. This risk is anticipated in the project design, and from the
outset negotiations would be initiated with community resource management institutions (Beach
Village Committees, Fishermen's Associations) with a view to implementing some form of
restriction to new entry into the fishing industry. The Fisheries Conservation and Management
Act (1997) already empowers the Director of Fisheries to limit the granting of licenses if such
limitation is deemed in the best interests of the fishery; however, such a move is not enforceable
without the support of the fishing communities, and is therefore better dealt with through an
extension-based approach that emphasizes community-based resource management which
LMEMP will support. LMEMP's treatment of this issue is further described under section II.D.3,
below.
Possible safeguard issue related to Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)
In all respects the activities supported by LMEMP seek to reduce pressures on the natural
resources of the Lake Malawi ecosystem, principally through the promotion of community-based
natural resource management approaches. However, the Government's long-term strategy of
diversion of fishing effort into non-traditional offshore fisheries would, for the most part, target
offshore stocks. Without some explanation this could appear simply to be transferring the
problem from one resource to another. The under-exploited fish stocks in question are of two,
quite different types: a very large stock of truly pelagic (mid-water) species, and a rather smaller
stock of demersal (bottom-dwelling) fishes that occur at depths below 50 meters and down to the
limits of dissolved oxygen at 200 meters. Both stocks have been extensively researched. A
considerable amount is known about their species composition and abundance, and maximum
sustainable annual yields have been estimated at around 30,000 tonnes for the pelagic stock, and
8,000 tonnes for the deep demersal stock.
The pelagic stock is the proposed target of new artisanal fisheries. The stock has low diversity,
comprising only about 20 species mostly of lake-wide distribution. Further, the within-species
diversity is also low. Molecular DNA studies on three representative species found almost no
genetic structuring, indicating that each species comprises a single huge stock. In practical terms,
this means that the heavier fishing pressure that in the long term would result from pursuing the
Government strategy is unlikely to lead to local extinctions, since the fish removed will simply
be replaced from the lake-wide genetic pool. Although it would be useful to extend the DNA
studies to other pelagic species, the same result is expected. A general picture of fish diversity is
beginning to emerge in which endemicity and diversity are related to habitat. Thus, inshore
rocky habitats support very high biodiversity and very high endemicity, with many species found
only on a specific rock outcrop. Inshore sandy habitats support a slightly lower diversity, but
although the sandy shore species may be widely distributed, rocky headlands interrupt genetic
interchange, and discrete genetic stocks are found in different parts of the Lake. Species of the
muddy lake-bed further offshore show much less genetic structuring, although species diversity
remains high. At the far end of the spectrum lie the pelagic fishes, with low diversity, very wide
distribution and virtually no genetic structuring. They are non-schooling fishes (which makes
catching them more difficult) and are likely to be very resilient to fishing pressure. The basic
principle here is to transfer fishing effort from the vulnerable, highly diverse shallow-water
stocks to a resource much less likely to be altered significantly by fishing.



17
ISDS
The deep demersal stock is seen as a potential target for new trawl fisheries, removing some
fishing effort from the shallow water trawl fishery. This stock is much more complex than the
pelagic stock and has higher biodiversity, but as indicated above the individual species are widely
distributed and unlikely to show a high degree of genetic structuring. The project rationale is
similar to that described above, but with one important difference. That is, that given the current
state of knowledge of the existence of the stock, its potential yield, and the fact that it may be
fished quite simply using existing technology, there is a strong (and understandable) political
commitment to ensuring that it is brought into production. A deep demersal fishery will become
a reality in the future, with or without LMEMP. Regardless, what the project seeks to do is to
assist the Government to impose a management regime on the emerging fishery that will ensure
the maximum efficiency and the least impact on biodiversity.
Safeguard issues related to Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50)
LMEMP plans to support interventions to (a) manage Malawi's sediment and nutrient inflow into
the Lake, and (b) improve the sustainable development of fisheries in the Lake that in the
long-term could involve fish stocks shared by the three nations. Although fisheries is not
mentioned specifically in paragraph 2 of OP 7.50, the long-term prospects for future
development of the fisheries in the Lake by the Government of Malawi would involve issues that
will require international cooperation and sensitivity to the rights of the other riparian states over
shared resources. This said, it should be noted that all three riparian states are cooperating in the
preparation of their ecosystem management projects that together will comprise a regional
program. LMEMP's treatment of this issue is discussed under section II.D.3, below.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No potential cumulative negative impacts have been identified in connection with this project.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No potential long term negative impacts have been identified in connection with this project.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
For the most part LMEMP will support interventions at the strategic rather than the policy level,
that is, it will work through the implementation of existing government policies within a strategic
ecosystem management framework based on the very considerable research achievements of the
former GEF/SADC Project and other recent studies. The current generation of natural resources
management (NRM) policies shares a common emphasis on (a) the progressive transfer of
resource tenure from the State to the resource users and (b) heightened importance for the roles
of the private sector and non-governmental organizations in policy implementation. Although
implementation experience points the way for further refinement of Malawi's NRM policies, the
broad policy direction is considered consistent with the project emphasis on community
empowerment and the mobilization of social and institutional capital as the primary means of



18
ISDS
achieving the productive and sustainable management of the Lake Malawi ecosystem. During
the project design process one alternative was identified at the policy level, and two alternatives
at the strategic level:
Policy alternatives for improving land resources conservation and management
There exist two principal policies for land use management in Malawi. The first is the active
encouragement of good land husbandry on customary land by government and non-government
providers of extension services. Extension has been the mainstay of customary land use policy
since the colonial era, the only major change being a shift in emphasis away from soil
conservation for its own sake towards conservation as a means to improve resource productivity.
The second policy, still under development, is the drafting of a new legal framework for land use
management, which will commence with three sets of regulations under the Environment
Management Act (1996). These will lay down minimum management standards for the use of
fragile lands - steep slopes, wetlands, riverbanks and lakeshores.
The emphasis on extension and land use standards for fragile and/or sensitive lands are both
compatible and indeed represent two aspects of a "policy" of state directed land management.
That is, extension as practiced to date represents a classic transfer of information and
technologies approved by the state (Ministry of Agriculture) to the farmer who is seen simply as
a resource user. Land management standards follow this with further, and in this case
enforceable, state directed prescriptions in the form of standards on the use of particular
categories of land. The only real policy alternative to state-directed extension and regulation is
the promotion of collaborative management and CBNRM regimes. Under the latter, the erstwhile
resource user is recognized as a resource manager, with unique authority and responsibilities for
the resource in question. He or she works alongside state resource managers.to determine how
best to ensure the sustainable, productive use of land resources.
LMEMP's Integrated Watershed Management component emphasizes the balancing
community-based and collaborative management regimes with state directed land resources
conservation and management with. The former establishes the regulatory parameters and serves
as a conduit of technical support, while the latter ensures that communities and local people have
a meaningful voice in resource management decisions. To this end, LMEMP emphasizes the
strengthening of community-based natural resource management practices along with
collaborative management regimes for resources in which the state has a management interest
within the targeted catchment areas. It is now understood that past failures in land husbandry
extension were related to inappropriate targeting and poor extension methodology, and there is a
substantial body of more recent successful extension initiatives that are ready for replication in
the selected sub-catchments.
Strategic alternatives for integrated watershed management
The Lake Malawi watershed comprises individual river catchments which vary greatly in their
intrinsic characteristics and in the degree to which they have been altered recently by agriculture
and deforestation. Attention has tended to focus on the degraded catchments that currently



19
ISDS
contribute most sediment and nutrients to the Lake and that require restorative treatment, yet
there are several healthy catchments that have the potential for very rapid degradation if land use
patterns were to change: here, preventative action could be an equally important and
cost-effective project approach. It is anticipated that both approaches will be tested within this
component's pilot field phase.
Strategic alternatives for fisheries management
As has been stated above, Malawi has an opportunity to relieve pressure on heavily exploited
inshore fish resources where species-diversity is highest by exploring the development of
offshore fisheries based on proven resources, both pelagic and demersal, that are currently only
very lightly fished. During discussions with the Fisheries Department on the best way of
achieving this long-term shift in fishing effort, a question has arisen concerning the advisability
of promoting the development of the mechanized fishery in the long term. It has been argued
that a strategy focusing on the artisanal fishery alone would yield better results in terms of
employment and poverty impacts, and would avoid the proportionally greater environmental
risks associated worldwide with mechanized fishing. However, there is evidence that some
resources (deep demersal) are likely never to become a serious target for non-mechanized
fisheries, while others (offshore pelagic) are so large that, within clearly stated limits, there is
ample room for both kinds of development in the long-term.
Given Malawi's poverty and the importance of fish in the national diet it would be perhaps
politically unacceptable to attempt "management by failing to develop". Furthermore, should
mechanized fishery development be advocated in Malawi in the future, it would be greatly
preferable for it to occur within the context of a strong management regime and intensive
monitoring, both of which are strong areas supported by LMEMP. The risks associated with
mechanized fishery development should be treated seriously, and the establishment of adequate
management safeguards and full social and environmental impact assessments would both be
mainstreamed by the project should any attempts to take such developments beyond an
exploratory/pilot stage be proposed.
Finally, reference should be made to the no-project alternative. A major lesson for the
international community is evidenced by the high economic and environmental costs of
neglecting to maintain the health of the Lake Victoria ecosystem, where eutrophication and the
introduction of exotic species have resulted in dramatic, deleterious changes in the system.
These include disruption of transportation and hydroelectric generation, increase in water-borne
diseases, water de-oxygenation, loss of fish habitats and rapid fish species extinctions, and the
potential for toxic algae blooms with adverse impacts on other productive uses of the aquatic
resource. The legacy of that neglect will be borne by the people of the Victoria basin for many
years to come. There is no need to learn the same lesson in Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Safeguard issues related to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
Bringing management systems to bear on situations of over-exploitation or resource mining is



20
ISDS
always bound to lead to the partial loss of short term and unsustainable livelihoods. This is not an
issue that may be side-stepped or otherwise avoided in the context of projects seeking to
sustainably improve management of natural resources based on which rural communities depend
for their livelihood. This is considered a risk of reduced benefit rather than one of net negative
impact. To minimize the social impacts associated with the introduction of improved natural
resource management practices, LMEMP will be made explicit the linkages between
conservation and production activities in all components, whether to address integrated
watershed management concerns across priority micro-catchments or to improve the
management of a biologically and economically important fishery, so that the economic
underpinnings of sound resource management are made manifest to all stakeholders. The project
will not support termination of undesirable but previously legitimate practices without ensuring
the existence of viable exit mechanisms and livelihood alternatives that are widely shared by the
stakeholder communities. This is consistent with the central project thrust in ensuring that
communities and their local level institutions have a meaningful voice in resource management
decisions and all co-management interventions supported by the project.
Safeguard issues related to Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50)
The transboundary nature of the Lake ecosystem requires that in the long-term the three riparian
countries find common strategies and institute compatible policies and programs for joint
management of the resources in the basin. LMEMP contributes to this process by supporting the
emergence of a national monitoring and integrated, ecosystem-based planning capacity, the
establishment of a national policy coordination and program oversight committee for the Lake,
and the formation of a national Secretariat for an eventual regional commission composed of the
three riparian states. By emphasizing the establishment of a regional ecosystem monitoring
network, a regional centre of excellence for aquatic research and education, and structured
exchanges of information and experiences through a variety of mechanisms including study
tours, workshops, regional conferences and collaborative research and training initiatives,
LMEMP will lay the foundation for closer regional technical and policy level coordination.
LMEMP will also assist the riparian governments to utilize the full range of technical, economic,
financial, regulatory, and institutional measures needed to develop and operationalize a
sustainable development strategy for the shared Lake basin.
As stated earlier, the long-term prospects for future development of the fisheries in the Lake
would involve issues that will require international cooperation. Regarding the fisheries sector,
there are two tasks here which LMEMP will support. The first is the clear identification of which
species constitute true "shared stocks", and should therefore be managed at the regional level,
and the second is the establishment of the policy and institutional basis for achieving joint
management by the three riparian states. The first is a research task, and would be undertaken
within the project's Regional Programs component. Groundwork towards the second task, the
establishment of joint management, has already been completed by the FAO project
"International Legal and Institutional Arrangements for the Management of Lake Malawi/Nyasa"
(TCP/RAF/0065(A)). This initiative, itself an offshoot of the earlier GEF/SADC Project, is
expected to result in (a) an international agreement covering the management of shared fish
stocks, and (b) proposals for a permanent regional institution to guide natural resources



21
ISDS
management of the Lake and its basin. The Regional Programs component of the LMEMP
would provide material and technical support to the establishment of such an institution.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Lake ecosystem is subject to a wide range of demands from multiple beneficiary groups
which generate a multitude of environmental and socioeconomic concerns. The diversity of user
groups accounts in part for the variety of sectoral activities impacting the ecosystem identified
under the former GEF/SADC Project. Stakeholders range from fishers, fish processors and
traders, farmers and wood producers to women's, youth and religious organizations, NGOs,
CBOs, universities, the business community, local government authorities, traditional authorities,
politicians, the press and national agencies and ministries in the three riparian countries. A
common understanding of the Lake ecosystem shared among these actors is key to enable them
to work together towards a healthy, sustainable and varied ecosystem that can support the many
human activities that depend upon the Lake's resources. In LMEMP, this will be attempted by
fostering a stronger linkage among knowledge, stakeholder participation, and co-management
interventions. These three factors together are expected to open the way for developing
innovative collaborative operational approaches and solutions among stakeholders to sustainably
manage the biodiversity resources of the Lake.
During 2001 five Government Task Forces responsible for LMEMP preparation conducted
extensive consultations with the intended primary beneficiaries, the farming and fishing
communities of the lakeshore and escarpment zones. The means of consultation varied between
Task Forces, for instance the Department of Fisheries convened a number of large public
meetings in different lakeshore areas, while the Department of Forestry undertook a series of
intensive participatory rural appraisals in selected villages. The project preparation team also
convened a series of workshops with local government authorities in order to introduce project
concepts and to seek feedback on the match between priorities identified by the Task Forces and
the priorities identified in the respective district development and environmental plans. Local
consultants engaged by the Government in November 2001 to bring together the work of the
Task Forces into coherent component designs also conducted their own wide-ranging
consultations with both primary and secondary stakeholders in the project. The content of these
extensive consultations was not framed in the style of the Safeguard Policies, but the safeguard
issues identified here, in particular the issues of restriction of entry into the fishing industry, and
the social costs and benefits of intensified fisheries and forest management, were openly and
frankly discussed.
Stakeholder consultations performed during and as part of the generation of this project should
be viewed not as a one-off activity, but rather as the start of an increasingly open dialogue
between all parties that will become the core and the hallmark of LMEMP, an objective that
forms the basis of the project's Social and Institutional Capital Mobilization component which
will support participatory monitoring and evaluation of LMEMP activities. Through this
component, LMEMP will enable stakeholders to advocate their interests, provide feedback to
government, and monitor progress towards achieving LMEMP objectives. Such conditions of
open dialogue for collective analysis are essential for stakeholders to collaboratively identify



22
ISDS
achievable priority actions, and more importantly, to create spaces for consultation and dialogue
among themselves and with the implementing agencies and districts on ways to achieve and
monitor progress towards meeting the project's objectives. LMEMP will include measures to
build in-country capacity to identify and manage such issues as they emerge, to establish and
support mechanisms for stakeholder participation in implementation, and to develop public
accountability systems that enhance stakeholder voice and monitor project outcomes.
LMEMP will thus seek to facilitate an environment of multi-stakeholder consultation and
networking that can be truly part of the broader social system by which generated information is
translated into action. Such system is expected to empower a wide range of individuals, groups,
and local organizations to work together and support decision-making change within a
framework of collective information production and action. The strategies developed by
stakeholders through this system are expected to draw on a larger base of information that is
available to any one of the parties acting alone. The probability of commitment to, and adoption
of, improved natural resource management practices is also likely to be higher because
stakeholders have had a direct hand in designing them.
Finally, an Integrated Environmental and Social Analysis of the project has been prepared by
the Government and will be disclosed before appraisal. A summary of this analysis will be
incorporated within the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The environmental analysis details:
(a) the main issues and their treatment; (b) the main EMP features of LMEMP which itself
represents an effort to design and implement an ecosystem-based environmental and social
management program for Lake Malawi and its basin; (c) details of stakeholder consultation; and
(d) arrangements for monitoring and evaluating the environmental impacts of the project,
including responsibilities and costs. The social analysis includes discussions of: (a) key social
issues, opportunities, constraints, impacts, risks, and anticipated project's social development
outcomes; (b) social institutions (formal and informal) and their impact on social rules and
behavior regarding the objectives of the project; (c) characteristics, interests and concerns of key
stakeholders, including women, and how they will be likely to engage and influence project
implementation and outcomes; (d) consultations or collaboration with NGOs or other civil
society organizations during project preparation and mechanisms for their continued involvement
in the project; (e) institutional arrangements to ensure stakeholder participation, voice, and public
accountability of the project's intended environmental and social development outcomes; (f)
other arrangements for monitoring project components performance; and (g) the applicability of
safeguard policies and the provisions made by the project to ensure compliance with them.
HIV/AIDS and sustainability of LMEMP's capacity-building efforts
HIV/AIDS is a national problem of such proportions that it cannot be overlooked in the design of
LMEMP. Malawi has one of the highest HIV infection rates in the world, conservatively
estimated at around 15 percent nationally in the 15-49 age group. There is a growing recognition
that the effects of HIV/AIDS now require improved human resources planning and training, as
well as well-designed workplace programs for AIDS prevention and the mainstreaming of
HIV/AIDS as a factor of human resources management in all sectors. Government policies to
address the HIV/AIDS problem are summarized in a National Strategic Framework coordinated



23
ISDS
by the National AIDS Commission.
The Strategic Framework directs the national HIV/AIDS response in the period 2000-2004,
providing the basis for formulating policies, operational programs, projects and activities. The
Strategic Framework has three main objectives: to reduce the incidence of HIV/AIDS, to
improve the quality of life of those infected, and to mitigate against the economic and social
impacts. LMEMP will support the Strategic Framework in three ways: (a) by promoting the
development of proactive strategies at central and district level to address recruitment,
multi-tracked training, and succession issues arising from staff losses due to HIV/AIDS; (b) by
strengthening horizontal linkages between resource user groups that will reduce dependency on
the formal extension networks that have proved so vulnerable to HIV/AIDS; and (c) by
strengthening the development of rural institutions and communication channels that could also
serve as appropriate focal points and conduits for communicating health and HIV/AIDS
messages.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           5/14/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            5/14/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                     Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable



24
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. An Integrated
Social and Environmental Analysis was completed by the Govemment and is being discussed with
stakeholders, and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal. A summary of this analysis will be
incorporated within the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). Specific operational agreements reached
with the client on mechanisms to achieve and monitor project environmental and social development
outcomes will be incorporated in the Loan and Grant Agreements.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Francisco J. Pichon                         May 13, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank     May 14, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Rusdian Lubis/Person/World Bank        May 14, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank  May 14, 2002
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     May 14, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Karen Mcconnell Brooks                      May 13, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEED8ArCK     SItE MAP       SHMDWCA%E     FM



