ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWori1I Frou of Povorty
infoShop
Tbc WXi,-d liuk
Report No AC74
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MALAWI                                   Project ID: P073821
Project: Multi-sector AIDS Program (MAP): Support to  Task Team Leader: Christine E. Kimes
the Malawi National AIDS Strategic Framework
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 19, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 24, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m):
IDA GRANT FOR HIV/AIDS 35
Managing Unit: AFTOS                              Sector: Other social services (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Fighting communicable diseases (P); Social
Status: Lending                                  risk mitigation (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the national HIV/AIDS program, which the proposed MAP will support, is
to reduce the transmission of HV, to improve the quality of life of those infected and affected by AIDS,
and to mitigate the impact of IlTlV/AIDS in all sectors and at all levels of Malawian society.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Government of Malawi, through its National AIDS Commission (NAC), is putting in place
management systems and funding mechanisms that will enable the public sector, private businesses, and
civil society to mobilize and implement a multi-sectoral response at the national, district, and community
level. The overarching principles guiding the national response are contained in the National Strategic
Framework 2000-04 (NSF), which was adopted following a participatory consultation process in
1998-99. The objectives of the NSF are to reduce the transmission of HIV, improve the quality of life of
those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS, and mitigate the impact of HIV/AIDS in all sectors and at all
levels of Malawian society. As the NSF is entering into its final year, the NAC and national stakeholders
have developed a programmatic framework to guide interventions during the next five years of the
national response - the Strategic Management Plan (SMP). The SMP includes those interventions which
are coordinated and directly funded by the National AIDS Commission It is expected that a new NSF
2004-2009 will be formulated before the end of the current NSF.
The NAC has invited its external development partners to provide their financial assistance in support of
the SMP, on the basis of ajoint annual work plan, using joint financial, procurement, and reporting
mechanisms, rather than funding multiple HIV/AIDS projects each requiring parallel systems for tracking
and reporting on individual donor's funds. The SMP is composed of seven major subprograms: i)



2
ISDS
advocacy and prevention; ii) sectoral mainstreaming; iii) treatment, care and support; iv) impact
mitigation; v) capacity building and partnerships; vi) monitoring evaluation and research; and vii)
national leadership and coordination. The SMP includes those activities for which the NAC acts either
as financier (through the I[V/AIDS grants facility) or as a direct manager of coordination/ leadership
activities. The first six subprograms enumerated above cover those activities which will be implemented
by stakeholders, while the seventh subprogram will be NAC managed and implemented.
The estimated cost of the five year, first phase SMP program is estimated at $221 million. In addition to
the Government of Malawi itself, the external development partners who will contribute financially to
the implementation of the joint program of work are: the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria (GF), UNDP, AfDB, Centers for Disease Control, CIDA, DffD, IDA, NORAD, and SIDA.
"Rules of engagement" between NAC and the development partners have been discussed extensively, and
are captured in a multi-donor Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and supporting Operational
Guidelines. Within the MOU framework, pooling of funds in a common basket will be one of the
financing modalities available to development partners. The partners who plan to participate in the
basket pooling arrangement are: CIDA, DflD, IDA, NORAD, SIDA and the GOM. Distribution of
basket funding among the subprograms will be agreed each year on the basis of rolling annual work plans
and stakeholder decisions.
IDA support will be disbursed into the common hard currency basket account on the basis of PMRs, to
fund those elements of the SMP which are not being funded by ear-marked contributions from the GF,
UNDP, AfDB or CDC. The IDA allocations per subprogram shown below are indicative, for the reasons
explained above, and are proportionate to IDA's share in the basket (48%).
Components:
1. Advocacy and Prevention: This subprogram covers a broad range of activities and services aimed at
changing behavior and preventing transmission of HIV. Activity clusters include: IEC/BC for target
populations, promotion of safe sex (including condoms), voluntary counselling and testing (VCT),
prevention of mother to child transmission (PMTCT), and prevention of nosocomial infections (blood
safety, injection safety, and health care waste handling).
2. Sectoral Mainstreaming: This subprogram will enable public institutions, private companies, and civil
society organizations to mainstream HIV/AlDS in their workplace and in their core business, thereby
mitigating the epidemic's impact on labor productivity and service delivery.
3. Treatment, Care and Support: This subprogram covers a range of health based interventions aimed at
reducing the morbidity and mortality associated with HIV/AIDS. The category comprises two main
activity clusters: a) clinical care and treatment, and b) community / home-based care.
4. Impact Mitigation: This subprogram aims to mitigate the impact of the T1-V/AIDS epidemic on
particularly vulnerable members of society: orphans and other vulnerable children (OVCs), girl-children,
widows and widowers, and the dependent elderly. Activities could include educational support and
training activities for OVCs, income generation activities for vulnerable households, community-based
and institutional care for orphans, and psycho-social support for affected families.
5. Capacity Building & Partnerships: This subprogram aims to build the capacity of stakeholder partners
to implement a multi-sectoral response to the epidemic. Interventions will assist NGOs, FBOs, CBOs,
sector institutions, local governments, and private companies to develop long term visions, operational
frameworks, and technical skills to address the epidemic.



3
ISDS
6. Monitoring, Evaluation and Research: This subprogram will cover the range of interventions needed
to enable the NAC to track the epidemic and national response and to understand which interventions are
proving most effective under different local and cultural conditions. Activities included in the M & E
work plan will include biological and behavioral surveillance, poverty analysis (to measure
socio-economic impacts of the epidemic), programme activity monitoring, and specialized studies.
7. National Leadership and Coordination: This subprogram consists of two main activity clusters: a)
national leadership and coordination, and b) program management.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
National in scope.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Classified as 'B' because of potential irnpacts of medical waste.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does no! intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Safe collection, storage, and disposal of medical wastes is the key environmental issue associated with
scaling up the national HIV/AIDS response. Currently, Malawi does not have a policy framework and
defined technical standards for managing health care wastes. -As input into the development of such a
national policy/action plan, an assessment of injection safety (IS) and health care waste management
(HCWM) within the public and private healthl services was carried out in November/December 2002,
supported by technical and financial assistance from UNICEF, WHO, and the World Bank.
With respect to injection safety, the assessment found that injection recipients in Malawi were at risk as a



4
ISDS
result of serious breaks in infection control practices and reuse of injection equipment in the absence of
sterilization. Many injections in the curative sector were unnecessary and might have been given more
safely and with equal efficacy in an oral formulation. Inadequate collection and disposal methods for
used injection equipment exposed health workers and the community at large to risks of injury and
infection from contaminated sharp waste.
Major deficiencies in HCW management were observed throughout the collection, storage,
transportation, and treatment cycle. The major weaknesses found include: lack of planning or internal
management procedures; absence of viable data about HCW production and characteristics; no
monitoring system or staff member designated to monitor HCW management; insufficiency of secure
collection materials and protective gear; mixing of HCW with household and office waste; and
inefficient local incinerators. As a result, health care workers, non-technical health facility staff,
municipal landfill workers, and landfill scavengers are at serious risk of infection. While paramedical
staff (doctors, midwives, nurses) were observed to be informed and demonstrate fairly good HCWM
practices, the general public's knowledge of risks linked with the handling of HCW was found to be very
weak.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
I1.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Based on the assessment described above, a draft FICWM policy and a draft HCWM Plan of Action were
prepared. The goal of the HCWM Plan of Action (POA) is to prevent and mitigate the environmental
and health impact of HCW on health care staff and the general public. The objectives of the Plan of
Action are to: (i) reduce infections due to HCW; (ii) improve service in HCWM and mitigate the
impacts of HCW on individuals and communities; and (iii) establish a well-managed multi-sector
institutional framework for co-ordination and implementation of HCWM measures.
The HCWM Plan of Action recommends: a) revisions and improvements to the legal and regulatory
framework (including defining technical standards and roles and responsibilities), b) upgrading HCWM
treatment systems at the health facility level (system selection was based on technical feasibility in view
of staff skills, cost, and ease of maintenance), c) training activities for workers who come into contact
with HCW; d) public awareness activities for the general public who may come into contact with HCW,
e) development of private-public partnerships for HCWM, and f) monitoring and evaluation activities.
The HCWM Plan of Action also defines implementation responsibilities, timetable and cost estimates.
Within the Ministry of Health, the Department of Preventive Health Services (DPHS) through its
Environmental Health Service (EHS) will take the lead in managing implementation of the HCWM plan.
The Health Education Unit of the Ministry will also be involved in training and public awareness
activities. EHS/DPHS will work closely with the Department of Environmental Affairs at the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environmental Affairs, which is responsible for developing appropriate standards



5
ISDS
for environmental impact assessments involving waste management, including HCW. At the district and
local levels, managers of health facilities will be responsible for implementation, working closely with
landfill managers (where they exist).
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include managers of health facilities and health sector workers (including traditional
healers/mid-wives), local government officials responsible for municipal landfills and municipal landfill
workers, family and community members caring for PLWAs and providing traditional burial practices, and
street scavengers who may be exposed to inadequately disposed of medical wastes.
The assessment team visited 80 health facilities in the public and private sectors for the injection safety
portion of the survey, and followed up with in-depth visits at 29 facilities to refine information on health
care waste data and practices. In addition to meeting with staff at the health facilities surveyed, about
250 members of the general public were randomly interviewed at markets and other public locations in
the community around each of the 80 health facilities (the sample was artificially stratified to ensure
equal representation of age groups and gender).
In addition to the health facility staff and members of the public, the assessment team also met
individually with key stakeholder institutions/departments: (i) MOI-fP (Departments of Preventive
Health: EPI, Environmental Health and Health Education Units, Clinical Services, Health Planning,
Technical Unit and Administration); (ii) Malawi National AIDS Commission; (iii) Malawi Bureau of
Standards; (iv) MNREA (Department of Environmental Affairs); (v) City Assemblies (Lilongwe and
Blantyre); (vi) Training Institutions (Polytechnic/Department of Environmental Health, College of Health
Sciences, Kamuzu College of Nursing, College of Medicine); (vii) NGOs (JHPIEGO, SafeMotherhood,
Medecins Sans Frontieres, MACRO); and (vii) Cooperation Agencies (UNICEF, WHO, WB, JICA,
GTZ, EU). These meetings were organized to collect information on stakeholder responsibilities,
understandings, programmes and activities in the field of IS and HCWM, and constraints faced.
Upon completion of the field visit phase in December 2002, the assessment team provided a debriefing
for stakeholders in Lilongwe on its preliminary findings. This initial debriefing was followed in January
2003 by a two day National Stakeholder Meeting and by district level consultations in February 2003 in
seven of the eight districts which had participated in the field survey to review assessment findings and
preliminary recommendations. Participants at the national and district consultations confirmed the main
findings, agreed with the thrust of recommendations, and emphasized the importance of implementing
the preliminary recommendations. The draft HCWM Plan was disclosed to local stakeholders and
development partners in March 2003, and a national workshop is planned for May 2003 to review the
draft national policy and draft action plan, make recommendations for finalization of these documents,
and agree on the next immediate steps.
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or oln basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable



6
ISDS
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/21/2003     3/7/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/7/2003      3/19/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/7/2003      3/19/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Christine E. Kimes                          May 6, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     May 6, 2003
Sector Manager/Director:      John Roome                                  May 6, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH       I EEDAuKk      I LSJr`rlA'   I      W



