25678
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
-;foShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MALI                                 Project ID: P040653
Project: Community Based Rural Development Project  Task Team Leader: Abdelkrim Oka
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 30, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: November I l, 2003            IDA Amount ($m): 50.00
Managing Unit: AFTR2                          Sector: General agriculture; fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (45%); Other social services (20%);
Status: Lending                               Vocational training (20%); Agricultural marketing
and trade (10%); Sanitation (5%)
Theme: Land management (P); Rural services and
infrastructure (P); Other rural development (S);
Other environment and natural resources
management (S); Decentralization (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the Mali Community-Based Rural Development project (CBRD) is
to reduce rural poverty and improve the living conditions of people in rural areas through
community empowerment and social, economic and environmental investments.
The proposed project will be part of a long-term national Rural Development Strategy also
aiming at eradicating poverty and hunger and improving living conditions in rural Mali where
80% of the population lives. This would be achieved by increasing rural (agricultural and
non-agricultural) production and income in a sustainable way and ensuring a rational use of the
natural resources that constitute the base for agricultural production and growth. Such challenge
can only be met if there is good governance and if communities are empowered and acquire the
skills to conceive, plan and manage their own development.
The CBRD will come in support of Mali's decentralization policy and program, principally by
assisting rural communities and their emerging elected bodies (communes) to (a) develop
technical and management capacities; (b) establish long and medium term Sustainable
Community Development and Investment Plans (SCDIP) and annual Program of Work and
Budget; (c) create social and economic public and private infrastructures; obtain benefits and
generate incomes from these infrastructures and (d) operate and maintain the said infrastructures



2
ISDS
in a sustainable manner. The project will be implemented in six regions of Mali (to be discussed
with borrower) and priority will be given to areas with greater poverty, as well as those where
similar work has been initiated through two IDA-funded projects and on which the proposed
project will build upon: the NRM project completed on December 31, 2000 and the GRIP/PAIB
project completing January 31, 2004. The project duration will be six years to allow enough time
for the first targeted communes to design and implement two Community Development Plans of
three years each.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project components will be:
(i) community empowerment and capacity building;
(ii) capacity building for community-support institutions;
(iii) design and implementation of Sustainable Community Development and Investment
Plans; and
(iv) project management, monitoring and evaluation.
The project will be implemented in six regions (Kayes, Koulikoro, Mopti, Tombouctou, Segou
and Sikasso) and will cover 200 (PGRN+PAIB) communes located in 20 districts (cercles). In
addition the CBRD project will cover the 18 communes where the IDA-funded Arid Rangeland
Biodiversity Conservation Project will be implemented in the regions of Mopti (Douentza
district), Tombouctou (Rharous district) and Gao (N'Tillit district). Among the (2500) villages to
be selected, about 1000 have been initially involved in the PGRN and the PAIB projects but have
only received partial support. The remaining villages will be selected in the same communes in
order to cover all the villages of these communes and carry out comprehensive communal
development plans. Under the NRM Project, interventions were in the regions of Kayes,
Koulikoro and Mopti while the GRIP Project intervened in the Mopti and Tombouctou regions.
Two new regions are being considered: Segou and Sikasso.
A. Community Empowerment and Capacity Building
Community empowerment and capacity building is required for different community groups and
for different purposes.
*   Communal Councils. The elected members of the Communal Council, as well as the
administrative and technical staff of the communal administration will get capacity
building, including the community capacity for review and screening of micro-projects
for environmental and social issues. Such a capacity building effort is key to community
empowerment as it will provide an indication of project potential environmental and
social impacts. A rural commune regroups 5 to 20 villages and has a total population of
5,000 to 50,000. The members of the Communal Council are elected by the residents of
the commune. The number of elected members in each commune varies according to the
population of the commune. Each Communal Council member serves a term of five
years. The responsibilities of the Communal Councils are to deliberate on issues
pertaining to the economic, social and cultural development of the commune. For



3
ISDS
example, the council will deliberate on communal budgets, environmental protection,
management of communal space, local public infrastructure, public transport, etc. Before
deliberation on these matters, the Communal Councils have to take advice of the villages
and village chiefs concerning such things as land registration, public transport, creation of
boreholes and other water sources, etc. Many of the elected members of the Communal
Councils are illiterate, and don't have the management skills required. The same is also
true for key administrative and technical staff such as the "Secretaires Generaux" and the
"regisseurs" of the communes. Some donors are already providing support for such
capacity building but this does not amount to the full need of these communes nor does it
cover all communes of the country. Support from this project will therefore complement
the ongoing efforts and will focus on. the following three priority areas:
1. Communes Budgets. Budget preparation and approval in the new communes
encounter many difficulties due to the lack of properly trained staff. This in
turn has deterred both central authorities and the donors from transferring
investments funds to them. Removing this constraint would first help of the
communes better manage and control their resources; secondly, it also ensure
the transparency of the commune financial system, a prerequisite for restoring
donor confidence.
2. Local Resources Mobilization. In addition to budgetary discipline, the second
area is the improvement of the communes capacity to better mobilize their
own resources (from both traditional local taxes and duties). Although this
alone would not be enough in view of the limited resources base in most rural
areas of Mali, there is still room for improvement. This, however, will require
better and close institutional relationships with the de-concentrated Treasury
and Tax services at the district level. Much of the financial life of the
communes depends on the latter who manage the communes revenues, shared
upwards with state funds.
3. Sectors Resources Mobilization. Both of the above capacity building efforts
under this component will, with time, enable elected communes councils and
managers better understand the financial situation of their communes and
program multi-year local investment, improve their capacity to effectively
lobby de-concentrated sector services on behalf of their communities for
sectors funds for social services.
Village Councils. Villages of the same commune are very isolated and distant from each
other with very little communication means. While getting all villages to work together in
the framework of the commune is very important, the need to have these isolated villages
internally well organized is essential. Although they are not formal decentralized bodies,
elected Village Councils have played an important role in helping village communities
get organized and carry out several initiatives. With the implementation of the
decentralization policy, they became the building blocks for the communal structures and
have produced a large number of Communal Council members. However, as with
Communal Councils, most of Village Council members are illiterate and have no
management skills. Similar capacity building efforts are therefore needed and will be



4
ISDS
provided under this project.
*   Professional and Socioeconomic Groups. Investments made at the village or commune
level (social public infrastructure or private productive investments) will be managed by
interest groups that will need to acquire proper skills. Capacity building will be provided
to these groups as a package tied to the investments.
*   Village/Commune Populations. Illiteracy is one of the main causes of poverty. Another
cause is the lack of basic knowledge about basic environmental issues such as natural
resource degradation, desertification, health and sanitation. These issues will be addressed
under this project.
B. Capacity Building for Project Support Institution/Agencies
Agencies Providing Direct Support to Communities. Institutions and agencies expected to
provide direct support to communities for capacity building and for the design and
implementation of their Community Development Plans need to upgrade or reinforce their own
capacities. This is particularly true when a project calls for new skills, or for more staff with
similar skills (increase in their volume of work). Some of these institutions are government
services. Other agencies are the newly created Centres de Conseils Communaux (CCC), or
advisory units established by the MATCL at district level (cercles) in 49 districts and expected to
provide technical support to communes and communal councils. These CCC are temporary (until
the Communes develop their own skills). During preparation, coordination and cooperation with
the CCCs as well as eventual support to these units will be discussed.
Povertv Monitoring. Under the GRIP project, support was provided to the Sustainable Human
Development Observatory (Observatoire du developpement humain durable - ODHD) and to the
National Department of Statistics (Direction Nationale de la Statistique et de l'Informatique -
DNSI) to help improve decision making in the area of poverty alleviation and to carry out the
population census and a household survey. The ODHD is now operation and is being supported
by UNDP. Under the CBRD project, support will extended to the DNSI to enable them to
monitor the evolution of poverty in rural areas and evaluate the impact of the CBRD and other
projects on poverty reduction.
Environmental Information System. Under the NRM project, support was provided for the
establishment of an EIS aimed at (i) a better understanding of the evolution and causes of natural
resources degradation in order to devise and implement appropriate policies and mitigation
measures; and (ii) an evaluation of the impact of NRM investments on the replenishment of these
natural resources and on the production base. As a result of the NRM project, several national
agencies were networked, received capacity building, had their environmental monitoring data
harmonized, their members trained, environmental and natural resources data bases set up,
reference manuals on methodology for environmental information management produced and a
web site created. Unfortunately, the NRM project closed before all these agencies and the
network could reach the point where they could operate without project support. Under the
CBRD project, these capacity building activities will be re-introduced and the network will be



5
ISDS
made operational and autonomous by providing paid environmental information and services to
its users. Assistance will be provided to the "Secretariat Technique Permanent du Cadre
Institutionnel de la Gestion des Questions Environnementales (STP/CIGQE) and to the network
members.
C. Design and Implementation of Community Development Plans
After having received support in enhancing their capacities, villages and communes will be
assisted in preparing and implementing Community Development and Investment Plans. These
plans have been defined as three-year plans. The different steps of the process are (i) broad
long-term Community Development Strategy - CDS (Schema d'amenagement communautaire
-SAC);   (ii)  three-year   Community    Development    Plan   -    CDP     (Plan
d'amenagement/developpement communautaire - PAC); and (iii) three-year Community
Investment Plan - CIP (Plan d'investissement communautaire - PIC). CDPs and CIPs may be
merged into one activity and document: the CDIP. Community members and representatives will
play a central role and must acquire a sense of ownership and responsibility. It is expected that
the CDSs, CDPs and CIPs at the village and those at the commune level will be complementary.
The design of the CDS, CDP and CIP will take into consideration all aspects and sectors, will
address all issues concerning the targeted communities and will not be limited to agricultural
sector matters. These plans will integrate all possible actions that could contribute to a successful
and sustainable development of the community. For that purpose, all relevant public services are
to be involved (health, water and sanitation, education, handicraft , agriculture and livestock,
environment, etc.). The process will start with a participatory comprehensive baseline analysis
and diagnostic that will identify community human, financial and natural resources assets, needs
and constraints; and problems and opportunities. The investments to be considered under such
plans are for:
1. public socioeconomic infrastructure (e.g., small road works, water supply, schools, health
posts, markets, inter-village roads);
2. private income-generating infrastructure/activities (e.g., small scale irrigation, handicraft
cottage industries, agroforestry, grain milling processors, poultry farming, etc.); and
3. natural resource management and environmental protection (e.g., erosion control, flood
control, agroforestry, soil conservation, etc)
The funding and implementation of CDPs and CIPs will also call for a multi-sector approach.
Some sector projects and programs are already being implemented and only coordination will be
required between those projects and the CBRD project in order to make them complementary. In
the cases where sector projects do not cover the CBRD project areas or do not address some of
the key the issues of the sector, resources will be provided under the CBRD project in
cooperation with the concerned sectors in order to complement the actions carried out by the
sector projects.
D. Proiect Management and Monitoring & Evaluation



6
ISDS
This does not constitute a component per se but the overall project management activities
including project coordination, financial management, procurement and project monitoring and
evaluation. The two concerned bodies will be the CBRD Unit in the Rural Development and
Environment Ministry (MDRE) and the AIB, under the umbrella of the Social Development
Ministry (MDSSPA). Further discussions will determine which ministry will have the overall
responsibility for project implementation.
Components:
A. Community Empowernent and Capacity Building
B. Capacity Building for Support Services/Agencies
B] Agencies Providing Direct Support to Communities
B2. Poverty Monitoring
B3. Environmental Information System
C. Community Development Plans
D. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in six regions (Kayes, Koulikoro, Mopti, Tombouctou, Segou and Sikasso)
and will cover 200 (PGRN and PAIB) communes located in 20 circles. Eighteen communes located in the
districts of Douentza, Rharous and N'tillit will be added as a cooperative effort between this project (CBRD)
and the GEF-funded Arid Rangeland Biodiversity Conservation Project, currently under preparation. The
exact location of the villages chosen and their complementary productive investments is not known at this
time. Detailed information on environmental characteristics will be obtained during preparation. However,
the project will exclude any protected areas.
Although there are culturally sensitive areas in Mali such as ancient burial sites and sacred groves, the
proposed activities of the project will not impact on cultural property. Where there is a possibility that
project activities will encroaclh on these areas, project activities will be diverted to ensure that these
culturally and socially sensitive areas are avoided.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments. The project will finance (i) the design and implementation of Community Development
and Investment Plans; (ii) community empowerment and capacity building; and (iii) institutional
capacity building for services and agencies providing support to the communities. The project will
help alleviate rural suffering and poverty in a sustainable way. While this will be done through
agricultural production growth and income generation, it is definitely done with a very strong focus
on the fact that no sustainable production and growth can be achieved unless the natural resource
base (Soil, water, vegetation) on which this production relies is preserved and restored wherever it is
being depleted. In fact it is the actual condition of degradation of these resources that is partly
responsible for poverty and one of the priorities of this project is to help communities restore these
resources. As a proof of that is the fact that the precedent project was called the Natural Resource
Management Project. It is therefore expected that the program will have a globally positive
environmental impact. This said, mechanisms will be put in place to monitor of the environment



7
ISDS
and its evolution in general and with/without project. An Environimental Information System and a
social observatory will be supported under the project.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes O No    * TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes O No    * TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   * Yes O No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               Q Yes O No    * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    * TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is niot available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The net social and environmental effect of this project is expected to be positive since it will significantly
reduce poverty in the target areas and is therefore likely to discourage encroachment on fragile lands. In
addition, natural resource investments will improve environmental management with a consequential
decrease in soil erosion and surface run-off. However, it is possible that certain environmental safeguards
may be triggered from micro-projects (e.g., micro-irrigation, road rehabilitation and school and health
post construction) if they are not adequately screened prior to funding agreements with communities. To
ensure that any environmental impact will be mitigated, an environment management framework will be
prepared, approved and disclosed before project appraisal.
O.P. 4.04, Natural Habitats, may be triggered if minor road construction and agricultural expansion impinges
on natural habitats. This will be examined in the environmental assessment. As part of the mitigation
plan, the EA will use checklists to identify cumulative environmental impacts. Questions might include
whether various types of habitats are impacted and how severely ecosystems may be degraded.
Mitigation measures will be presented. Any potential negative impact that might occur will be handled
by the project consistent with Bank policies.
OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered because land acquired for public and other project
activities may cause individuals or community groups loss of assets or access to assets. To ensure that
this is mitigated, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, cleared and disclosed prior to
appraisal. This RPF will provide the framework to thoroughly investigate all land acquisitions and handle
all issues related to OP 4.12 and to determine the framework for compensation for loss of assets or access
to assets were this to occur during project implementation.
OP 4.09, Pest Management, may be triggered for several reasons. For example, if the project allows for the
creation of a water body that would increases the number of pests and therefore disease such as malaria



8
ISDS
or bilharzia, or if the project funds pesticides for improved agricultural production. Since it is possible
that this project will fund micro-projects that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the use of
inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides and small-scale irrigation, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be
prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal. This plan will include (i) the establishment of
linkages between this project and the Government agency responsible for pest management; (ii) the
training of input suppliers and users in the use of pesticides and integrated pest management. The plan
will also encourage ecologically based pest control practices designed to minimize the reliance on
synthetic agricultural inpuls.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are foreseen.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Given the small scale and dispersed nature of the community-initiated investments under the
project, it is not expected that a comprehensive environmental analysis will be needed. Instead,
an environmental and social management framework, as well as a resettlement management
framework and an integrated and pest management plan, will be prepared and included as an
integral part of the Project Operation Manual. It would specify a clear and systematic process for
the effective assessment of any potential environmental or social impacts that result from
project-funded activities. It would also establish sound environmental and social review and
screening, monitoring, evaluating and supervision mechanisms at the national and district levels
to prevent certain types of productive or infrastructure micro-projects from producing irreversible
negative environmental effects. Guidelines for Integrated Pest Management will be incorporated
as part of the technical manuals for community investments micro-projects.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
On the demand side, the community (at village and commune level), is the key stakeholder and,
at the same time the main executing agency for the design and implementation of their own
Community Development and Investment Plans (CDIPs). The preparation of these plans will be
made by the community with the assistance of community support services (publics services,
NGOs and/or private organizations) selected in consultation with the community. Most
investments will be small (micro-projects) and will be handled by the communities who will
therefore manage implementation, including procurement of goods, services, and works. For
more complex investments, detailed planning, design, and execution may be contracted out. The
monitoring and evaluation of the CDIPs' output and outcome will be carried out by the
community who will use the findings to correct and improve their program. Other stakeholders
will be professional and socio-economic groups inside the villages and communes as well as



9
ISDS
individuals. As beneficiaries, they will also be involved in the design and implementation of the
CDIPs but more specifically in particular components that are most relevant to them.
On the supply side, the main stakeholders are the government services (at field and central
levels), the NGOs and the private sector (consulting firms, enterprises, etc.) who will be
providing assistance and suLpport to the communities in different sectors. These services will be
fully involved. Details about their specific roles will be worked out during preparation.
The process will be fully participatory, transparent and formally defined. It will consist of a
comprehensive baseline analysis that will assess the situation before project start, the adverse
effects that may occur as a result of project intervention, the mitigation measures that need to be
taken and the formal and voluntary commitment of the stakeholders to implement these measures
or to discard these interventions. All actions and decisions will have to be fornally endorsed by
all the stakeholders. The EA, RPF and PMP will be disclosed in country and to the Infoshop prior
to appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or oni basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S]. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S] 3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/28/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             6/27/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              6/27/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/28/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             6/27/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              6/27/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/28/2003



10
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             6/27/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              6/27/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Abdelkrim Oka                               02/06/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  TBD
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                         02/25/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                          02/06/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
JSLARCH    _1 -E.EDeK iK          Me        - _  *CA5E_



