1
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frce ol Poserty
U_._____ ,, -7--  .T   . . 1, F 7 .,  r. "   -
InfoShop
I'.: Wott I:,
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/11/2002                            24965
Section I- Basic Information                                October 1 1 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Countrv: MALI                                    Project ID: P052402
Project: ARID RANGELAND BIODIVERSITY             Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel G. Pavy
CONSE RVATION
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 25, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 16, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: AFTES                             Sector: Forestry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Biodiversity (P); Land management (P)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Context and background
Biodiversity loss has taken extreme proportion throughout West Africa. While this loss is addressed in
the Guinean Forest and Sudanian Savanna, the Sahel ecosystem located in the 600 mm - 200 mm isohyets
across the West Africa landscape has not benefited from significant attention of decision makers or
donors.
Mali, a landlocked Sahelian Country with extreme poverty and vulnerability, has requested donor
assistance to implement its environmental & biodiversity strategies in a priority sitcs. Donors have
responded favorably for several important protected areas (Baoul6, Niger Delta, Adrar).
For the Gourma, the priority Sahelian site, Mali's request to the Bank was jointly formulated with
Burkina because of the transnational dimension of the ecosystem they seek to preserve. Burkina has
already completed preparation and launched implementation of its GEF-financed Partnership for Natural
Ecosystem Management Project (PAGEN) on the Burkina side of the Gourma.
The Gourma spans 3 million hectares in Mali between the Niger River bend and the Burkina border. It
possesses diverse landscape features -- lakes, dunes, low-land forests and inselbergs -- and unique
biological features such as the world northernmost 400-strong elephant population. With the end of the
Tuareg rebellion, and influx of populations, there is a sense of emergency for action: the Gourma is
experiencing high degraclation including local extinction of animal and plant populations and overall
desertification.
The current country policy and reforms, present an opportunity to position in the Gourma a conservation



2
ISDS
model that responds to the community perception of constraints and opportunities. Moving away from
centralized top-down management, the Government has launched an ambitious decentralization and
administrative deconcentration reform. This reform, which is widely recognized as genuine,
participatory and democratic, provides the framework upon which the proposed Project can be designed
and implemented. It is registered, together with projects of other donors, in a decentralization program
whose clevelopment objective is to ensure that "The ruralpopulations have better access to public
services, to socio-econonic infrastructures and to productive natural resources".
In the Ciourma, which spans part of three regions: Mopti, Timbuktu and Gao, the UNCDF and AFD are
already supporting the above program. They are strengthening commune capacities as well as help them
prepare and partially implement Communal Development Plan. Also in the Gourma, several Bank
operations are helping with improvement of delivery of basic services in agriculture/livestock
(PASAOP), rural equipment (PNIR), education and, in the future, social infrastructures/natural resources
management (CBRD). The proposed GEF project would strengthen these efforts by further improving
the commune capacity and help maintain the biological resources that are the basis of land productivity
and therefore long-term poverty alleviation.
Proiect Development Objectives
Within the framework of the above-mentioned program, the GEF & FFEM provide incremental financing
with the 6-year Development Objective that Biodiversity degradation trends are stopped and, in some
cases, reversed in key conservation areas and project sites in the Gourma. The project targets the GEF
Operational Program I (Arid and semi-arid ecosystem).
The development objectives is sought via three operational outputs:
-    (01). International, national and Gourma-based conservation and research institutions are better
able to advise and help communes and communities in their management of biological resources;
-    (02) Municipalities are better able to help their constituencies with management planning and
management of biological resources;
-    (03) Conservation Area Management Committees (CGSC) demonstrate significant capacity to
promote and achieve biodiversity conservation and sustainable use.
The project will in essence help communes and communities manage better biodiversity.
-      Where the preservation of natural ecosystem function must remain intact, strict protection will be
proposed (this concerns about 1.6% of the land), where ecosystem functions can be altered while
remaining under production, a proactive management prescription will be proposed (this concern about
2.4% of the land). Areas under the above prescriptions will be connected together and called
"Conservation areas". Conservation areas will be managed by community association called in this
document "Conservation Area Management Committees - French acronym CGSC" created by their main
stakeholders.
-      On the rest of the communal land, local initiatives in favor of biodiversity by community
members, community group or communes will also be supported. There, the project will rely on the
ideas, leadership and commitments of the Gourma population. Support will be provided in the form of
information, training, financing and advise for biodiversity micro-projects. It is expected that, as the
entire community is presented with information, experiences and opportunities, behavior change in favor
of lesser damaging mode of resource extraction will be stimulated and, in the long term, spread over large
portions of the Gourma.



3
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Project will be implemented through three components:
-      Component I. Capacity building for decentralized biodiversity management
-      Component 2. Community-based biodiversity initiatives
-      Component 3. Communal-based management of conservation areas
Component I - Capacity building for decentralized biodiversity management
This component is divided into two sub-components: (1.1) Support to Gourma operation and (1.2)
National supervision and stock talking.
Subcomponent 1.1. Support to Gourma Operations. Through this subcomponent the
GEF and FFEM will finance (1) incremental support to steering and advising by the Steering
Committee, (2) support to Gourma Conservation Service (GCS), (3) Technical assistance to
commune & communities; (4) Support to the Douentza, Rharous & N'Tillit Nature Conservation
Services (SCNs); (5) Support to other public deconcentrated institutions or NGOs, (6) Design and
capacity building of Intercommunal Gourma Association (to replace GCS); (7) Training, (8) Audits, (9)
Design of a trust for incentive-based financing of conservation areas in Gourma; (10) Monitoring of
Environmental and Social Analysis (ESA) and Process Framework; (11) Transfrontier
coordination with Burkina
Subcomponentl 1.2. Supportfor national supervision and stock talking: Through this
subcomponent the GEF and FFEM will finance (1) Incremental support to DNCN including (a)
Operation support, (b) training & awareness building, and (c) documentation center and web site; (2)
Studies and workshops including (a) National reforms of biodiversity management, (b) transfer of natural
resources management to communes, and (c) Wildlife inventories.
Component 2 - Support to community-based biodiversity initiatives
Through this component the GEF and FFEM will finance (1) community awareness building ; (2)
regional and local workshops on conservation and range use; (3) community training; (4) complementary
diagnostics on biological resources of communal land ; (5) specific studies to explore options for
ecological restoration; (6) support to Communal council and Centers for Communal Council (CCC); (7)
biodiversity-related micro-projects: the following list of eligible micro-projects has been defined: (i)
Protection of a threatened local biological resources, (ii) improvement of natural pond, wetland, spring or
water course management, (iii) improvement of management of a forest, (iv) improvement of pasture
land management, (v) measures in favor of elephant conservation and cohabitation with populations, (vi)
bushfire control, (vii) education on biodiversity, (viii) support to conservation of cultural assets, (ix)
support to ecotourism development, and (x) support to sustainable use of secondary products. The project
will finance no socio-economic micro-project such as road, school, storage facility, dispensary, well,
dam, tree plantation, agriculture or livestock.
Component 3 - Support to inter-commune management of conservation areas
Through this component the GEF and FFEM will finance (1) local capacity building including (a)
communication, (b) creation of Conservation Area Management Committees (CGSC), and (c) training,
(2) Studies including (a) ecological diagnostic and basic research, (b) study of rangeland users and



4
ISDS
tenure, and (c) tourism development and private sector involvement, (3) conservation area creation and
management including (a) negotiation, delineation and gazetment of conservation areas and core zones,
and (b) preparation of conservation area management plans, (4) implementation of conservation area
management plans including (a) repair, construction or maintenance of minor infrastructure, (b)
surveillance of conservation areas, (c) use of conservation areas, and (d) local ecosystem monitoring, and
(5) external monitoring of impact including (a) aerial wildlife and livestock surveys, and (b) monitoring
vegetation and land use patterns.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or sbcially sensitive areas.)
The Gourma spans 3 million hectares in Mali between the Niger River bend and the Burkina border. It
possesses diverse landscape features -- lakes, dunes, low-land forests and inselbergs -- and unique
biological features such as the world northernmost 400-strong elephant population. With the end of the
Tuareg rebellion, and influx of populations, there is a sense of emergency for action: the Gourma is
experiencing high degradation including local extinction of animal and plant populations and overall
desertification.
The Project will focus implementation on 18 communes of the Gourma spanning three Cercle: Douentza
(Region of Mopti), Rharous (Region of Timbuktu) and N'Tillit (Region of Gao). Because of the
population mobility, it is difficult to provide accurate figures on the Gourma demography. By cross
referencing several documents, it is estimated that the 1 8-commune population is in the order of 200,000
inhabitants. These are a sub-set of the total population of the cercles in which the communes are located
which is estimated to be 150,000 for the Cercle of Douentza; 95,000 in the Cercle of Gourma-Rharous
and less than 50,000 in the Cercle of N'Tillit. The population is divided between Tuaregs, Peuls, Songhai
and Dogon. Each commune covers a very large territory and encompasses several villages or fractions.
Except for the Dogon and Songhai who are mostly farmers, the bulk of the population is engaged in
extensive pastoralism. Depending of the quality of the range in the Gourma and elsewhere, the area also
receive seasonal herders from Burkina, Niger and from other regions of Mali.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Because there are a few expected negative environmental externalities but potentially significant
social externalities, it was decided that these issues would be addressed with the special focus of an
Environmental Analysis. Still, because the project's outcome is expected to be positive socially and
environmentally, a full-fledged EA is deemed unnecessary. Consequently the project is classified as B
-Partial assessment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         *           Yes    No   C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      * Yes    No   CTBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                Yes *No       TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes *No       TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        Yes *No       TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes    No   _ TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          ^ Yes * No      TBD



5
ISDS
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        |   Yes * No   . TBD I
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The Project seeks to conserve and restore biodiversity which is highly threatened by over hunting and
overgrazing. Expected positive environmental benefits are: (i) increased area maintained as natural
habitat with associated increase in wildlife populations, including elephants, and in vegetation cover, (ii)
improved management of grazing areas with consequential decrease in soil erosion, stabilization of
dunes, reappearance of perennial grass-species, etc. Little negative environmental impact is foreseen.
OP4.01 is triggered for several reasons. It is possible that an improvement of the range's grazing quality
convince communities to increase further the number of livestock or attract herders from other areas.
Both of these consequences may reverse the positive trends that the project seeks to establish. In
addition, there are minor risks of local erosion or local degradation of vegetation associated with the
restoration of old ponds that may prove necessary. Finally, the project seeks to stabilize the erratic
motion of elephants along their ancestral migration route to decrease the potential of human-elephant
conflicts. It is possible that longer sojourn of elephants in some areas increases local degradation of
vegetation particularly in low-land acacia forests.
OP4.04 on natural habitat is relevant not in term of threat mitigation but in term of conformity with the
program global objective which is to improved the long term standing of biodiversity within a natural
ecosystems.
Not triggered, OP/BP/GP 7.60 on Projects in disputed areas, is still relevant because the project works
with a mnobile resource (elephant & livestock) that travel across the Mali/Burkina boundary in an area
that was once disputed (settlement was reached at the Intemational Tribunal of La Haye in the late 80's).
OP4.12 is triggered even though involuntary resettlement of settlement is an option excluded by the
approach itself. The limit of conservation areas as well as the rules of their management will be
negotiated with all communities to ensure that no involuntary resettlement occurs. However, collective
management of communal resources, even if rules are defined by the communities, could end up
restricting access for conservation area resources from certain users. The project intend to be careful at
balancing the will of the powerful traditional elite with the goods of the commons herders and farmers.
Because, there is a potential risk within conservation areas, it was decided that OP4.12 would be
triggered, a Framework process would be necessary, and specific instructions to consider it would be
given to the EA team in charge of the social assessment. Biodiversity micro-projects outside protected
areas do not require land acquisition or any "involuntary taking of land". Consequently, no Resettlement
plan or policy framework is required
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable



6
ISDS
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
A failure implies that communes and communities of the Gourma have not endorsed the need, nor acted
upon that need, for improvement in biological resources management. In the worst case scenario, the
situationi will continue to evolve as if the project did not exist. In our opinion, this scenario is unlikely.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Under a "do no GEF program alternative", strengthening of commune capacity and local development
implemented by other operations is likely to improve living conditions in the Gounrna. Natural resources
management is planned under these projects, however, the proposed scale of intervention is not
commensurate with the magnitude of the overall problem. As a consequence, it is likely that current
degradation trends would continue. This would include degradation of natural habitat, rangeland and
further extinction of species. The human/elephant cohabitation is likely to worsen and perhaps leading to
drastic actions to eliminate elephants.
Alteratives for GEF involvement were considered at Project identification. Usual alteratives run from
top-down planning and law enforcement to hand-off approach based on awareness building; experiences
show that neither lead to lasting results. Mali does not currently have the capacity to implement the first
alteratives, nor would the population accept it and respect its rules. Conversely, awareness building
would have little chances to bear significant results given the extreme poverty of the population, its low
level of literacy and the long-standing perception that all spotted wildlife is to be harvested and all
vegetation grazed. These alternatives were considered and rejected in favor of a participatory
incentive-based approach based on negotiation, technical assistance, demonstration of results and
commune empowerment for conservation. Decentralization makes this approach legally feasible. Such
approach is recent in West Africa and requires adaptation to each case; in Mali the dynamic and
democratic decentralization process provides the basis for such innovation. In addition, Local
Development operations (e.g. PNGT2 in Burkina) or participatory wildlife management (e.g.
GEPRENAF) are showing encouraging results. Commune council and community members consulted
are favorable to the approach.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmental and Social Impact Analysis (ESIA) was prepared by two consultants. This work is
divided into three documents: Volume I provides baseline information and carries out ana analysis of
potential impacts. Volume 11, relevant for OP4.01, proposes a Framework process for screening and
monitoring of micro-projects (outside conservation areas) and small infrastructures (within conservation
areas). Volume ITI, relevant for OP4. 12, proposes a Framework Process reduce potential negative impact
of access limitation to resources in conservation areas. Consultants built their recommendationis within
the project logframe as part of normal project implementation. External control of the ESIA
implementation will be provided by the national agency in charge of environment assessment; training
and operating costs will be provided to that agency. The project budget makes provision for consultant
contracts for specific ESIA and for independent monitoring. The project also set aside provisional funds
to mitigate unexpected adverse environmental impact that may materialize during implementation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project will focus implementation on 9 priority communes of the Gourma. Nine additional
communes will also benefit from project support for conservation activities registered in their Commune
Development Plans. These 18 communes span three Cercle : Douentza (Region of Mopti), Rharous
(Region of Timbuktu) and N'Tillit (Region of Gao). Because of the population mobility, it is difficult to
provide accurate figures on the Gourma demography. By cross referencing several documents, it is
estimated that the 18-cotnmune population is in the order of 200,000 inhabitants. These are a sub-set of



7
ISDS
the total population of the cercies in which the communes are located which is estimated to be 150,000
for the Cercle of Douentza; 95,000 in the Cercle of Gourma-Rharous and less than 50,000 in the Cercle
of N'Tillit. The population is divided between Tuaregs, Peuls, Songhai and Dogon. Each commune
covers a very large territory and encompasses several villages or fractions. Except for the Dogon and
Songhai who are mostly farmers, the bulk of the population is engaged in extensive pastoralism.
Depending of the quality of the range in the Gourma and elsewhere, the area also receive seasonal
herders from Burkina, Niger and from other regions of Mali. At the field level the project is
implemented by the Commune Council through national technical assistant financed by the project.
Technical assistance is likely to be provided by local NGOs or consortium of local/international NGOs
already working in the area. Other stakeholders are the Government services working in the areas;
mostly the foresters (Service de Conservation de la Nature - SCN) as well as agriculture and livestock
s'ervices. SCN will operate under a MoU with the project and dispatch 47 new civil servants into the
area. Other MoU will be drafted as needed to involve other Government services and NGOs as needed.
Implementation will follow a participatory process which will begin by updating existing participatory
diagnostics and Communal Development Plans which mainly list priority communal investments. This
exercise will be carried out at the communal and inter-communal level to ensure homogeneity and
coherence between each commune and associated development plan. Its output is a Communal
Development Plan that positions each commune within a greater landscape and plans for activities to
organize the protection and use of grassland and for investments to restore biological resources. In
addition, the limits of inter-communal conservation areas will be negotiated and the rules for their
protection and use will be elaborated through a participatory process between communes and their
communities. At each steps of the process, there will be possibility to reopen issues to ensure that rules
are agreeable, accepted and understood by the communities. This exercise will be feed by an in-depth
transnational study of the pastoral system and its users in order to ensure that the solutions that emerge
from the participatory process are compatible with current traditions and practices. Ecological studies
will also be used as in input to the negotiation process.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



