Report No. 23864
Report No: I073984 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/19/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MALI    Project ID: P073984
Project: SUPPLEMENTAL CREDIT FOR THE TRANSPORT SECTOR PROJECT     Task Team
Leader: Jean-Noel Guillossou
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 24, 2001       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 4, 2002 IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR     Sector: TW - Railways
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project aims at improving sectoral efficiency and rehabilitating and
maintaining essential transport infrastructure.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Supplemental Credit will provide the resources for rehabilitation
works on the railway track and for the retrenchment of redundant staff in
the railway company following the concessionning of railway services to a
private operator. Rehabilitation works will be carried out to complete
works already executed partially on 50 km of track and financed by IDA and
Western African Development Bank under the on-going project (Transport
Sector Project, Cr. 2617-MLI, approved on May 26, 1994). In addition 53
km of track will be rehabilitated on the section of the track which
deteriorated the most since the initial project became effective.
Rehabilitation works will consist in replacing old used rails, adding
ballast, strengthening the platform and consolidating embankments.
Finally, works limited to strengthening of the platform and consolidation
of the embankments will be executed on 39 km with a severe potential for
further deterioration.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The works under the supplemental credit are located in the Kayes region
near the border of Senegal (towns of Maina and Diamou) and near Bamako.
The areas are characterized by rocky hills, certain peaks reaching 400
meters. The vegetation is of the sub-saharan savannah type, predominantly
acacia trees and shrubs around the Diamou location. Access to the areas
is easiest by train and most difficult via unpaved pathways, which are
difficult during the rainy season. The rainfall is good and temperatures
can reach above 40 degree Celsius in the dry season. The towns of Maina
and Diamou are located near the rail stations and all safety precautions
are implemented for the protection of the adjacent riverine communities.
With regard to the social characteristics, it is important to underscore
that the inhabitants of this region are traditionally conservative and



depend on agriculture, livestock and fishing for their livelihoods.
Agricultural products such as mango, tomatoes, oranges and other
perishable goods are major economic activities in this region. The train
is the principal means of transport for people and goods in this region.
Traditional activities such as blacksmith, weaving, pottery, wooden and
leather handicraft constitute a limited source of income for the
villagers. These are jobs traditionally performed by different castes. All
these are economic activities that rely on the railway as a principal
means of transport, and use the train stations as a market place (outlets
for local products and distribution centers of incoming products). As a
result, a breakdown in the railway traffic or an inefficient railway
system have serious economic implications for the communities and
businesses and result in shortages of goods, food supplies from Bamako to
the towns and villages. The breakdown of the bridge of Bagouko is a
perfect example of the above problem and how it can affect people's
livelihood and survival.
The number of staff in the railway company is about 1,500. The number of
redundant staff is not known yet. The concessionaire will determine the
number of staff which will be transferred to the new company. Not many
data exist on the social characteristics of the staff. Based on a survey
on 121 active agents carried out in 2001, about 10 percent are women, 93
percent are above 40 years old, almost all staff have been more than 10
years in the company.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: While the project team envisages no major negative environmental
and social impacts related to the rehabilitation works, it recognizes that
for quality enhancement purposes, an Environmental and Social analysis
needs to be carried out. The project is therefore classified as a B
category.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The following safeguard issues have been identified:
(a) related to the execution of the works: Materials such as laterite and
- 2 -



ballast will be used to strengthen the railway track. Ballast will come
from an existing quarry. Laterite will come from borrow pits which will be
identified by the engineering study of the works. Resettlement issues may
result from occupation of right-of-way for residential, commercial and
farming purposes and from the extension of the ballast quarry if its
existing capacity is insufficient and from the opening of borrow pits for
the laterite. Execution of the works may also impact on the health of
workers of villagers because of the dust of laterite. The presence of
migrant workers may also increase the risk of spreading HIV/AIDS.
Consolidating the railway platform may require enlarging it by about 20 cm
on one side of both sides of the track. This may impact on minor
cultivations, trees and bushes, buildings, commercial structures etc.
along the track.
(b) related to the privatization of railway services: The Environmental
and Social Analysis that will be undertaken will pay special attention to
incremental impacts following privatization, particularly with regard to
sources of significant "pollution flow", including violation of emission
standards, hazard to the health and safety and social protection of
workers or local communities and diversion of scarce water resources for
example. Incremental impacts would also need to be considered in light of
the tendency of some privatization activities leading to stronger
incentives to pollute or exhaust natural resources. As companies are
pushed by competition to maximize profits, and in the absence of
appropriate implementation of government regulation, there is a need for
appropriate environmental and social safeguard to be in place prior to
privatization. While privatization can provide a golden opportunity for
strengthening the environmental regulatory framework, it may also have a
recapitalization effect and may indeed result in intensified pollution
loads and a heavier regulatory burden for environmental institutions,
especially in light of limited capacities as in the case of the Department
of Railways.
(c) related to retrenchment of redundant staff: Retrenchment will result
in the loss of jobs which is a traumatic event not only for the staff
concerned but also for the families and other persons who rely on the
staff declared redundant for their daily lives. Financial compensation has
proved to partially only overcome this traumatism and needs to be
accompanied by additional measures.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
In light of the fact that no comprehensive Environment and Social
Assessment was conducted under the initial Transport Sector Project, the
planned Environmental and Social Analysis (ESA) will be undertaken before
Board presentation. The ESA will further determine the extent of
- 3 -



environmental and social impacts and make recommendations in line with the
safeguard policies of the Government of Mali and Bank procedures and best
practices.
A resettlement framework or resettlement plan will be prepared as a
safeguard measure should the ESA identify impact which will trigger the
resettlement policy. It will define procedures to ensure that any
resettlement and land acquisition resulting will be adequately
compensated. Compliance with these procedures will be monitored during
project execution.
The ESA is intended to provide the appropriate safeguard framework and
measures, while highlighting the opportunities for enhancing the positive
synergies between privatization, social and environmental protection.
While these opportunities will be explored and their potential maximized
in the Environmental and Social Analysis, it is recommended that they be
seen as part of the policy dialogue with government. It is expected that
the findings of the ESA will go beyond the narrow scope of the
rehabilitation zone and touch upon the larger environmental management and
social issues to be addressed by the Railway Authorities. The supplemental
credit will provide support for the implementation of recommendations
provided in the ESA.
Although the capacity of the Railway Department is limited, it has
expressed its intention to recruit an environmental specialist who will
work closely with the Social and Human Resources Unit. In addition the
Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Works, which serves as Government's
clearing house for environmental safeguards, has expressed its readiness
and willingness to provide technical and supervisory support to the
Railways Department in the development and implementation of the overall
environmental management, but also in the undertaking of the ESA for this
project.
An action plan has been drafted to mitigate the impact of the
redundancies. This plan is being reviewed by the Government before
approval. Implementation of the plan would be the responsibility of a unit
created with financing from the project. The retrenchment program will be
defined after the concession is awarded and the concessionaire has
selected the staff which will be transferred to the new company. Besides
managing financial compensations, the unit will provide support to staff
which will be laid off. Support will be provided by assessing competences
and training needs, preparing for and assisting in finding reemployment,
and assisting in carrying out projects identified by staff.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are: (a) for the rehabilitation works, people living
along the railway track who benefit economically from railway activities,
railway passengers and companies which ship freight on the train; and (b)
staff in the railway company concerned by the redundancies.
The mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies in
compliance with Bank guidelines are being determined.
- 4 -



E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      5/31/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 6/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   7/31/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      5/31/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 6/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   7/31/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Jean-Noel Guillossou     3/6/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank
2/20/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     3/12/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard      3/8/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



