Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC106
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
LA. 1. Project Statistics
Country: MALI                                  Project ID: P073036
Global Supplemental ID: P076440
Project: Mali Household Energy and Universal Access  Task Team Leader: Koffi Ekouevi
Project
Atuthorized to Appraise Date: May 5, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 8, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 35.65
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 3.50
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Sector: General energy sector (50%); Renewable
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  energy (50%)
Status: Lending                                Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other
rural development (P); Climate change (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The household energy and universal rural access (HEURA) project would support the
Government of Mali's efforts to increase access of isolated low income populations to basic
energy services to help achieve economic growth and poverty reduction targets, including those
linked with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The HEURA project's specific objectives are:
(i)   accelerating the use of modem energy in rural and peri-urban areas in order to increase
productivity of small and medium enterprises, to enhance the quality and efficiency of health and
education centers, and to improve living standards;
(ii)   promoting further community based woodland management to reduce unsustainable
pressure on forest resources while simultaneously encouraging interfuel substitution and energy
efficiency initiatives; and,
(iii) strengthening energy sector reform processes and related institutions to create a favorable
investment environment for increased private sector participation in decentralized energy
services delivery in rural and pern-urban areas.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
1.1 Component 1: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening( US $4.8 million)
The Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening component will have two main
purposes:
(i) to support capacity development of the Regulatory Commission (CREE) to enable them to
carry out their responsibilities of contract oversight, monitoring and compliance for decentralized



2
ISDS
systems more effectively; and,
(ii) to support training programs and activities of the National Directorate of Energy (DNE)
aimed at strengthening their capacity to monitor implementation progress of rural energy sector
strategy and reform. This support will help ensure that the regulatory and institutional reform of
the energy sector is deepened and provides a supportive envioronment for decentralized energy in
rural and pern-urban areas.
For the Regulatory Commission, which oversees the management of decentralized energy
schemes, IDA will support the following activities:
*   Training and capacity building program for the 5 Commissioners and 8 technical
specialists of the CREE in the areas of financial regulation (20 staff weeks), analytical
accounting (18 staff weeks), financial management (25 staff weeks), contract monitoring
(10 staff weeks) and tariff design (30 staff weeks). These activities will be carried out
through formal training sessions, study trips or on-the-job training, on a as-needed basis.
*   Short and long terms technical assistance (24 man-months equivalent) to develop and
implement the monitoring and evaluation program of the operators, and to build
awareness on regulatory issues among consumers and technical staff of the ministries.
*   Provide support to CREE for the establishment of a local area network with 15
workstations (hardware and software) and other office equipment, software for economic
and financial modeling, accounting and other decision making tools.
For the DNE, IDA will support the following activities:
*   Training and capacity building program for staff in the areas of policy formulation (20
staff weeks), monitoring, evaluation, and impact assessment (40 staff weeks), demand
side management and energy efficiency (30 staff weeks).These activities will be carried
out through formal training sessions, study trips or on-the-job training, on a as-needed
basis.
*   Short and long terms technical assistance (30 man-months equivalent) to set up
monitoring, evaluation, and impact assessment systems and databases, to develop a
national energy efficiency program.
*   The establishment of a local area network with 25 workstations (hardware and software),
supply of 6 portable computers with related accessories, 18 printers, 16 photocopiers, and
other office equipment; the rehabilitation of the documentation center with a
state-of-the-art information/catologing system, the supply of 10 vehicles.
1.2 Component 2: Energy Services Delivery( US $32 million)
The Energy Services Delivery component would support the government's strategy of providing
access to basic electricity services in rural areas through the provision of decentralized energy
services. It is based on an output-based approach (OBA), using private operators and
community-based organizations, and linking payments of subsidies to outputs. Under this
scheme, investment costs would be funded by a mix of private equity, commercial bank loans,
and grants for the subsidized portion of the capital expenditures, channeled through a



3
ISDS
newly-created rural electrification fund. The approach will build on the successful experience of
two 'demonstration' schemes that have been in operation since 2000. The rationale for this new
approach, process for the selection of future private operators, mechanisms for the provision of
subsidies, and the experience to date with energy service delivery schemes are fully described in
Annex 2.
Component 2 has three subcomponents:
A. Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening of AMADER( US $8 million);
B. Fund for the Promotion of Rural Electrification Investments
(US $23 million);
C. Promotion of Multi-functional Platforms (US $1 million)
Subcomponent (A) for Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening of AMADER would
comprise the following goods, services and activities:
- Building, office furniture, computers, and vehicles;
- Salaries, working costs, and maintenance needs;
- Capacity building, training and technical assistance programs for the staff;
- Promotional activities;
- Studies to evaluate the cross-sectoral impact of rural electrification investment.
Subcomponent (B) for Rural Electrification Investments would comprise the following:
- A special fund( Rural Energy Fund, REF) to be used to promote rural electrification
investments undertaken by private operators; related studies to prepare and evaluate bids;
- Study to assess the need for the special financing instruments ( partial risk guarantees) to help
mobilize the required financing from commercial banks;
- Monitoring and Evaluation Studies of individual investments;
It is estimated that some 5-7 larger decentralized schemes, including the two ongoing
concessions, (i.e.schemes involving in excess of 5,000 consumers, and including rural family
residences, social institutions, and small productive companies) and between 8-10 smaller
decentralized schemes( i.e.involving isolated rural communities with less than 1,000 consumers
and either none, or a limited number of, small productive companies) would be financed over
the five year period from 2004-2008, starting with a slower growth of new schemes in the early
years as AMADER builds up its institutional capacity. If achieved, these aggregate decentralized
schemes would represent 35,000-45,000 new consumers of basic electricity services in rural
areas by 2008, benefiting more than 400,000 people, or double the present number. In addition,
an estimated 135 rural schools and over 100 rural health centers would benefit by having access
to basic electricity, thereby acquiring a capability to provide education through audiovisual
services, improved classroom illumination over longer hours, and refrigeration for vaccines. The
specific targets of new consumers, broken down by social and economic groups, are given in
Annex 2, together with the forecast annual disbursements.
Subcomponent (C) for the Promotion of Multi-Functional Platforms Investments would
comprise the following:
-A study to assess the sustainability of existing multifunctional platforms focusing on: (i) their
ownership, management, operation, maintenance, and equipment renewal aspects; (ii) their
viability in the presence of other private energy services companies; and, (iii) the possibilities for
scale up taking into account environmental concerns.



4
ISDS
-Micro-financing to support the equipment start up costs of multifunctional platforms to be
operated by community associations, women associations, NGOs, and the private sector.
1.3 Component 3: Household Energy( US $15.9 million)
The household energy component will build on achievements of the previous Household Energy
Project and support the scaling up of initiatives of the national strategy on household energy. It
would have three main subcomponents:
A. Community-based Woodland Management (US $9.5)
B. Interfuel Substitution and Energy Efficiency (US $3.0)
C. Information, Communication and Training (US $3.4)
The subcomponent (A) for Community-based Woodland Management will finance:
-the updating of 10 woodland management master plans
-the production of 5 new woodland management master plans
-the creation of 1000 rural markets
-the implementation of village woodland management systems in woodfuels supply basins
covering an area of 2 million hectares in the regions of Bamako, Segou, Mopti, Koutiala, Niono,
Kayes and Sikasso to provide about 70 percent of urban consumption of woodfuels
-the modernization of woodfuel production and trade (a target of 80 percent of tax collection on
woodfuels by year 3 of the project)
-the creation of more than 300 modern charcoal production associations with efficient techniques
and adequate management capacity; and,
-the support to the central and regional forestry service departments to elaborate legislative
measures applicable at communal levels
The subcomponent which was develop in coordination with the Ministry of Finance ana the
Ministry of Interior will support the development of standard contracts for use by communities
and local governments for management and exploitation of wood resources. Based on
institutional and regulatory reforms initiated under the fonrner project, support will be provided to
municipalities in tax collection and monitoring of woodfuel flows following decentralization
principles. Taxes collected will contribute to fund basic modern infrastructure services and
income derived from activities of this component will help participating local communities
afford modern infrastructure services.
The subcomponent (B) for Interfuel Substitution and Household Energy Efficiency will finance:
- efficient wood energy technologies (about 250 000 charcoal kilns),
- improved wood (500,000) and charcoal (300,000) stoves
-the promotion of alternative household fuels (100,000 kerosene stoves , a penetration rate of
about 30 percent of LPG utilization) to reduce an equivalent of about 440,000 tons of wood per
year
-power demand-side management initiatives at the household level to reduce the peak power by 5
MW by the use of at least 2000 evaporative coolers and 20,000 compact fluorescent lamps.
The promotion of efficient wood energy and alternative products is a continuation and extension
of the HEP project demand side component. Its main thrust is the promotion of efficient charcoal



5
ISDS
stoves and substitution by kerosene, LPG and alternative biomass fuels. A process of certification
will be established for best quality and most environment friendly products. Regional private
operators will provide adequate technical assistance and training to efficient charcoal stove
producers, while support will be given through technical assistance and investment subsidies to
private stakeholders for importing or locally manufacturing kerosene stoves and new biomass
fuels (briquettes). The main thrust of the power demand-side management activity is to promote
the penetration of low-Energy consumption lamps and energy efficient evaporative air-coolers to
reduce the peak power demand curve and to reduce the electricity bill for end-users. Private
distributors will receive support for the promotion of energy efficient products and appliances.
Introduction of air-coolers, to substitute for inefficient air-conditioners through a demonstration
program.
The subcomponent (C) Infonnation, Communication, and Training will support:
-extensive information and promotional campaigns through existing media in rural areas (radio,
institutional, grassroots) in order to raise interest and formal requests from rural communities in
support of the community-based woodland management and interfuel substitution activities;
- woodfuel sector training, planning and monitoring. This latter activity will focus strengthening
sector capacities to monitor performance as well as measure the impact of reforn and project
activities. It will be based on updating information on (i) regional woodfuel supply master plans
and (ii) adequate environmental, forestry, and social monitoring data.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environimental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proxininty to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover rural and peri-urban areas of Mali. No negative environmental impacts nor any
displacement of populations are envisaged. The global objective of the project to reduce atmospheric carbon
emissions through removing barriers and reductions in cost of renewable energy are expected to have
positive enviornmental benefits. For example, solar home systems would contribute to reduce indoor air
pollution from unsustainable use of woodfuels and kerosene. The promotion of sustainable woodland
management and the generalization of improved carbonization and utilization of improved stoves will also
contribute to preserve carbon sequestration potentials of forests.
B. Chieck Enviro,iniental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comnments. The proposed project is not expected to have any significant negative environmental or social
impacts that cannot be effectively mitigated. Negative impacts on cultural heritage, sites of historical
significance and natural resources resulting from project activities will be avoided. An Environmental and
Social Management Framework was prepared with an indication of a clear and systematic process for the
effective assessment of any potential environmental impacts that could result from project-funded activities.
The framework spells out the institutional arrangement, along with their capacity building requirements, for
sound enviromnental and social review and screening of sub-projects, as well as monitoring of the
implementation of mitigative measures of potential enviromnental and social impacts. In accordance with
OP4. 12, resettlement, either in the form of land acquisition or the restriction of access to legally designated
parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihood of the displaced persons will be
avoided or adequately mitigated
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (froitt PDS)
(click on E for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)



6
ISDS
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        * Yes ( No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               (9 Yes (9 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes ( ) No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  (_) Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              ( ) Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               (9 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      * Yes ( No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          (9 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  U) Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*    (9 Ycs 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please Jill in all r elevant questions. If informnation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessaty data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Overall, the project is expected to have positive environmental benefits. World Bank's enviromnental and
social safeguards will be complied with by the private sector operators involved in decentralized energy
services delivery.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
It is anticipated that that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.
Il.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
At this point project sites are not yet identified, this does not allow predictions on long term impacts of
project activities in the project area. However, as the global objective is to contribute to positive
environmental impacts, it is expected that only minor adverse impacts will occur. Both the energy
services delivery and the household energy components will undergo social and enviromnental
assessments to identify mitigation measures for issues that could result in long term impacts.
II.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The alternative of no action has been rejected prior to the choice of renewable energy systems. The
generalization of renewable energy systems is preferred to a situation where inferior fuels are used by the
majority of the population.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The borrower has prepared and Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement
Policy Framework. During implementation, these frameworks will serve as basis to screen all
sub-projects. Sub-projects presented by private operators will be subject to environmental and social
assessments based on the frameworks. In view of potential land acquisition and/or loss of access to
resources, the government will prepare the appropriate resettlement instrument based on r
ecommendations of the Resettlement Policy Framework.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



7
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emplhasis on potentially affected people.
Sites for future sub-projects are have not yet been identified. Discussions are on-going with the
Directorate of Energy and the Directorate of Nature Conservation on the prospective sub-projects
sites. The Environmental and Social Management Framework outlines public participation plan
that will be applied during the preparation of future sub-projects. Safeguard documents will be
distributed to the affected peoples and other stakeholders. Participation will be requested by local
communities in energy services delivery schemes and woodland management initiatives.
Through workshops and consultations, environmental and social issues will be addressed during
project preparation and implementation using participatory needs assessment techniques. The
project will ensure that the consulation processes are mainstreamed in project activities. Private
sector operators and NGOs involved in the project will also be subject to sensitization on
safeguards policies.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy Framework
were reviewed and cleared by the Bank. They were disclosed by the infoshop and in-country on
May 2, 2003 prior to appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is detenrined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[  S3. - No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirermients
Environmental Assessment/Analysi/AManagement Plan :         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/12/2003      3/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             5/2/2003      5/2/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/1/2003      5/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Sumnmary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framewvork:                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 3/3/2003      3/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             5/2/2003      5/2/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/1/2003      5/1/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable



8
ISDS
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Darn Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted bv       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Koffi Ekouevi                               5/02/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Serigne Omar Fye                       5/02/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Kristine Ivarsdotter                   5/02/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Amadou Konare                          5/02/2003
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     5/02/2003
Sector Manager/Director       Praful C. Patel                             5/02/2003



