                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                   Report No: AC95
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: MEXICO                                                Project ID: P077717
Project: Large-scale Renewable Energy Development              Task Team Leader: Charles M. Feinstein
Project (Phase 1 = $25M; Phase 2 = $45M)
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 15, 2003                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 15, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m):
                                                               Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: LCSFE                                           Sector: Renewable energy (55%); General finance
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)          sector (25%); Other industry (20%)
Status: Lending                                                Theme: Technology diffusion (P); Environmental
                                                               policies and institutions (S); Infrastructure services
                                                               for private sector development (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The development objective of the proposed project is to assist Mexico in stimulating and accelerating the
commercialization of renewable energy applications and markets, particularly at the grid-connected level,
in order to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) and other emissions while responding to increasing energy
demand and energy diversification imperatives necessary for sustainable economic growth.

The global objective, per GEF Operational Policy #6, is to address and reduce the barriers to
development of grid-connected renewable energy technologies and markets in Mexico.

Mexico has a broad array of world-class renewable energy resources, but has developed very few of these
resources due to the historic availability of domestic oil and gas and a Constitutionally-based mandate to
acquire only least-cost electric power resources. For Mexico, the project will significantly contribute to
their objective of diversifying the electricity sector (price and supply) , while providing significant
additional renewable energy (RE) capacity, organizational learning, and cost reductions in wind and
other technologies.

While many of Mexico's emissions issues are related to the transport sector, and a growing use of natural
gas in the power sector reduces overall emission intensity, there are significant local and global benefits
associated with reducing GHG intensity in the power sector. This is primarily due to the substantial use
of heavy fuel oil in old and inefficient oil-steam power stations, and consequent high levels of SO and
                                                                                                       2

CO emissions. Development of an action plan to reduce these emissions, including through the
   2

widespread promotion of renewable energy, is a key component of the Environment SAL-I loan and
implementation the focus of succeeding SAL tranches.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The Program's objectives address three primary tracks for developing and sustaining large-scale
renewable energy development, including:

                                                     2
                                                                                                         ISDS



1. To open avenues for direct sale to CFE at prices that increasingly recognize over time the full value
of renewable resources - including intermittent resources - to the integrated grid system.
2. To remove risk and transactions costs barriers currently limiting private projects serving municipals
and industrials under provisions of the September, 2001 renewable energy self-supply regulations
enacted by CRE.
3. To define and open up development of the renewable energy export market with U.S. border states
that have enacted Renewable Energy Portfolio Standards (RPS) incentive mechanisms, and facilitate this
opening with elements of emissions reduction certification and trading.

In addressing these tracks, there are two main components under the program:

    A collection of Technical Assistance activities at the analytical, policy, institutional, and business
    development assistance levels to stimulate and facilitate project investments, and
    A Financial Mechanism to provide targeted tariff-based incentive support in response to competitive
    tenders for CFE renewables capacity.

Component #1: Technical Assistance

Within the Technical Assistance component are four main categories:

System-based Least Cost Definition: These tasks will include development and implementation of
methodologies that establish system marginal costs incorporating diversification and environmental value
of renewables. CFE and SENER have already agreed in-principle on performing such an analysis and
offering a base tariff for renewable generators.

Integration of Renewables in Utility System Operations: These tasks include analysis, modeling, and
appropriate investment for effectively integrating the unique operational characteristics of renewables
into the CFE generation dispatch and transmission system.

Renewable Energy Project and Business Development to facilitate projects attracted and incentivized
by the Financial Mechanism. Additional business support tasks and activities are to mitigate political and
payments risks associated with renewable energy auto-generation schemes now permitted under the
September 2001 renewable energy self-supply regulations enacted by CRE.

Green Power/Export Market Development to enhance the ability of renewable projects to attract
external financial inflows based on their global environmental benefits define and open up development
of the renewable energy export market with U.S. border states that have enacted Renewable Energy
Portfolio Standards (RPS).

Component #2: Financial Mechanism:

Incorporating lessons from British, Irish and California experiences promoting renewables, tariff price
support for renewable projects will be delivered from a Financial Mechanism on a per kWh production
basis through competitive bidding for increments of capacity for a specific time period (nominally 5
years). Bidding would be periodic and expected to target an expanding level of capacity increments over
time. Capital for projects would be provided primarily by the private sector through commercial markets,
with the tariff support and contract bid for providing a key ingredient on obtaining project financing.
Over the life of the wind projects, the expected level of tariff support implies an approximately 10:1
leveraging ratio of GEF funds or higher.

                                                        3
                                                                                                        ISDS




Operational Principles for this financial mechanism or "Green Fund" will be further developed based
on the following indicative approaches:

     Competitive bidding to minimize cost requirements
     Payment to support electricity production only (no capital cost support)
     Clear linkage with long-term power purchase contracts to facilitate deal closure
     Only new projects considered, with large hydro and large geothermal excluded
     Support to be limited in duration with phase-out an integral part of project economics
     Project size to be limited to avoid depleting the Mechanism with only a few large projects
     Time limitation for completion, after which projects lost right to incentive support
     A cap on available support to protect the program for uncompetitive bids or gaming



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

In Phase I of the project, investments supported under the financial mechanism are expected to focus
exclusively on wind energy projects. The Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Oaxaca, Mexico, has been identified as
having a high potential for wind farm development. As in other parts of Mexico, much of the land in the
Isthmus is either owned by poor rural communities and held by communal entities known as ejidos, or
owned by communities under other traditional communal ownership structures. Developing wind farms in
the Oaxaca and neighboring states thus faces a major challenge: Project developers will often need to
negotiate with entire communities or large groups of landowners to approve wind farm development, rather
than negotiate directly with a single landowner.

Phase II of the project will scale-up wind energy development, but will also begin support for other
technologies having high potential in Mexico, including mini-hydro and biomass cogeneration schemes.
The bulk of the mini-hydro developments are anticipated to be run-of-river, often as an add-on to existing
irrigation canal schemes. The biomass projects are expected to be based primarily on waste biomass
associated with agricultural production and processing.


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments: The bulk of the sub-projects supported are expected to be Category B. Urban waste projects
(i.e., landfill gas recovery), if supported under Phase II, may warrant a Category A classification.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on     for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                          Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes     No    TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes     No    TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes     No    TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes     No    TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes     No    TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes     No    TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes     No    TBD

                                                      4
                                                                                                        ISDS



    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes    No       TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes    No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes    No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Given the focus of the project on renewable energy development in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples,
the major impacts associated with the project are expected to be social. However, if properly managed the
renewable energy developments should result in substantial resource rents and livelihood enhancements for
the affected communities. A notable impediment is that many of the local community leaders and members
lack important information to negotiate effectively with project developers. Specifically, community leaders
and members often do not know how landowners elsewhere are compensated and what are prevailing rates.
In other cases landowners may not have a clear understanding about how much of their land would be used
for wind turbine installation, or how compatible certain types of ranching or farming operations such as
sugar cane cultivation are with wind farm development on the same lands. In addition, the local
communities are interested in a realistic assessment of the prospects for some community members to work
on wind farms. Given the above, community leaders and members feel they are at a distinct disadvantage
when negotiating with wind project developers.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

None anticipated.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

None anticipated.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

Sub-projects supported by the project's Financial Mechanism will be required to undergo Mexican
environmental/social screening and assessment procedures applicable to energy projects, as administered
and enforced by SEMARNAT (Ministry of Environment), www.energia.gob.mx.

The consistency of these procedures with the Bank's safeguards framework will be assessed in the course
of project preparation, and strengthened as required to meet Bank appraisal criteria for financial
intermediary type operations.



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on

                                                       5
                                                                                                        ISDS



safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

At the end of the Third International Colloquium for Wind Energy held in Huatulco in September 2002,
several landowners from the Isthmus of Tehuantepec expressed their concern due to a lack of information
that would help them negotiate efficiently with project developers. Based on these discussions, the
Secretary of Industrial and Commercial Development of the State of Oaxaca made a direct request to the
community assembled at the event to carry out a study to address landowners' questions. Work is
proceeding on a study that would provide ejidos and other communities in the affected regions with
objective information on the types of agreements and contracts typically used in the U.S. and elsewhere
between wind power project developers and landowners. The report will also examine the land lease
process for wind energy projects, land uses compatible with wind farms, and potential job creation from
the introduction of wind farms. The USAID-financed study is being prepared for the State Government
of Oaxaca by Winrock International, under the review and coordination of Instituto de Investigaciones
Eléctricas (IIE).

While several ejido representatives have explained their need for information and advice, several wind
farm developers have also expressed strong support for this activity because they think that an objective
approach to this issue will be much more effective than information a wind project developer could
provide (given perceptions of bias).

Several consultation workshops in Tehuantepec, Oaxaca, and in six communities in the Ixtaltepec,
Juchitan and Santo Domingo municipalities in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec region. The objectives of the
workshops were to give community members brief technical overviews of wind power stations, and to
solicit their opinions, priorities and questions about the introduction of wind farms on their land.
Following the availability of the report, the Government of Oaxaca will organize a series of local "road
shows"and workshops to disseminate the findings in both Spanish and the local dialect. In addition, the
Secretaría de Energía (SENER) will host a public consultation on the project in February, 2003 to engage
energy and environment NGOs and broader elements of civil society, one of an expected series of such
consultations in the course of project development.



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[X] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

                                                    6
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Charles M. Feinstein                               05/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                       05/30/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Danny M. Leipziger                                 05/30/2003

