1
ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Free of Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: (15/28/2002                                 24008
Section I - Basic Information                                         May 28, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MEXICO                                  Project ID: P070108
Project: Savings and Credit Sector Strengthening and  Task Team Leader: Carlos E. Cuevas
Rural Microfinance Capacity Building
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 4, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 64.60
Bank Approval: July H1, 2002                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSER                              Sector: BI - Institutional Development; FS -
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  Financial Sector Development
Status: Lending                                  Theme: RURAL DEVELOPMENT; FINANCIAL
SECTOR
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The proposed project builds upon and enhances the Bank's overall program of strengthening Mexico's
financial sector, and providing targeted assistance to the rural poor. The project's main objective is to
contribute to the integration of low-income people into the national economy and to the realization of
their income generating potential by increasing their access to financial services. To this end, the project
aims at improving the financial stability and outreach capacity of savings and credit institutions (SCIs)
nationwide, and especially at expanding financial services in rural areas.
The project also builds upon the recent legal and regulatory reforms the Government of Mexico (GOM)
has enacted to restructure and strengthen the savings and credit sector, a much needed action given the
state of this sector and especially the loss of confidence in the financial system among the poor. Most
notable among these reforms are the "Popular Savings and Credit Law" (Ley de Ahorro y Cr6dito
Popular, June 4, 2001), and the law that creates the "National Savings and Financial Services Bank" (
Banco delAhorro Nacionaly Servicios Financieros, BANSEFI, June 1, 2001, see section B.2).
Specifically, the project would support the strengthening of the SCI sector through specialized assistance
to the retail institutions, enabling these intermediaries to reach more clients with improved services in a
sustainable manner, and through improving the supervisory capacity of the Comisi6n Nacional Bancaria
y de Valores (CNBV) to oversee the SCIs as mandated .by the Ley de Ahorro y Credito Popular. In
addition, as a targeted element of this generalized financial sector strengthening, the project would
support actions to improve the access of low-income rural communities to sustainable financial services.
Lastly, the project would include studies and actions designed to increase understanding of the
constraints affecting the extension of financial services to lower-income clients, monitoring the
effectiveness of current policy and programs and developing new financial techniques adapted to



2
ISDS
Mexico.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project supports the Government's efforts to strengthen the SCI sector, which serves the poorer
segments of the market, so thai: sector institutions are able to provide secure and expanded services, and
over time, increase their coverage. In addition, because rural areas are seriously underserved and
because of the intrinsic problenms in serving clients in this market, the project includes programs aimed at
improving access of rural communities to sustainable financial services. The main components of the
project are summarized below.
Component 1: Consolidation of the Savings and Credit Institutions Sector
The project supports a program to strengthen eligible institutions and liquidate institutions which are not
sustainable, to improve SCI sector infrastructure, and to enhance sector supervision. As per its mandate,
BANSEFI will manage the technical assistance programs. CNBV will be in charge of certification of
institutions for lawful operation,s.
1.1    Strengthening SCIs
Support to Institutions. The project will support an assessment of existing SCIs to determine whether
these qualify for certification by CNBV, require technical assistance either to strengthen or to restructure
them (mergers with other institutions), or need to be liquidated. Evaluation criteria have been prepared by
a team led by CNBV, and consisting of national and international specialists. It is expected that 365
institutions with 1.7 million members or 75 percent of total sector membership) will participate in the
program. Preliminary analysis shows that some 90 percent of institutions would meet the capitalization
requirements for certification provided they take measures to strengthen their financial performance and
operations. This estimate excludes the Cajas Solidarias network, where it can be expected that a higher
percentage will have viability problems and will need to be merged or closed down.



3
ISDS
The project will support the preparation and implementation of plans to strengthen institutions
which can be strengthened or restructured and which have agreed to carry out plans to gain
CNBV certification. It is anticipated that the institutional strengthening plans will last between
one and two years, depending on the size of the institution. BANSEFI will recruit institutions
which are specialized in the 'provision of these services (referred to as technical assistance
providers) to carry out the initial assessment using CNBV guidelines, and to prepare and
implement the institutional strengthening plans. The technical assistance providers will enter
into formal agreements with the participating SCIs and their corresponding Federations spelling
out the program and the performance standards to be met in a designated time period.
BANSEFI will monitor the iesults of the technical assistance program and will review progress
on a semi-annual basis. BANSEFI intends to suspend assistance to institutions which do not
achieve the agreed semi-annual targets. In addition, CNBV intends to verify on a sample basis
the accuracy of the classification given at the outset to the institutions participating in the
program. The CNBV will conduct its own evaluation of the institutions when the technical
assistance program is completed, and decide independently whether the institutions are to be
authorized under the law.
The project xvill also support, as required, the liquidation of institutions which have been determined
unviable and present risks to deposit-holders. As the legal status of sector institutions is very diverse,
support for liquidation will be (letermined on a case-by-case basis.
Technical assistance providers will be selected from among specialized institutions with demonstrated
experience in the field. The providers will support all institutions in a Federation which are willing to
enter into specific agreements. The Government, with financing by the Bank, will pay for the costs of the
technical assistance program. The beneficiaries will contribute some logistical support to the
consultants. The participating institutions will also pay for the full cost of the Federations which are
being established as required by law. The loan does not include financing to shore up the capital, which
may be required in the case of a few institutions. The contracts will cover the costs of the international
and national specialists required to carry out the institutional development plans as well as expenses
directly associated with their work, including equipment and materials. No vehicles will be financed; if
vehicles need to be purchased, these will be paid by the Government.
Providing SC Information Infrastructure and Services. The project would support the design and
establishment of an information system for the sector as part of an integrated effort aimed at
strengthening the SCIs, their federations and the sector at large. The information system will enable
sector institutions to provide required financial reports to the CNBV as their supervisor, and to other
relevant government agencies. It will also have the capability to maintain accounts and financial
information, and to provide other operational, control and reporting services, upon request by the
institutions.
The core system will reside an(d will be operated at BANSEFI. The SCIs will link to the system with
equipment, software, technical assistance and training provided by the project contractors. This
component would support the clesign and development of the basic system infrastructure and software,
and the provision of services to about 40 SCIs that represent approximately 1000 points of service (SCI
branches). The Government will pay, with Bank financing, for the system development costs. A
fee-for-service cost recovery mechanism will gradually be put in place that will have as an objective the
full recovery of operating costs by the fifth year of system operations. The requisite telecommunications
infrastructure exists in Mexico. Prior to loan effectiveness, BANSEFI will have confirmed interest from



4
ISDS
data communications providers to participate in bids for provision of services to the information systems
to be set up by BANSEFI .
Training program for SCI staff The project will support the implementation of a training program for
SCI management and staff. Thc: program will include modules in the areas of finance, accounting, risk
management, credit analysis and governance and will be offered in six regions. The training, which will
be available to all participating institutions, will be carried out by specialized consultants (for
accounting) and training institutes for the other subjects. It will be implemented over a two year period.
Some 800 members of participating institutions are expected to participate in the training. The
Federations and member institutions will provide the physical facilities for the courses and will pay for
the transportation and living expenses of its participants in the courses.
1.3     Strengthening SCI Supervision.
The project will provide support to CNBV to strengthen its supervision procedures and competencies. To
this end, it will provide trainin,g to CNBV staff on supervision practices and procedures for microfinance
institutions and technical assistance to CNBV to develop and adapt regulations as needed. In addition,
CNBV will engage the advice of recognized international experts in systems of auxiliary supervision
(e.g., Germany, Canada, Spain) on a regular, semi-annual basis. The project will also provide technical
assistance to strengthen the Supervision Committees (Comites de supervisi6n) at the Federations,
specifically charged with the auxiliary supervision functions. It will also provide support to the
Confederations that group them. This support aims at ensuring clear definition of the functions of the
Federations (and the Confederation that will group them), and specifically a demarcation between the
auxiliary supervision role and other functions. The support to CNBV and the sector will seek to establish
rules and procedures that ensure professional and transparent handling of entry and exit, and address and
mitigate risks of conflict of interest, adverse selection and other issues that may emerge in the process of
implementing the supervisory mechanism. The loan will finance technical assistance and training
required to carry out the activities.
Component 2: Expanding Financial Services in Rural Areas
This component aims at expanding the supply of financial services the marginal areas, and builds upon
work initiated under the marginal areas programs. The project will cover the marginal areas in some
eleven states. Activities under this component will be carried out by specialized international technical
assistance providers under contract with the implementing agency.
2.1 Expanding Institutions and Services in the Marginal Areas
The component aims at increasing outreach, ensuring financial sustainability, and improving and
diversifying the financial services offered by existing intermediaries that serve the marginal areas. In
areas where no intermediaries exist, new institutions will be established using proven methodologies and
which will fully comply with existing legislation. Participating institutions will be selected on the basis
of their track record in terms of outreach and sustainability, and their expansion plans. Institutions
supported under this component are likely to be regional institutions, as these are the most inclined to
serve the target clientele. The participating institutions would enter into agreements wilh the technical
assistance providers committing to performance targets which will be closely monitored. Program
activities will encourage commlitment and ownership at the local level while setting up institutional
policies and structures that encourage efficiency and profitability. The process will take time because
new habits and skills will need 1:o be developed. All participating SCIs will join or will be assigned to a
Federation, as mandated by the law, and will meet the requirements for certification by CNBV. The



5
ISDS
program does not include a line of credit, and it is expected that most of the credit given by participating
institutions will be from members' savings.
The marginal areas will be grouped into regions for developmental purposes. The population of the
marginal areas covered total some 17 million people. The program will be implemented in six of the
following seven regions: (i) Chiapas, (ii) Huasteca (marginal areas in the states of Hidalgo, San Luis
Potosi and Veracruz), (iii) Oaxaca, (iv) Veracruz excluding the Huasteca (iv) Guerrero (and adjacent
marginal areas in the state of Morelos), (v) Michoacan (and adjacent marginal areas in the State of
Mexico), (vi) Puebla and (vii) Sierra Gorda (marginal areas in the states of Quer6taro and Guanajuato).
The municipalities covered by the program appear in a document prepared by SAGARPA which is based
on the classification of the CONAPO for levels of marginality. The regions have been selected taking
into account the demand for services identified in market studies, and the willingness of institutions or
groupings of clients in the region to enter into performance agreements with the technical assistance
providers. The sequencing of the regional programs has also been determined on the basis of the studies,
although this order may be modified if developments justify advancing a region ahead of others.
The technical assistance providers will be selected following World Bank procedures. The process of
selection of the technical assistance provider which will implement the program in Chiapas is complete
and the program will be initiated this month. The process of selection of the technical assistance provider
for the Huasteca Region is well advanced, and work should start later this year. At the end of five years
of the project, some 60,000 families will be served in the six regions where the program will have been
initiated. This figure takes into account that some of the regional programs would only be in their third
year of operation. Given that the regions served under the program have few existing institutions, much
of the expansion of services will come through the establishment of new branches or new institutions.
Some 15-20 new branches (or local institutions) should be established in each of the marginal areas
covered. The contracts will cover the costs of the international an national specialists required to carry
out the regional development plans as well as expenses directly associated with their work, including
equipment and materials. The loan will also finance the purchase of one computer and basic software per
branch established. No vehicles will be financed; if vehicles need to be purchased, these will be paid for
by the Government.
2.2    Community Training Programs (Social intermediation)
The project will provide training to the poorer segments of the population in the marginal areas on basic
principles of household finance and participation in financial transactions. In some cases, the program
will assist communities to set up simple record-keeping for indigenous savings organizations, and
introduce them to formal institutions where they could set up formal accounts. Activities under this
sub-component will be organized by the same technical assistance providers that will provide services
under sub-component 2.1.
Component 3: SCI Sector Studies, Monitoring and Information Dissemination
Activities under this component include studies on financial intermediation in rural areas and other
underserved areas of Mexico with a view to defining new miethodologies which are adapted to local
conditions. In addition, the component includes dissemination programs, including workshops and
information campaigns, to inform SCIs, their clients and other stakeholders of the sector consolidation
program, and to disseminate lessons from experience in the area of microfinance. The project will also
support the introduction of systems to monitor sector development progress and the impact of the
government's development programs. The sector studies and monitoring function will be carried out at
five different levels: (i) SCI supervision mechanism; (ii) SCI performance; (iii) federation/network



6
ISDS
performance; (iv) social impact; and (v) fiscal impact. Lastly, the component will also support periodic
external evaluations by national and international consultants, including technical and financial audits of
the rural microfinance institutions supported under the project, and expert advice to the project
management team. The project will finance consulting services under this activity and information
materials prepared by BANSEFI.
Component 4: Project Management
BANSEFI is conscious of the importance of a strong project implementation team to coordinate and
supervise the work the consulirants contracted to carry out the project activities, and has assembled a
strong team for this purpose. The project will support the operations of the technical unit which has been
set up to carry out project rnanagement and implementation follow up, including monitoring and
evaluation of the activities.
Components:
1. Consolidating the Savings & Credit Institutions Sector
2. Expanding Financial Services in Rural Areas
3. SCI Sector Studies, Information Dissemination & Monitoring
4. Project Management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments.
C. Safeguard Policies Trigerd
I'olicy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                      Yes * No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       ' Yes * No    QTBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes *No       TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/EIP 4.12)                     * Yes     No     TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                D Yes * No    3TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                   Yes * No    3 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*             Yes 0 No   K TBD
Projects in International Watervways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          Yes * No   3 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claimis
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management



7
ISDS
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If informzation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguarcl issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will promote the consolidation and strengthening of savings and credit institutions and the
expansion of financial services in marginal rural areas. As identified during project preparation,
indigenous people from a variety of ethnic groups represent a high percentage of the rural population in
marginal areas. To ensure that ihe project benefits this population, it incorporates a social development
model comprising: the preparation of a social analysis, consultation, and the development of a social
strategy built upon teh informat:ion and recommendations which emerge from this process. On this basis,
the consultant in charge of the lechnical assistance to savings and credit institutions under Component 2
of the project will prepare an action plan to promote indigenous peoples' participation. This process has
been already completed for the two regions where implementation of the project will begin in the first
year, and it will be repeated for each region to be included under Component 2 of the project as they
come into implementation.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Though the project will operate under a demand-driven approach, the proposed social clevelopment
model will ensure that indigenous population and other vulnerable groups can benefit by: (i) conducting
outreach strategies to link poor communities to SCI services; and (ii) using targeted communication
campaigns to make indigenous populations aware of the project's benefits and encourage participation.
At the project's midterm, interregional workshops will take place to share experiences and lessons
learned in expanding financial services to underserved groups in the marginal areas.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
BANSEFI, through a technical unit (TU) responsible for day-to-day management of the rural outreach
expansion activities, will ensure that criteria for qualification and selection of TA providers fits within
the purpose of promoting participation of indigenous organizations and other vulnerable groups, and that
those firm(s) selected prepare action plans taking into account results and recommendations from IPDPs.
The TU will also ensure that all steps of the project's social development model, comprising IPDPs and
consultations, are prepared in a timely matter for each region according to the project implementation
schedule, and that their recommendations are incorporated as inputs in technical assistance provider's
Terms of Reference. Bidding evaluation procedures will take into account the experience in working with
indigenous population, the outreach strategy and communication proposals to promote indigenous
peoples participation. Benchmarks to reach rural population and women will be defined for each region
based on identified organizations potential and willingness to participate identified through IPDPs. The
Terms of Reference for each region, including selection criteria and performance benchmarks, will be
submitted for Bank no-objection. The technical committee that oversees the component will foster
implementation in accordance with social development model steps.
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



8
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During project preparation, consultations were made with main stakeholders, including SCIs in various
regions, the clients of SCIs, beneficiaries of public programs and national and local institutions related to
the savings and credit sector. Two consultation workshops with indigenous peoples organizations were
carried out, one in Chiapas and other in the Huateca region, to solicit their views about savings and
micro-credit instruments, institutions and outreach methods and alternatives, which were incorporated
into the project design.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. S ummary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              5/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          5/15/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             5/21/2002
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.



9
ISDS
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:              Carlos E. Cuevas                             05/20/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Maria Elena Castro Mufoz                 05/20/02
Project Safeguards Specialists :2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinal.or: Juan D. Quintero                          04/09/02
Sector Manager/Director:       John Redwood                                 04/09/02
For a list of World Bank news releaises on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEICSACK       SITE MAP   ,    SHOW'CASE



