ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                             AWortd Free of Poverty
E              -                                                                     i;_-
InfoShop                                                        24227
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet I
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/22/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MOLDOVA                                 Project ID: P040558
Project: ENERGY 11                               Task Team Leader: Vladislav Vucetic
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 9, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 18, 2002                     IDA Amount ($m): 35.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE                             Sector: PD - Distribution & Transmission; PY -
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Other Power & Energy Conversion
Status: Lending                                  Theme: ENERGY
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objectives of the project are to:
(i)   improve the security and reliability of the electricity transmission system and wholesale
electricity supply and, therefore, facilitate unimpeded commercial operation of the power system, both
domestically and internationally; and
(ii)  improve the availability, quality, and efficiency of heating in selected priority public buildings
(schools, hospitals, and residential buildings for disabled and other vulnerable groups).
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Project comprises four components:
(A) Electricity system upgrade;
(B) Heating supply and efficiency improvement;
(C) Technical assistance for project implementation and energy sector reforms; and
(D) Project management and administration (incremental operating costs).
The total project cost is estimated at about US$43.8 million, of which US$27.4 million is the cost of the
electricity component, US$9.4 the cost of the heating component, US$5.8 million is the cost of technical
assistance, and US$1.2 million is the incremental operating cost.
Component A: Electricity system upgrade. This component includes the following subcomponents:
i. Improvement of metering in the electricity transmission networkThis component includes
installation of energy meters at all interconnecting points of the 110-400-kV transmission



2
ISDS
network, which would enable metering and recording of active and reactive electricity flows in
the wholesale electricity market. The meters would record at 15-minute intervals, be able to
transmit information to the National Dispatch Center, and have remote and on-site data
downloading and reading capabilities. The metering system should be able to support a variety of
market arrangements, from bilateral contracts to short-term spot markets based on competitive
bidding.
ii. Rehabilitation and upgrade of power system dispatch This component includes installation
of the necessary hardware and software to enable real time acquisition of operational information
from the main facilities (power stations and transmission system substations), analysis and
monitoring of the system status at the National Dispatch Center, and control and dispatch of the
power plants, load centers, and the transmission system, to maintain a reliable, secure and
economic operation, and facilitate financial settlements in the wholesale electricity market. The
main elements of the system include Remote Terminal Units (RTU) and the corresponding local
data acquisition equipment at the power plants and transmission substations, the System Control
And Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, and the Energy Management System (EMS).
iii. Rehabilitation and upgrade of system telecommunicationThis component includes
installation of the necessary communications equipment (fiber optics, power line carrier
systems-PLC, and radio systems), which would serve the communication needs of metering and
dispatch.
iv. Priority rehabilitation of the transmission network, including environmental upgrades
This component covers replacement and repair of high voltage transmission line pylons and the
most urgently needed rehabilitation measures in selected high-voltage substations (station
batteries for 11 substations, 330-kV equipment for the Chisinau, Straseni and Balti substations
and a number of 1 10-kV circuit breakers for various substations)The component also includes
physical mitigation measures for appropriate disposal of old PCB-containing condenser batteries,
to be implemented when replacement of the batteries is required.
Component B:     Heating  Supply and Efficiency ImproQdiientomponent includes
improvements in supply and distribution of heat and demand side measures for heat and hot water
consumption in selected public buildings (schools, hospitals, and residential buildings for disabled and
other vulnerable groups). About 20 buildings, comprising the first investment batch, have been identified
and technically appraised. An indicative list of additional buildings has been prepared, and includes
about 95 objects in 8 municipalities (Cantemir, Chisinau, Falesti, Floresti, laloveni, Soroca, Straseni and
Ungeni) and under the central Ministries of Health and Education. The list includes about 50 schools and
kindergartens with more than 15,000 pupils and about 25 hospitals and clinics with more that 4000 beds.
A detailed analysis during the project implementation may result in some of the objects being changed
due to technical or financial reasons. The criteria for the selection of the public buildings is in Annex 13.
The Ministry of Energy expressed strong interest to include in the project some residential apartment
buildings, located close to the chosen public buildings, which could be a reasonable solution from
technical and economic point of view. At this stage (the start of the project), there is no legal,
institutional, and regulatory framework in place to include individual private apartments and other
commercial users into the investment project. Such framework should be developed under the
USAID-financed technical assistance. The Energy I project could include some pilot schemes with
residential and other buildings, in agreement with IDA and once the legal, regulatory and institutional
framework developed by USAID-funded consultants has been implemented by the government.
The heating component will be implemented in three batches: the first would include the already



3
ISDS
identified and appraised 20 buildings (including the pilot project in Ungeni); the second batch will be
prepared (identified and appraised) with the assistance of the Swedish and local consultants within 6-8
months from the start of the project; and the third batch will be identified and appraised within 18-24
months from the start of the project. For each batch, a technical and financial feasibility analysis of the
proposed investments will be completed. The investments should be least cost - i.e., the proposed
technical solution should satisfy the required heating standards at minimum costs (investment plus
operating costs).
Component C: Technical Assistance for Project Implementation and Energy Sector Reforms. The
project would include technical assistance for the following activities:
i. Project implementation: consultant services for procurement and project management for the
electricity and heating components;
ii. PCB follow-up study (electricity system): The environmental assessment carried out in the
context of project preparation indicated that no appreciable adverse environmental impacts
would result from the implementation of the proposed electricity system upgrades. However, in
order to strengthen its capacity to deal with the potential problem of condensor batteries
containing PCBs located at substations throughout the country, the Government has requested
the inclusion in the technical assistance component funds to carry out a follow-up study of the
issue, including the development of recommendations for appropriate protection of the sites and
disposal of old PCB-containing condensor batteries, to be implemented when replacement of the
batteries is required. Actual removal of the capacitors or renewal of old ones is not foreseen
under the project.
iii. Assistance for sector reforms: development of legal, institutional and regulatory framework for
development of decentralized heating systems; audit of sector historic debts and their
restructuring; support to energy regulatory commission; support to Moldelectrica for corporate
operations and operation of the wholesale electricity market (including strengthening financial
management system); support to the Government for privatization of electricity industry.
Component D: Project Management and Administration. This component includes the incremental
costs associated with the establishment and operation of a Project Implementation Unit, created by the
project beneficiaries specifically for implementation of this project. The incremental cost of international
audits of project accounts and Moldelctrica's financial statements is also included.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Republic of Moldova (locations throughout the country, including municipalities to be determined.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes     No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                         Yes *No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes *No    STBD



4
ISDS
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes * No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes * No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        Yes 0 No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 Yes *No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            Yes * No    ^ TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The only safeguard policy that applies to this project is Environmental Assessment. Generally it is expected
that the project will have no appreciable adverse environmental impacts, but instead will have environmental
benefits associated with the replacement of old equipment with more environmentally-benign equipment,
and the execution of certain mitigation measures that otherwise would likely not be carried out. Details are
provided in the PAD.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None anticipated.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Borrower prepared Environmentl Management Plan for the project. Implementation of the EMP will be
a covenant in the Development Credit Agreement.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the Government of Molodova; Moldelectrica; by extension, all users of electricity
in Moldova (essentially the entire population); the municipalities that will participate in the heating
component.
The Ministry of Energy published an announcement in the major newspapers of Moldova, indicating the
availability for review of the project EMP by any interested party. The same public announcement included
information on a public meeting for discussion of the project EMP. The public meeting was organized by
the Ministry of Energy with the active participation of the Ministry of Environment and Territorial



5
ISDS
Development (Environmental Policy Division), which routinely maintains close working ties with the
environmental NGOs represented in Moldova. The public meeting took place on May 15, 2001 and was
attended by 45 representatives of various NGOs, the media, municipalities and ministries. The Borrower's
combined EA/EMP for the project was submitted to the Bank in August 2001, together with the report on
the public consultation and disclosure process.
E. Safeguards Classqifcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 8/8/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             5/15/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              2/13/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Vladislav Vucetic                            May 9, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Bernard Baratz                            May 13, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Hossein Razavi                              May 14, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAlCH         FEE0UACK       SrE MAP        SMOWCASE



