23890
March12, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated. March 12, 2002
A. Baskc Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. I . Project Statistics
COUNTRY: MOLDOVA                                  PROJECT ID: GM-P070044-SPN-BBGEF
PROJECT: GEF Dniester Blodiversity Conservation MSP  TTL: Samir M. Suleymanov
APPRAISAL DATE: N/A                               IBRD AMOUNT ($m):
BOARD DATE: N/A                                    GEF AMOUNT (Sm): $975,000
MANAGING UNIT: ECSSD                               SECTOR. Environment
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: GEF Medium Size Project      STATUS: Approved by GEF CEO
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS)
The project objective is to improve in-situ conservation of biodiversity in the Lower Dniester river. To
achieve this, the project will: (i) support the creation of a Lower Dniester National Park in the lower
Dniester river basin and build local capacity for its management; (ii) restore forest habitat linkages and
water management of floodplain forests; (iii) promote sustainable management of forest and meadow
resources inside and outside of the protected area; (iv) build awareness among local communities and
disseminate the benefits of project activities; and (v) improve collaboration with Ukraine on the protection
of the transboundary wetlands of the Dniester Delta region.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS)
Component A. Establish Moldova Lower Dniester National Park: The objective of this component is to
improve protection and management of the Dniester wetland ecosystem by establishing the Lower
Dniester National Park as a multiple use protected area. The Component will support technical studies for
designation and gazettement of the national park, finalization of the management plan, including
territorial/management plan and legal documents for its creation and adoption; capacity building in
protected areas administration, resource and visitor use management, and biodiversity monitoring, and
awareness building within local communities; establishment of park infrastructure to implement urgent
recommendations of the management plan; and minor ecological restoration activities.
Component B. Biodiversity Activities in the Buffer Zone: This component would: (i) address the threats
of unsustainable land and resource uses in the buffer zone on biodiversity inside and outside the national
park; and (ii) engage local communities in project implementation, and share with them the benefits of the
national park.
Component C. International Cooperation in Dniester River Basin and Black Sea Coastal Zone: The
project will promote international cooperation in several areas: (i) cooperation with Ukraine on improved
management of the transborder wetlands of the Dniester delta; and (ii) cooperation with Ukraine and
Romania in development of the "green corridor" on the Black Sea Coast and its tributaries. Activities for
the Ukraine Dniester Delta will be financed under the Azov Black Sea Corridor Biodiversity Conservation
project.
Component D. Project Management and Commitment Building: The Component will provide incremental
support to a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) established to oversee the day to day implementation of
the Project and disseminate the information on the project activities. The component would also raise
environmental awareness in the project region and support NGOs and local communities in promoting
environmentally sustainable development policies at the local and national level.






The first idea to create the proposed National Park came from the local authority of the Village of
Talmaza. In a letter to the Parliament of Moldova in 1995 expressing the opinion of the local population,
the local authority asked to enhance the protected area network in the region to improve protection and
sustainable management of the nature and wildlife of the Dniester River floodplain.. In the same year local
authorities of Stefan-Voda region organized a special session of the Regional Council with participation of
representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Committee for Agriculture and Environment of the
Parliament, and BIOTICA NGO (Recipient and Implementing Agency of the GEF Grant). The Council, in
presence of all mayors of target villages, unanimously adopted a decision to ask central authorities to
establish protective regime for natural zones of the Lower Dniester. BIOTICA approached the World Bank
for applying for a Medium Size Grant from GEF to assist in creation of a Lower Dniester National Park,
corresponding to the requests of local communities and authorities.
The proposed National Park would:
Improve the protection of natural resources from unauthorized recreational activities by non-
subsistence users; and
2, Introduce new management regimes for various zones within the protected area that would
promote sustainable use of natural resource by subsistence users and improve their livelihoods.
The Park would consist of four zones, as per framework law on Protected Areas of Moldova (Law on
National Parks (NP) does not yet exist, since there is no NP in Moldova yet):
*  Zone A would be a core zone, strictly protected area where no economic activity would be
allowed. The area that is proposed to become Zone A currently is already a strictly protected area
under the State Forestry Committee, with no population living in it or using it. Thus, no
resettlement, limited access to resources, or loss of income concerns would arise;
*  Zone B would be an area where only very restricted activity would be allowed. These areas are
currently belong to and under the protection of local forestry agencies, and only very restricted
activity is allowed in these areas only by the Forestry staff. This would remain unchanged, except
the Management Plans to be prepared under the Project would identify the most efficient and
sustainable practices and methodologies for management of these resources. The Project will
result in improved protection of biodiversity in Zones A and B from unauthorized use by non-
subsistence users, mainly not leaving in the Project area;
Zone C would be an area where a limited economic activity can take place by population.
Currently these are non-populated areas that are being used by a community as a whole, i.g.
common pasture lands. So, there would be no additional restriction created by the NP, instead the
Management Plans would again identify better practices for utilization of these Zone to the
increased benefit of the current users;
*  Zone D would be a buffer zone of the Park, where people would be allowed to leave and do any
kind of economic activity that is not harmful to the environment. Thus, this Zone would cover the
territories of surrounding villages, without imposing any restriction to their current practices and
accesses to any resources. The populations is actually expected to benefit from improved and
sustainable natural resource management practices developed by the Management Plans.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of the area
and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other
culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area is 30,000 hectares in southeastern Moldova, located along 54 km of the Lower Dniester
River, and is bordered by Ukrine to the south and the Turunciuc branch of the Dniester River to the east.
Three habitat zones overlap in the project area, and account for its high levels of biodiversity: the aquatic






habitats (wetlands, swamp forests, and open water) of the riverine/Black Sea zone, the dry oak forests of
the silvo-steppe zone, and the steppe zone itself. The project area is in rural southeastern Moldova and
includes all or parts of the territories of I8 villages and a population of over 74,000 people.
1l. Check Environnemental Classif7cation A f , B fXY, C rI, FL [ i, TBDi
(:omments: The project has been classified "Category B" because of its minor environmental impact. A
simplified Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared (see Annex 1) to identify
potential environmental issues and define mitigation measures which would need to be implemented to
address those issues. The overall environmental impact of the project will be positive. The only minor
works proposed under the Project would take place in the Zone D of the National Park (see below) - a
buffer zone where people would be allowed to live and carry out any economic activity not harmful to the
envirornent. Details on these works and exact location will be identified once the Management Plan for
the National Park is finalized. They will be implemented in accordance with Moldovan regulations and
consistently with the EMP. Below is a brief description of works that could be supported by the Project:
Refurbishment of the Administration Building of the Park. The Park that is expected to be
established does not have any building yet assigned to it. Management Plans to be developed
under the Project will also identify and recommend a building that could be used as an
administration building and info center for the park at the same time. Thus, the Project has
allocated some funds for these works. It is expected that a building would be provided by local
authorities, so no new construction would take place;
Afforestation Works. About $40,000 has been allocated under the Project to finance some urgent
afforestation works, as identified by the Management Plans. In any case, these would only include
establishing forests corridors between separated lots of forests, on the lands that have been
reserved by local authorities for these purposes, and belong to local authorities (public);
Water infrastructure improvements. Very minor improvements in water infrastructure ($10,000)
could be financed by the Project, again, based on the recommendations of the Management Plan,
as approved by the Govemrnent. They would only include rehabilitation of some existing
schemes, located in the public lands of Zone D;
About $80,000 has been allocated for small grants under the Project. These grants could finance
minor works in the buffer zone for sustainable agriculture. Procedures for the selection,
environmental screening, approval and implementation of the small grants will be described in the
Operational Manual for Small Grant, currently under preparation. The environmental procedures
will be consistent with the Bank guidelines and the Moldavian regulations. The OM will be
reviewed and approved by the World Bank prior to implementation of the small grant program.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PIbS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirenents
Click on Policy reference number for full policy          ___
I.C1. Table on applicability                          Yes    No     TBD
Envirownental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)              [XI    []       ]   .-
Forestry (OP/OP 4.36)                                   I ]         I I
Natural Habitats (OP/EP 4.04)                        Jj        l    I IX
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                           I1     [I    I      Lj
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                              I [L] [X]I   [ ]
Involuntarv Resettlement (OD 430)                     [X]      I ]I [ 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                           I[     XI IX [ ]
Cultural Property (OPN 1103                                  [XI] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP/GP 7.60)            [ ]    [X1I   [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BPIGP 7.50)   [      {X     I ]
By supporting the proposed project. the Bank does not intend to prejudice the fnal determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas






II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
potential large scale, significant and/or irTeversible impacts.
No large scale or irreversible impact is expected from the implementation of this project.
The project has been reviewed for its environmental impact consistent with OP4.01. The project is
consistent with the objectives of OP 4.36 and OP 4.04. LEG confirmed that OP 7.50 does not apply.
Although the project will not involve relocation of people, some restriction of access to resources could
result from the implementation of the Management Plan for the National Park. Therefore, the project may
trigger OD4.30.
The Management Plans prepared in participatory manner will focus on key activities to enhance
biodiversity conservation and natural resource management, such as increased monitoring, and working
with forest-dependent households and communities to develop and implement regulations and other
measures to ensure sustainable utilization of natural resources. The Project does not require involuntary
physical displacement or relocation of people. Furthermore, to the extent feasible, the Management Plans
will balance more effective enforcement of existing regulations to prevent loss of globally important
biodiversity in protected zones, with improved and equitable access to appropriate economic zones where
specific natural resources will be managed for sustainable subsistence use by local communities. In some
cases, changes in zoning may adversely impact livelihoods. Increased restriction of access cannot be
ruled out until the Management Plans for these areas are developed, at which time the nature of any
proposed restrictions, as well as the type of measures necessary to mitigate adverse impacts of those
restrictions, would be determined in consultation with the project-affected groups. A Process Framework
(see Annex 2) outlines the criteria and procedures to be followed to ensure that eligible, affected persons
are assisted in their efforts to restore or improve their livelihoods in a manner which maintains the
environmental sustainability of the nature reserve in question.
Land ownership structure in core and limited and recreational use areas will not change by creation of
the proposed National Park i.e. the lands to be included in the National Park will remain in public
domain of the Central Government, as they are now. The core area and zones of recreational and limited
use of the proposed National Park (Zones A, B, and C) are now public properties and belong to the State
Forestry Service (Forestry Code, 1997, Art. 6). National parks, in accordance with the Law on Protected
Areas (1998), are protected by the State and can be managed by either Central Environmental authorities,
or the State Forestry Service (but in any case, not by the local authorities). In accordance with Art. 11 of
the Forestry Code, the administration of the State Forest Fund is the obligation the Government, local
authorities, and State Forestry Service.
As to buffer zones (Zone D), private land ownership and traditional agriculture with limited use of
fertilizers and pesticides will remain permitted here, as per Law on Protected Areas, protected by the State
(Art. 34). Since significant amounts of the buffer zone lands belong to the floodplain, drained in the Soviet
period, but now partly privatized by numerous villagers with peaces of about 1.5 ha, the fate of agriculture
here depends on soil quality. Significant part of soil is currently under the process of salinization and can
be used for haying or grazing.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or due to
multiple project component.
N /A                          _  _  _ _  _  _  _ _  _  _  _ _






lI.D lc Describe an picinfial )on- term impacts dtic to anticipated fiture ncrivities in the project area.
No negative long-lerni impact is expected. The project is expected to further improve cross-sectoral
cooperation in Lowver Dniester area in regards to nmariauenILnt and use of the proposed National Park.
Significant progress in thlis regards has already been achie'.ed during rJc preparation of the Project. Local
communities, business, and auiiiorities are also well familiar with the Project. welcome it, and have
alredd c developed a strong sense of ownerslhip in the Project This % il l ensure successful implementation
of the project as well as the future sustainability ot its outcomes.
11 D.2 In Iight f  describe the proposed treatnienrt  alternati%esi it required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe anrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Recipient is committed to implement the project as described in the Project Brief and will ensure
compliance with the EMP and the Process Framework which are integral part of the legal agreement. A
high level Steering Committee will be established to oversee the overall implementation of the Project.
The Committee will also include representatives of the Ministry of Environment and local authorities. This
will ensure that all recommendations of the management plans to be prepared under the Project will
undergo enviromental and social reviews and received clearances as required by the Moldova laws.
Another local Committee will be established to supervise the implementation of the Small Grants
Program, consisting of representatives of local NGOs, communities, and authorities, which will provide
another opportunity for adequately addressing the safeguard issues. Local Advisory Committees,
consisting of representatives of local communities, will be closely involved in all matters related to Project
implementation, specifically in finalization of the zoning of the proposed National Park. Stakeholder
consultation and involvement arrangements are described in details below.
II.D.4. Identify the e;h   :g a ckcribc rtie mcihaniz. I L'ri'.ilt alnl uiIxIdiU1W .F s.ugl.lrd p1'ILC,. . with an
emphasis on potentiall' prYciid people.
If restricted access to park zones is unavoidable per recommendations of the Management Plans, prepared
under the Project, then the Process Framework (see Annex 2 to ISDS) will be implemented to manage the
process and assist subsistence users to improve or restore their livelihood while maintaining the
sustainability of the park. It will identify potentially affected communities and any adverse impacts and
the significance of these impacts on the subsistence resource users. it will describe the criteria for
eligibility for mitigating or compensating measures and the process for resolving disputes relating to
resource use restrictions that arise from community members. It will also identify relevant administrative
jurisdictions and line ministries responsible for addressing the issues. The Management Plans will also
include a description of arrangements for participatory monitoring of management activities.
The Process Framework also contains detailed description of stakeholder consultation process held during
preparation and planned under implementation.
E. safeguards Classifica  (select one), Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of that policy
[ I] S;. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policie s are i       are limited in their impact and are technically and
institutionaly manageable
SI  . - No safeguard issues
[ SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
rojects which reuire a safeguard framew  o     Matic aproach to address safeguard issue  A
F. Diveosurel He mqleinens           -      Epected Date Ac-tual Date






Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  02/11/02  02/11/02
Date of "in-country" disclosure              N/A       03/15/02
Date of submission to InfoShop               N/A        03/20/02
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors ..
.../... /...                               or N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  02/06/02   02/06/02
Date of "in-country" disclosure              N/A        03/15/02
Date of submission to InfoShop               N/A        02/20/02
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  .../... .   .. / ...   or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              .../ . .    .. / ...   or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                   ... 1.  .. / 1.    or N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  ... ... .   ... /...   orN/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ... . ..    .. 1  ...  or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               ... 1 ..    .. 1  ...  or N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  ... ./.. /   ... / ...  or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ... ./...   .. / ./.   orN/A
Date of submission to InfoShop               ... ..    . . / ...    or N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                            Samir M. Suleymanov    Date: 03/13/02
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:             Emilia Battaglini      Date: 03/19/02
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:             Julian Lampietti       Date: 03/19/02
Approved by:                         ,
Regional Safeguards Coo                      Bernard Baratz         Date 03/19/02
Cormnents
Sector Manager                               Marjory-Anne Bromhead Date 03/19/02
Commnents
N/A Not Available






ANNEX 1 TO ISDS
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
Issuelimpact: Small infrastructure rehabilitation works. The project would finance some small-scale
rehabilitation and/or renovation works, mainly in and around existing infrastructure, which may have
minor impact on the surrounding environment and natural habitats.
Mitigation. All works are to be carried out in Zone D (buffer zone) of the proposed National Park. Exact
locations would be identified by the protected areas management plans, and would be subject to
environmental review under Moldova environmental review procedures. Three mitigation measures are
identified: (i) The facilities chapter of the protected area management plan will identify infrastructural
improvements to buildings and other small scale works in the protected area and develop measures to
mitigate environmental impacts, based (as needed) on inventories of flora and fauna; (ii) the Ministry of
Environment will supervise preparation of site-specific environmental plans before issuing permits for
construction activities in accordance with the Moldavian environmental assessment and coastal protection
laws, and (iii) local communities will be represented on Local Advisory Committees which collaborate
with park administrations on all aspects of protected area planning and implementation.
Issue/impact: Agricultural practices. Small scale investments in improved agricultural practices financed
by the project for crop and soil management, may have minor adverse environmental impacts.
Mitigation. The project will promote activities with positive environmental impact through reductions in
soil erosion and nutrient runoff (such as diversification of crops, ameliorative crop rotation, soil
consideration and haying development) and improved landscape and habitat management (e.g., by
reducing or eliminating grazing pressure and creating field protecting corridors of habitat, green buffers
improvement along river courses). The criteria identified in the Operational Manual for Grants and
Operational Manual for Credits prepared under parallel World Bank RISP Project will be used to screen
individual investments to exclude investments with adverse environmental impacts.
Issue/impact: Tourist impact. Increased recreational tourism in the project area, if unregulated, may
cause disturbance to wildlife and natural communities.
Mitigation. The proposed protected area is expected to attract recreational tourists and there is a need to
minimize their impact on the natural habitats by allocating specific sites for recreational use. Recreation is
currently prohibited or restricted in sensitive bird nesting and foraging sites, shelter areas with
concentrations of mammals, and high value grasslands. Under the project these restrictions will be
maintained and enforcement capacity strengthened. The protected area management plans will include a
chapter on visitor management, which will summarize measures to be taken to protect sensitive sites of
high biodiversity value. Agreements with local tourism companies will be reached to reflect the above.
The park administration will be responsible for ensuring that existing and future recreational uses are
consistent with both local livelihoods and the biodiversity conservation objectives of the protected area.






ANNEX 2 TO ISDS
PROCESS FRAM EWORE
Process Framework. This Process Framework will be implemented in accordance with World Bank policy
on involuntary resettlement. It covers restrictions of access to legally designated parks and protected areas,
which result in adverse impacts on livelihoods of the affected persons.
The Framework describes the participatory process by which: (a) specific activities of the project were
prepared and will be implemented; (b) the criteria for eligibility of affected persons will be determined; (c)
measures to assist the affected persons in their efforts to improve or restore, in real terms, to pre-displacement
levels, their livelihoods (e.g., as appropriate, alternative grazing areas, cultivation of unique non-timber forest
products such as mushrooms, or of other crops, or investments in community infrastructure) while
maintaining the sustainability of the park or protected area will be identified; and (d) potential conflicts
involving affected persons will be resolved. It also provides a description of the arrangements for
implementing and monitoring the process.
Process Followed During Preparation. BIOTICA Ecological Society, Implementing Agency for the Project,
has carried out extensive consultations and workshops with various stakeholder groups and organizations to
measure and improve environmental and social impact under the project. (see details in Chapter VI
"Stakeholder Involvement and Social Assessment" of the Project Brief". Possible environmental and social
impacts of the project and proposed mitigation measures were presented and discussed with local stakeholders
(governmental and non-governmental) at five workshops in the project region during project preparation:
*  On August 13, 1999, a seminar was held to familiarize local authorities and population with plans to
create a national park. About 100 people participated, including the Minister of Environment of
Moldova and Chairrnan of the Committee on Environment of the Parliament, and representatives of
local authorities of villages of the target region, Forestry Service, county authorities, NGOs, farmers,
and teachers. The participants widely supported the proposed project.
*  On October 6-8 1999, an International Conference on Biodiversity Conservation in the Dniester River
Basin was held in Chisinau by BIOTICA with support of the Ministry of Environment. About 260
people participated, including 3 members of Parliament of Moldova, 3 MPs of Ukraine, Minister of
Environment of Moldova, scientists and NGOs from Moldova, Transnistria, Ukraine, especially,
Odessa County. A special half-day session was dedicated to the problem of he National Park creation.
In September 2000 an Intemational seminar on "Development and stimulation of environmental co-
operation between local authorities and NGOs in the Lower Dniester region", was organized in the
village of Talmaza with support of UNDP-Moldova with participation of local authorities and NGOs
from the Tighina region, Beliaevsky region of Odessa county of Ukraine, and Slobodzea region of
Transnistria (55 people in total).
In 2001 a regional "Natura 2000 EC Directive" Seminar was organized in the village of Talmaza (in
framework of the DANCEEIDN - BIOTICA Project). About 45 people participated, including mayors
and councilors of the villages of Talmaza, Crocmaz, Ciobruciu, as well as county, forestry and
environmental authorities, farmers, teachers and medical specialists, and NGOs.
Process to be Followed Durina Implementatio. The Project proponents, BIOTICA, has already build a
strong commitment and ownership for the Project objectives amongst local authorities, communities, and
NGOs. These stakeholder consultations and public outreach campaigns will continue during the
implementation of the Project. Three sub-components would specifically focus on these issues:






Communication Support System. Achieve good coordination and communication among project
stakeholders, individuals and organizations engaged in project implementation;
*  Community Outreach Campaigns. Build public awareness of the Project's objectives and encourage
participation of local communities in the Project;
*  Promote environmental advocacy role of Moldovan NGOs. This activity would provide training and
financial assistance to Moldovan NGOs to improve their role of advocates for biodiversity
conservation at the national, regional, and local levels.
The studies financed by the project will include consultations with local communities and NGOs. The
purpose of these consultations, which will occur in all communities affected by proposed protected area
management decisions, is to ensure that restrictions on resource use do not have an unnecessary adverse
impacts on the livelihood of subsistence users. Particular emphasis will be placed on a consultation process
that allows communities to identify and choose among potential compensating measures. These would likely
consist of being given priority for access to resources in the new economic zones and new jobs created in and
around the protected area (e.g. building trails, boundaries, forestry work). The consultations will also address
mechanisms by which potential conflicts involving resource users can be resolved and develop strategies for
participatory monitoring of beneficial and adverse impacts within the management area and the effectiveness
of compensating measures. The results of the consultations will serve as an input to the protected area
management plans.
The process to be followed during project implementation would consist of the following steps:
(1)    Consultations on the content of the Management Plans and any changes to the boundaries or
management regimes will be carried out with the communities affected by park or reserve management
decisions to ensure that changes in resource use do not have unnecessary adverse impacts on the livelihood of
subsistence users.
(2)    If adverse impacts are unavoidable, then the consultations will focus on identifying measures to assist
subsistence users to improve or restore their livelihoods while maintaining the sustainability of the reserve or
park. Particular emphasis will be placed on a consultation process that allows communities to identify and
choose among potential compensating measures.
(3)    The consultations will also address mechanisms by which potential conflicts involving resource users
can be resolved. This includes working with community members to define criteria for eligibility for
compensating measures and identifying the relevant administrative jurisdictions and line ministries (including
clear delineation for administrative and financial responsibilities under the project) responsible for
implementing mitigating or compensating measures.
(4)    Develop strategies for participatory monitoring of beneficial and adverse impacts within the
management area and the effectiveness of compensating measures.
The Management Plans will include a detailed write up of the results of these consultations. This will include
descriptions of (1) proposed restrictions on subsistence natural resource use, (2) criteria for eligibility of
affected persons, (3) measures to assist affected persons to improve or restore their livelihoods while
maintaining sustainability of the park, (4) administrative procedures for how potential conflicts will be
resolved; (5) legal procedures for project management; and (6) monitoring arrangements.
Plan of Action. The protected area management plans would serve as the Plan of Action required by the
Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement to be developed and submitted to the Bank during project
implementation and prior to enforcement of existing or new laws and regulations governing access to
resources in the protected areas, describing the specific measures to assist persons to be adversely affected by
the proposed restrictions.



