Acio;
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: MONGOLIA                               Project ID: P077778
Project: TA: Economic Capacity Building TA      Task Team Leader Vera Songwe
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 20, 2003     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 5, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m): 8.03
Managing Unit. EASPR                            Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  Theme: Macroeconomic management (P); Other
Status: Lending                                 public sector governance (P); Other economic
management (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the proposed Economic Capacity-building Technical Assistance Credit
(ECTAC) is to support medium-term macroeconomic stabilization through improved public expenditure
management and public administration refonm. This will enable the Govemment of Mongolia to
implement its Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EGPRS) in a fiscally disciplined
environment. Specific actions by the authorities to implement the Strategy are proposed to be supported
by the International Development Association (IDA) through a series of single-tranche Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over the next three years. The project will provide the core technical
assistance and institution-building support to the Government so that it can effectively design,
implement, monitor and sustain the poverty reduction program proposed to be supported through the
PRSCs.
Specifically, the project will provide capacity-building technical assistance for enhancing the
effectiveness of public expenditures in reducing poverty through:
*      Effective implementation of the landmark Public Sector Management and Finance Law (PSMFL)
by Strengthening of Public Expenditure        Management processes and systems
*      Modernizing Public Administration and the Civil Service.
The activities under the ECTAC components will strengthen the budget preparation, budget fonnulation,
execution and oversight processes, increase public sector accountability, and enhance the
poverty-reducing impact of public expenditures
l.A 3. Project Description (From PDS):
Components:
1. Strengthening Public Expenditure Processes:
(i)    Disciplining budget preparation, planning and fonnulation
(ii)   Developing budget and expenditure planning processes at the agency level
(iii) Improving budget execution and accountability
Strengthening budget oversight and monitoring processes



2
ISDS
2. Modemizing the Public Administration and the Civil Service
(i)    Strengthening Civil Service Management Capacity and Professionalism
(it)   Establishing a Human Resource Management and Information System (HRMIS)
(iii)  Rationalizing the Civil Service Wage Bill, Employment and Incentives
Strengthening Accountability for Performance
3. Implementation Arrangements
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key enviromnental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas)
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on I for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)       (U Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                9) Yes * No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 Q) Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   (9 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                  Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                (_) Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       ( Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           ( Ycs * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  ( Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     (_) Yes * No
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Suinmiary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant questions 1f informalion is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



3
ISDS
II D la. Describe any safeguard Issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
11 D. Ib. Descnbe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
II D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
H.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Not applicable.
Hl.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of the EGPRS has been extensively participatory. The challenge will be to devise a way
to continue the participatory process into the implementation phase of the EGPRS, particularly through
the implementation of the PRSCs and the ECTAC. Improvements in treasury management and reporting
will improve access to budget information and policy planning for civil society and other key
stakeholders. Parallel financing through a PRSP Trust Fund will assist in developing and strengthening in
the capacity of civil society to monitor the implementation of the EGPRS agenda.
The formation of a National Civil Society Advisory Council is being discussed to monitor and coordinate
civil society participation in the implementation of the EGPRS. This Council will perhaps also review
implementation of the PRSC and the ECTAC.
In addition, the proposed Service Delivery Survey (to be financed through the PHRD Grant for
preparation of the PRSC) affords opportunity for direct participation of and feedback from key
stakeholders. Periodic surveys are proposed to be conducted during the implementation period to assess
the impact of the reforms and to take corrective measures to improve implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP) Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[S. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant tecluhical and institLtional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2 - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionially manageable
[X] S3. - No safeguard Issues
[  SF. - Financial internediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



4
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessnment/Analysis/Management Plan         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected       Actiual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan                                 Expected      Acttal
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by      Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader'             Vera Songwe                                02/21/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Naoya Tsukamoto/Person/World Bank     03/01/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank     03/07/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3.
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S Morgan                          03/11/03
Comments
REGIONAL SAFEGUARDS UNITS DIRECTOR: Maria Teresa Serra
Sector Manager/Director      Tamar Manuelyan Atinc                       02/21/03



