Report No. 24094
Report No: iO69124 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/26/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MOROCCO         Project ID: P069124
Project: Rainfed Agriculture Development Project         Task Team Leader: Laurent
Msellati
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 17, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 25.25
Bank Approval: June 11, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSRE     Sector: AY - Other Agriculture
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)       Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Rainfed Agriculture Development Project (RADP) is the first phase of a
wider program which aims to assist the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural
Development, and Water and Forests (MADREF) in implementing the "2020
Rural Development Strategy" in rainfed areas.
The overriding goal of the RADP is to improve the livelihoods of
smallholder farmers in rainfed areas by promoting local participatory
development and fostering sustainable agricultural development. To this
end, the proposed Project would have the following specific objectives:
To build institutional capacity for project identification and
implementation in rainfed areas in partnership with local organizations.
In six priority areas: (a) to improve the livelihoods and incomes of the
local population; and (b) to promote sustainable development of rainfed
agriculture farming systems and reduce their vulnerability to drought.
This project has been developed around three guiding principles: (a) to
align programs for rainfed agriculture development with the objectives of
MADREF as contained in the Rural Development Strategy; (b) to develop new
approaches for rainfed agriculture development which take into account the
impact of recurrent drought and regional differences; and (c) to focus on
"priority action zones" (PAZs) selected on the basis of such criteria as
level of poverty, shortage of basic infrastructure, access to social
services and natural resource degradation.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed Project consists of two complementary components: (a)
institutional strengthening, aimed at harmonizing MADREF's multiple
approaches to integrated rural development, developing a structured
response to drought, and putting in place the capacity and tools (both at
the central and local levels) for identifying, preparing, implementing and
monitoring rural development programs in rainfed areas; and (b)
development activities in six "Priority Action Zones" (PAZs) which are
among the poorest areas of the country and suffering from major handicaps
in terms of rural infrastructure and access to basic social services.
In line with MADREF's regionally adapted approaches, the development
activities will fall into two categories corresponding to two different
types of rainfed areas:



poverty reduction activities in low-rainfall and remote areas, including
the Atlas Mountains (Taroundant Province), Pre-Saharan Oases (Tata
Province), High Eastern Plateaus (Boulemane Province), and the Central
Arid Zone (Khouribga Province), the last two being considered as part of
the Bour defavorable (see definition in Section B.2.); and
agricultural growth promoting activities in higher rainfall areas (Bour
favorable), including the Cereal Plains (Khemisset Province), and the Rif
Foothills (Sidi-Kacem).
Component A - Strengthening of Implementation Capacity for Rainfed
Agricultural Development
This component has been designed to help implement the principles and
objectives of the "2020 Rural Development Strategy" in rainfed areas and
to develop a structured response to drought. The proposed Project aims at
developing a program approach for rainfed areas development in order to
integrate activities within a coherent framework, to create synergies and
to promote good practices. It will achieve this by:
strengthening MADREF's implementation capacity at the central level for
developing and managing the rainfed agriculture development program, and
for ensuring adequate monitoring and evaluation of this program (composed
of numerous operations with similar approaches). In addition, the
proposed Project will provide technical assistance to help MADREF in
preparing and implementing a restructuring plan for its field offices;
strengthening the local implementation capacity of MADREF's provincial
(DPA) and local (CT/CMV) structures as well as of local government and
community institutions. The proposed Project will provide technical
assistance and support training activities to help prepare local
participatory "Communal Investment Plans" (CIPs), including economic and
social investments; and
developing new instruments and institutional capacity to improve support
services for rainfed agriculture, notably a drought management strategy,
including drought related policy-making at the national level, the
development of an early warning system for drought in the six PAZs, and
the piloting of a weather-based index insurance scheme, managed by MAMDA,
the agricultural mutual insurance company, and supported by IFC. The
proposed project will also support the development of demand-driven
research funding mechanisms. In addition, the proposed Project will
support: (a) the strengthening of the decentralized national research
network; (b) the preparation of technico-economic reference manuals for
each PAZ; and (c) the preparation of studies to improve collective
rangeland management.
Component B - Rural Development Activities in Priority Areas
Under Law No. 33-94, which allows the State to intervene in legally
designated rainfed development sites (PerimOtres de mise en valeur des
zones bours, PMVB), the proposed Project will finance activities aimed at
promoting sustainable agricultural development, improving access to basic
infrastructures and services, and developing income generating activities,
both off-farm and on-farm. In the six PAZs identified, seven PMVBs would
be covered over a period not exceeding five years per site.
Activities are structured in three sub-components:
agricultural and pastoral development, aimed at increasing the
productivity of agricultural systems, improving natural resources
management and mitigating the effects of drought, notably through soil and
water conservation works;
-2-



rural infrastructure development (including rural roads, small and
medium-scale irrigation, and pastoral water points) and the provision of
technical assistance to Rural Communes (RC) for the formulation and
implementation of the Communal Investment Plans (CIPs); and
support to local initiatives, which would help strengthen the capacity of
local organizations to identify their own development needs and plan for
them accordingly, and would support education and skills training
activities, including financing equipment for on-the-job training, and
promtoting micro credit organizations and farmer associations for specific
productive activities.
Implementation of component B will be based on three principles: (a)
activities will be identified through a participatory approach in order to
meet the needs of the beneficiaries and therefore ensure sustainability;
(b) activities will be adapted to local socio-economic and agro-climatic
conditions, using specific development models (Archetypes) which will be
formulated for each PAZ; and (c) decision making and implementation will
be delegated as close to the field as possible, by strengthening the
programming and coordination role on rural issues of the Provincial
Technical Committee and by building the capacity of the rural communes.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Specific Environmental, Beneficiary, and Partnership-stakeholder
assessments have been carried out during preparation.
Project Area. The priority areas for intervention cover different
agro-ecological areas where development models, "archetypes" have been
identified. These models are described in detail in Annex 2. This
concept is built around the premise that these areas are prototypes of
different resources of rainfed areas, and that the people using these
resources have adapted to them, and have ways of allocating and using
resources that are intricately bound with the way in which these
populations are themselves organized. In each of these areas there are
particular features of social organization that can either be constraints
or opportunities for the active participation of the population.
The identification of the social organization in each region is therefore
crucial to establish the effective participation of the population and to
generate sustainable models for self-development that can improve and
enhance the human and institutional resources of these areas that have
been consistently marginalized due to their isolation, and where poverty
has reached a critical level.
The Program will operate in six provinces with rainfed agriculture: Tata,
Taroudant, Boulemane, Khouribga, Khemisset, and Sidi Kacem. The Program
will cover the ten communes, presented in the table below, in each of
these priority action zones (PAZs). These communes do not include any
protected areas nor critical natural habitat sites.
Priority Action Zone     Rural Commune   Localities       Archetype
Boulemane       Tissaf   (1)     1       High Oriental Plateau
Khemisset       Ain Sbit   (1)   1       Cereal Plains
Khourigba       Beni Ikhlef (1) 1        Central Arid Zone
Sidi Kacem      Ounana, Mjaara, Teroual, Zghira (4)       1       Hilly Pre-Rifian Zone
Taroudant        Tizi N'Test, Ouneine (2)        2        Atlas Mountains
Tata    Tagmout (1)      1       Pre-Saharan Oases
Six Action Zones         10 Rural Communes       7        6 Archetypes
-3 -



Beneficiairies. The field studies defined the number of potential
beneficiaries in the project areas. The population distribution is
summarized in the table below. The individual data sheets for each of the
selected localities together with the basic information of each archetype
by locality can be found in the Social Assessment document. Additional
extensive information in the project files deals with the specific details
of social organization, access and use of natural resources and the degree
of organizational capacity in each commune.
PROVINCE        COMMUNE DOUARS   HOUSEHOLD       POPULATION
Boulemane        Tissaf  10 (+ nomads)   883      6,013
Khemisset       Ain Sbit         16      1,975    11,836
Khourigba       Beni Ikhlef      8       1,483    10,166
Sidi Kacem      Ounana
Mjara
Teroual
Zghira  22
14
23
29      2,074
1,111
2,100
2,591   12,248
6,184
9,940
15,328
Taroudant       Tizi N'Test
Ouneine 32
55      773
1,373   5,171
9,063
Tata    Tagmout 21       1,028   5,279
TOTAL   10       230     15,391  91,228
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project has been assigned Category B.
It is recognized that the "bour" zones (rainfed ecosystems) are fragile
and that the increasing use of these marginal areas for agriculture and
livestock production can render them more vulnerable. One of the
challenges faced by this project will be to ensure that the optimum
ecological balance is kept in these zones and that the carrying capacity
is not exceeded. For these reasons, an Environmental Assessment (EA) was
carried out during preparation and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
has been prepared. The EA identified a number of positive impacts on the
environment and identified issues related to land and irrigation
development and to social infrastructure. The issues related to land and
irrigation development, concern largely mechanical and chemical land
clearing and water management. The issues related to social
infrastructure are those typically associated with investment in access
roads and potable water.
Given the participatory approach which will be adopted the activities
which will be financed under the project cannot be known with precision in
advance. As a result, there will be a need to develop a mechanism for
applying the EA and EMP procedures to the Program as it unfolds.
Provision has therefore been made to incorporate environmental screening,
- 4 -



asssessment and mitigation in the technical study process for each
investment. Moreover, a training program for all concerned project
agencies, communes and beneficiaries and their institutions has been
designed to ensure awareness on environmental issues and the capacity to
manage the EA and EMP procedures for the program as it is implemented. A
budget equivalent to US$25,000 annually has been added for this purpose.
In addition, the Environmental Assessment raised two issues relating to
the use of chemicals to remove shrubs (Jujuba spp.) and Doum palms
regrowth (Hyphaene thebaica) . A detailed technical data sheet (Fiche
technique sur le defrichement manuel et chimique) was prepared by MADREF
and shared with the Bank. This data sheet was taken into consideration in
the final version of the EA, dated February 20, 2002, which includes a
Pesticide Management Plan as required under OP 4.09 on Pest Management.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)   No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      Yes
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)    No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*        No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)      No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
For OP/BP 4.01, as indicated in Section E.5 above, the EA has been
completed and the EMP Executive Summary is attached in Annex 12 of the
PAD. In addition, the EMP includes a Pesticide Management Plan to meet
the requirements under OP. 4.09.
The appraisal mission confirmed that neither OP 4.04 on Natural Habitat
nor OP 4.36 on Forestry are triggered. Also, OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement would not apply since the proposed project will not finance
any extension of irrigated areas, rural roads construction or
rehabilitation that would require involuntary land acquisition or
involuntary physical relocation. This stipulation will be reflected in
the PAD, Minutes of Negotiation and Operations Manual, and will be ensured
through project monitoring and supervision.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
-5-



II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The EMP Executive Summary is attached as Annex 12 of the PAD.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Site specific mitigation measures for any potential adverse environmental
impact, and monitoring systems to review their efficacy, will be developed
under the Project, following procedures in the EMP and the environmental
manual. Also, the EMP includes a Pesticide Management Plan to meet the
requirements under OP. 4.09 for chemical land clearing activities. No
other pesticide product will be financed by the project. Actions for
production system improvement (Component B.1), other than chemical land
clearing, could concern pesticide use in agriculture. To limit potential
negative impacts, these actions will be adapted to the environment.
Moreover, biological treatment would be promoted in place of chemical use
and IPM will be integrated into the extension advice to be provided as
part of this component.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Relevant Government agencies as well as beneficiaries were consulted
during project preparation on the environmental safeguards. The training
program to take place under implementation as well as the design of the
project to hinge on community participation will ensure that consultation,
participation, information and disclosure are intrinsic part of the
participatory approach.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/21/2002       2/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/21/2002        2/14/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/22/2002       3/8/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
- 6 -



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              2/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure          2/14/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop           3/8/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Laurent Msellati         04/24/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        John Keith Rennie-MNS/Person/World Bank
04/26/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        John Bryant Collier/Person/World Bank    04/26/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Kanthan Shankar 04/26/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Petros Aklilu    04/26/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



