ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorld Fret of Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/21/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: MOROCCO                                  Project ID: P076921
Project: HISTORIC CENTERS REVITALIZATION          Task Team Leader: Anthony G. Bigio
PROGRAM (MEKNES)
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 29, 2004        IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: May 27, 2005                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF                              Sector: General water; sanitation and flood
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  protection sector (30%); Roads and highways (25%);
Status: PCD approved April 24, 2003              General public administration sector (20%); Housing
construction (15%); Other social services (10%)
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor (P);
Administrative and civil service reform (P); Other
urban development (P); Civic engagement;
participation and community driven development (S);
Other social development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the program includes: a) improving the quality of life of the resident
populations of the historic centers through the promotion of cultural tourism and of local economic
development; and b) assisting GoM in the revitalization of historic centers and in the management of
built cultural heritage.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed program would be an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) designed to support the Government
of Morocco in the revitalization of historic centers for the medium-term, and would consist of two
five-year phases. The first phase would have the following four components:
1. Institutional Strengthening:
This component would include: a) support to the Ministry of Culture for the reorganization of its
Patrimony Department, and of its Regional Delegations, that would be combined with the regional
Inspections aux Monuments; b) technical assistance for the revision of the legislation concerning the



2
ISDS
classification and the protection of monuments and sites, and the drafting of legislation enabling the
adaptive re-use of classified monuments, including those belonging to the State, for cultural, educational,
social, productive and commercial purposes; c) support to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning
for the establishment of an effective Department of historic housing, based on the expansion of its
current Division de l'Habitat Ancien, to be in charge of policies and operational approaches for housing
maintenance operations, conservation of buildings in danger of collapse, and the construction of new
housing units within historic urban fabric, via the regional delegations of the Ministry and its parastatal
agencies (organismes sous tutelle); d) establishment of a Division in charge of cultural tourism at the
Ministry of Tourism, to develop and implement policies and regional programs for the promotion of
cultural tourism, anchored on the revitalization of historic centers; e) technical assistance to the
Municipality of Meknes to improve its management of the historic city, and to the Agence Urbaine of
Meknes, that reports to the Ministry of Housing and Planning, to establish a service for the enforcement
of the regulatory provisions of the Plan d'Amenagement et de Sauvegarde de la Medina de Meknes,
currently being prepared.
2. Revitalization of the historic city of Meknes
This would include the physical and other investments for the revitalization of the historic city, and
would have the following sub-components: a) conservation of main monuments and central squares that
constitute the public core of the historic city and its main tourist attractions; b) conservation of the
essential part of the imperial city, monuments and gardens; c) rehabilitation of the urban fabric of the
Medina, Mellah and Dar el Kebira, including the upgrading of public spaces, the maintenance of housing
stock, the construction of new low-income housing units , the upgrading of municipal infrastructure and
access to basic urban services, and the adaptive re-use of ancient foundouks for cultural and other
activities; d) reorganization of the productive areas to the south-west of the historic city, where the
majority of the productive and commercial activities are concentrated; reorganization of the pedestrian
and vehicular access to the historic city, including the building of an underpass to enable the pedestrian
use of El Hedim Square and neighbouring areas; e) promotion of handicraft, vocational and professional
training, participatory maintenance of the sub-standard housing stock, and of income-generating
activities; and f) promotion of cultural tourism activities, in the areas of hospitality, retail, festivals and
cultural events, visitor circuits within the historic city and the regional basin, including incentives for the
creation of small-scale hotels, restaurants and cafes; the opening of art galleries, handicraft production
and commericalization centers, and the production of guides and audiovisual materials.
3. Studies and investment plans for priority historic centers
During project preparation, the Government will have selected a number of priority historic centers, both
urban and rural, to benefit from the technical and financial support of the program . This component will
therefore include: a) the identification and the technical preparation of the studies of such sites, that
would enable investments to start immediately at the outset of the second phase; and b) the definition of
the investment plans and the leveraging of financial support from foundations, mecenes, multilateral and
bilateral donors that may be willing to support a large share of the implementation costs. Implementation
agreements with regional and local authorities will also be made.
4. Program management
Program management will consist of two activities: a) support to the Secretariat of the national
Coordination Committee that would ensure the liaison between the Ministries of Culture, Tourism, and
Housing and Urban Planning, consultation with other line Ministries, with the private sector, the donor
community and civil society organizations; this Secretariat would be directly in charge of the



3
ISDS
implementation of components I and 3; and b) support to the Project Implementation Unit to be set up in
Meknes to carry out activities under component 2 on behalf of those line Ministries and of the Local
Government that will be benefitting from the Bank's loan. Other line Ministries will be financing their
interventions independently and thus operate with their own regional delegations and procurement
procedures.
The second phase would likely have the following three components:
5. Permanent institutional set-up for the management of historic centers
On the basis of the improved management capabilities of the Ministries of Culture, Tourism, Housing
and Urban Planning and of the accomplishments of the Coordination Committee during the first phase, a
permanent coordination mechanism for the revitalization of historic centers would be set in place. In this
phase the Coordination Committee and its Secretariat would put in place the necessary arrangements to
attract and manage private and international financing, manage possible income-generating activities, and
plan for the long-term protection and revitalization of historic centers. Program management of the
second phase would be handled entirely by the Secretariat of the Coordination Committee and
implementation arrangements with each of the participating historic centers would be set up. Program
management systems developed during the first phase at the national and local levels would be made
permanent.
6. Revitalization of priority historic centers
Physical and other investments would take place in a number of priority urban and rural historic centers,
based on the investment plans and technical studies prepared during the first phase. Investments would
likely include the conservation of important monument and public spaces, the adaptive re-use of historic
buildings for functional purposes; upgrading of urban infrastructure and delivery of basic urban services;
maintenance of sub-standard housing stock and provision of additional low-income housing units;
support to handicraft production and commercialization; vocational and professional training; support to
the creation of revenue-generating activities; and the promotion of cultural tourism activities in the
centers and in the related cultural basins. Technical assistance would be provided to the Agences
Urbaines and to the Local Governments to improve the long-term management of historic centers.
7. Studies and investment plans for a further set of historic centers
The Coordination Committee would pursue plans and technical studies for a further set of historic
centers, based on the synergies with regional development plans, with tourism investments, and on the
level of available financial support for such investments. The continuation of the program after the
second phase would depend on the ability of the established Coordination Committee to raise resources
on the basis of the first concrete accomplishments.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The program would be implemented in the historic city of Meknes and immediately adjacent areas (first
phase) and in a series of urban and rural historic centers, still to be identified by GoM (second phase). The
historic city of Meknes is characterized by a low level of urban infrastructure provision (water and
sanitation) and low access to solid waste management by the resident population. Effluent treatment is



4
ISDS
uncertain. Vehicular air pollution is significant on the major artery of the historic center. Some potentially
polluting tanneries are situated in proximity of the city walls. The resident population of the historic city is
considerably poorer than the average of the Meknes urban agglomeration. Monuments and cultural sites of
national and international importance are situated in the historic center, and are threatened by lack of
maintenance. It can be assumed that a similar profile would be found in other historic centers that would be
the object of the second phase.
B. Check Environmental Classif cation: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Environmental classification will be reviewed during project preparation
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       OYes *No      O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) X__ __                        *Yes O No     O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                OYes * No     O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 OYes * No     0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will aim at improving the current characteristics of the urban environment of the historic city of
Meknes, via improved solid waste management, access to water supply and sanitation, and the treatment of
polluting effluents from small-scale crafts units in and around the historic urban core. The implementation
of a proposed underpass would eliminate much of the vehicular emissions in the city center, but is dependent
on ensuring that no significant underground archaeological remains would be affected. Participatory
rehabilitation of degraded housing stock and commercial units might entail the provisional displacement of
inhabitants and businesses. Some informal housing constructions situated in the close proximity of major
monuments might be subject to demolition due to safety or cultural protection concerns, or both, and their
inhabitants would benefit from alternative housing. The provision of a limited number of new housing units
within the boundaries of the historic city would benefit families living in overcrowded premises.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
TBD
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Intense cultural tourism activities are know to represent a threat to the integrity and conservation of



5
ISDS
monuments and sites. Therefore program design will ensure that the conservation and adaptive re-use of
cultural assets be developed in light of the anticipated increased human traffic, and that appropriate
periodic maintenance operations will be carried out. Additional vehicular traffic and parking demand due
to cultural tourism will also be taken into account in project design.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
For the Environmental Assessment OP, an early review by the regional safeguards team of the program's
design should provide guidance leading to the definition of the Terms of Reference of the EA, to be
carried out by consultants and to be reviewed by the Bank. Minimization of possible environmental
impacts will be incorporated into program design, as well as mitigation measures, where appropriate, and
the related costs will be included in the program costs. An Environmental Management Plan to mitigate
the possible negative environmental impacts of program implementation in Meknes will be part of the
EA. The EMP will also specify technical standards for the restoration and protection of cultural assets, in
compliance with the Cultural Property OP. For the Involuntary Resettlement OP, a Resettlement Policy
Framework will be prepared by the Borrower of acceptable quality prior to departure of the appraisal
mission, together with a Resettlement Action Plan for any identified buildings or site that require
intervention in this regard.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A social assessment, a poverty baseline study, and a handicraft sector study will be carried out as part of
program preparation. These activities will include extensive consultations with the resident population
and with different stakeholder groups, to elicit their views on the detailed design of the community
development and social support components of the program. The workshops held with these groups will
represent the opportunity to communicate the Bank's safeguards policies. In addition, consultation with
national, regional and local authorities will provide the opportunity for the team to expose the
counterparts to the safeguards requirements of the Bank's work. Consultants to be contracted for program
preparation will also be informed and required to address any social or environmental issue that may be
emerging in their reports.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[  S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual



6
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 6/25/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             7/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                              7/30/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 6/25/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             7/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                              7/30/2004
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sinned and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Anthony G. Bigio                            05/13/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  John Bryant Collier/Person/World Bank  05/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Meskerem Brhane/Person/World Bank      05/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Kamel F. Arif                     05/19/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Emmanuel Forestier                          05/21/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEArtCH        pEEWACK        ST MAP        SHOWCASE



