25326
November 26, 2002
Integratctl Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I - Basic Information
U:uc ISIJS Prcp:ired/Up'dad: 26 Noveiber 2002
At.          esursic  nc Dta
I.A .1,  Piojee  Statistics            -  -------
COUNTRY: \or%:            P________             _Rnowcr II) P074N6%
I1ROJECTOEP0U  Energy and Einvitronnieni LIItfrgmlm  )  Rcn6 .Merndotvia
APPRAISAL DATE: not a2knblc                       G3A'M' ANtOIlJN  Sm): 0375
BOARD) DlATE: I2/Gi1D2 (GUF CEO Approvnl)     =    1MAMIOUI(S,w: nt npahle
MA,xNAGJNG;# UNIT. IMNISIF                       [SI Wf 1: IV      .
LEtN'DINGC I NSTR UMlN rs: TA L     _____ jSTATUS:lein
14 ;2. .Ppliject ObfCt6ves
Ihutinted bv IDIIf1AR. the assokirtitot of playgrs oitthe largest indwitrial park of Caabkmblnca, SiJ
-mrnousse. the ptojcct has three major CAS rebuted t.bte *> buil aroaund imnpletmcniztion of ncr;ry atid
ater.tIi:UiCY ;, r,i.rttcasarcs itl industry:t
*   lk&'teettwg and enhanciaLd tecnvtrtnent.,
.   Ltt,jlit 'Lu %w:t.LIi  for econotnic growth and privat bsEctr devopElnct. bth ilntuttgh better
ctzs cneml itTt int,dstrvaynd su ppl,y (i f   and .set vi"es:
*    rniprovsi~ povernat''ge.C w ah eamerstone of dws iniciative is hec assaditivn of operwtors of thc
illdstfrial park.
Th'ie spCeific OP 5 related c'bjicve is' (tthe reroval if b.trricers to Cnergy efficien1cy. The deveIaplpnnr eIlated
ObjeenveS Ca:in be lirSed as foilows:
*   Devel.Iopmtent and implcmientationl ofcolmmcrwia!ly Itbl: cE.rt y C;la!L'hIA tICStvltments
*   EnEhanrlcd k   ino'lec,gc atid nltbattstnis necessary for financicrs aind CnJ-usersw fltnd eniergy
etuciency projes:
*   Stisraminability alnd Continuatiotn of Cnergy ntunauEmle treolted achivolles.
I.A3. Project Des(criptir-
Ihc L'vcrali VrojeCt. I\ :e L Lii beloW. COnS   of tlThrerfassnisitanceuvativiles only. ao xuhizlt the GEl'
rmid-sie grawnt I .aO.YItJ2 will ftancie Apprt9itrmtely 507a te% ;i1 mrL s W'1 I be: carried cut by a TA wiat t)
IZ3IlIAR orngtized in a PMNIU. over a 3 yeltr peritid:
I. (inbrmntieon and ma3rencss earnp;sil 5 1ISOS)    i        .2
2   Assistance (a industrial client'sn a coust shatipg b:sis n f I) i,  of      polmial tZ
assessn3el of fintancial viabifity 3) prepaflration o0 cnginietin1,g report (4) prep.antimon of tender
du.nettiits. aSSStffnl'C to supplierf .eletion, ptOttttlaItCCcontract negPtifttion afnd exerIlicOil of
works j5) pertfonntfe monilouriog. including monitotiiig o0 she jwrlorr.lOnce ot anvirrtititCtt& 3,ad
social iSsues- Inelude.s f l:atsiol.  gtxt tit anid itnplernvta¶Iof. l of performance contractS
InCludes; supputi to investmenl finWncial yiekajigg (SgrOOkS
3.   ill, tide cinergeCeu of FsCO, trtough Itsk shiuing t0a4 l 311C1 part of the their coss upfrlovit)
4. Scntugx tsp tat an1 inforrn2t7ifltl cltearring house4i wi'th a .hSErniflaliott fasmt-tioti. eosopuctCi'x,d database
,  VornrtsolO awn ind plCfrtfll iO of nativitiets specifientli darccld 1, % 7 sin;,d% Companies
n iOOks).
6.  t)kcvcopwrtttt t if proictcs i,n thler l,ustrlal puisi. St'Si
7, ('. C.,,:.ic' 000,ks)



1.A.4. Project Location:
The energy efficiency measures will be taking place at the industrial site of Sidi Bernoussi Zenata,
Casablanca in Morocco.
Bl. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [ ], C [XI, Fl [1] TBD []
Comments:
Given that the activities of this project are limited activities, specifically technucal assistance to improve
environmental conditions at one industrial site, i.e. Sidi Bemoussi, the project is classified as Category C
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, tnggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
I.C 1. Table on applicability                                Yes     No      TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                      . I    [I ]
Forestry (OPIGP 4.36)                                        f I     [X]     t I
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                [H      rXl     [_]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   [      [XXl    [ 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     [ I_      ._L I
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                           t ]     .        [ 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  [ ]            I[
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                 [ _            [ 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)                    1 1    . .     [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           [ ]            r I
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
Il.D. Summnary of Key Safeguard Issues Please rill in all relevant questions If information is not as ailable,
descnbe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is anticipated to have beneficial environmental effects both in terms of local and global
(greenhouse gases) pollution as a consequence of reduced energy consumption and improved water
management. More specifically, the estimated annual savings are 11,250 t fuel, 21 GWh electricity and
300,000 m3 of water per year at the end of the project.
The project will facilitate the eventual purchase of equipment and rehabilitation of small and medium-size
industrial plant. This will result in major local and global environmental benefits. the enhancement of
energy efficiency on the industrial site of Sidi Bernoussi will reduce both local air pollution andl greenhouse
gas emissions. Indirectly, the health of the local population will thus also benefit from the project.
Replacemeni of matenals and equipment may lead to limited temporary dust and noise emissions dunng
the construction period. None of these potential impacts are expected to be significant. Other potential
construction impacts may involve disposal and de-contamination issues that may arise as part of the
activities, and these potential issues will be screened and monitored by the industrialist's organization,
EZDIHAR.
No negative social effects are anticipated. This includes the shantytown residents on the site of Sidi
Bernoussi. Local water and air pollution is expected to decline along with measures being implemented,
and thus the impact of pollution on the health of workers and on-site residents would be reduced. By
investing in energy efficiency, participating companies will be able to reduce their operating costs, increase
their productivity and product quality and improve competitiveness on domestic and international markets.
The population will benefit through an increase in employment. Further benefits are an increase in literacy
through courses that IZDIHAR will provide as part of their TA component.
None of the projects supported by IZDIHAR is expected to have any large-scale, significant and/or
irreversible impacts. There will be no land acquisition or displacement of people or economic activities as a
result of the project.
l.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable.
Il.D.lc Descnbe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable
II.D.2. In light of 1, descnbe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
A survey undertaken among 35 entrepreneurs on the site of Sidi Bernoussi indicates a large variety of
possible alternative activities that can roughly be grouped into (i) water use improvement, (n) reductions in
electncity usage and (iii) more efficient use of thermal energy. Examples for projects in the water area are
the recycling of used waters from washing processes in the agro-food industry and recycling of used waters
from dyes in the textile industry. Examples in the domain of electricity is the use of more efficient lighting
in the textile industry, the improvement of lighting in the freezer industry, and the replacement and/or fine-
tuning of motors used in the textile and metal industry. Examples in the area of thermal energy are
improvement of heaters in the textile industries and improved combustion in the textile industries



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Part of the TA will be used to assist in screening and monitoring any issues related to environmental and/or
social aspects as they arise for each individual energy efficiency activity. IZDIHAR's personnel will be
trained on issues of environmental and social screening and monitoring in order to enable them to identify
appropnate mitigation measures for environmental and social issues which in turn would be tmplemented
through ESCos. All screening by staff to identify any environmental or social effects will be part of the
reporting obligation to the World Bank. This training would be focusing on potential environmental and
social effects from projects planned or designed under the project. The training will ensure that
environmental and social issues are addressed both under guidelines in Morocco and at the World Bank.
In addition and in following standards on environmental and social reporting set by IZDIHAR, the ESCos
will monitor any environmental and social impacts that the project may have. Reports will be confirmed
through spot-checks conducted by IZDIHAR.
The project unit, which includes IZDIHAR, will have to report on a 3 times annual basis on any
environmental and social issues arising from projects in accordance with both Moroccan and World Bank
guidelines.
In addition to the safeguards issues, the project will design a momtonng system to measure the global
environmnental impacts through reporting of CO2 emission reductions. In order to confirm the saving
potential of projects, these will be measured. Measurements will be monitored at regular intervals by the
ESCos as part of a performance contract that industries sign with ESCos.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and descnbe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
From the project's initial stages, IZDIHAR made a conscious effort to engage the main stakeholders and
inform all concerned about the potential benefits of this initiative. Three plenary meetings were held
involving industnal units of the park, local authorities (Government, municipality, region, utility, ...) and
sectoral Ministries who are all members of the "Comit6 de Pilotage". Presentation and participation in
vanous meetings organized by the Ministnes covering Industry and Environment was ensured. During
project preparation, a survey was conducted by the local NGO Enda Maghreb among the shantytown
residents on the industnal site with the aim of gaining a better understanding of their socio-economic
situation. These residents remain an important stakeholder during the course of the project. Media coverage
(press and TV) was also widely ensured. During the preparation steps, the high degree of industrial
manager motivation was proven, as well as the interest of energy service companies, including consultants,
engineering, manufacturers, installers, and potential ESCOs.
Very specifically, the project also meets perfectly the objectives of national authorities
*   Mimstry of Environment and Land Management on pollution control(MATE);
* Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Energy and Mines (MCI), through the modernization and
competitiveness of industrial parks;
* The Wahi of Casablanca as described in introduction, concerned by productivity, employment, and
pollution and sustainable urban development.
Furthermore, stakeholder involvement is a key instrument in the proposed project, because the project's
long-term goal is to create a development model at the level of industrial parks in developing countries,
through a participatory model, i.e. the involvement of the industrial stakeholders. There are a number of
industrial parks in Morocco, and the project team has already been approached by some of them in view of
undertaking similar operations. One of the major project components is therefore to enhance and facilitate
the dissemination of the Sidi Bernoussi experience.
E. Sa    a      a         (select one). Category is determined by the hlghest impact in any policy. Or on basis
of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply



[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institulional nsks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ S3. - No safeguard issues
[1SF - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
Issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements                    Expected Date Actual Date
Environmental Assessinent/Analysis/Maniagement Plan: not applicable
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework: not applicable
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: not applicable
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:not applicable
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dani Safety Management Plan: not applicable
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submnission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                      |I     Ren6 Mendonea          Date: /' /o /   z-
Environmental Specialist:       1        4(Finny %Mi.ssfldi-Ringius Date:   &//t o2
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  laAl.n Ro'lni.i                    Date: I x(<-a (. '.
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:              mi,,  Li  l3rhaiie     Date.  1 )< .(
Approved by:                                                                      I
Regional Safeguards Coordinator               Sherif Arif         a:    5       i // c7/
Comments                                                   q           "t, J    l
Sector Manager                                Franeoise Clott        .  e  ' ./   /c    Z 
Comments
N/A Not Available
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the f inal determination of the parties' claims on
the disputed areas (this disclaimer appears only for projects triggering OP/BP 8.60)



