1                                     6a
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/07/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: MOZAMBIQUE                             Project ID: P071465
Global Supplemental ID: P076809
Project: Transfrontier Conservation Areas and Tourism  Task Team Leader: Robert A. Clement-Jones
Development Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 15, 2003      IBRD Amount (Sm):
Bank Approval: April 17, 2004                   IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Global Supplemental Amount (Sm): 10.00
Managing Unit: AFTES                            Sector: Forestry (50%); General agriculture, fishing
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  and forestry sector (40%); General industry and
Status: Lending                                 trade sector (10%)
Theme: Biodiversity (P); Other environment and
natural resources management (S); Environmental
policies and institutions (S); Other financial and
private sector development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Mozambique Transfrontier Conservation Areas and Tourism Development Project (TFCATDP)
builds on the experience of the first GEF-funded TFCA Pilot and Institutional Strengthening Project
aimed at assisting Mozambique to take advantage of unique opportunities in biodiversity conservation,
tounsm and rural development.
TFCATDP development objective is: to obtain sustainable livelihood and economic development
benefitsfrom the well-managed exploitation of the Mozambique 's natural resources..
Mozambique's ecosystems and biodiversity are globally significant in terms of both the scale of the
resource (surface area) and the richness of the system and species diversity. Mozambican ecosystems are
high in endernism and have relatively high quality habitat. Given the regional nature of many of these
ecosystems, a major challenge for the project will be to further promote effective regional cooperation
among Mozambique and her neighbors aimed at integrated ecosystem management.
The global objective is to ensure the sustainable management andprotection of Mozambique's global
biodiversity assets and critically important transboundary ecosystems through integrated ecosystem
management.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project builds on lessons learned from the first phase of the TFCA program (see Section D3).
Dealing with the multiple challenges requires making an intensive and long term commitment. In
conservation terms, timescales should be calibrated m decades rather than years. Building on the
accomplishments of the pilot project (TFCAI), the next five years will:
.      Consolidate the gains made so far in terms of international agreements, leading to the formal
adoption of intemational treaties for Limpopo, Lubombo, and Chimanimani, and the development of new



2
ISDS
ones for Niassa and ZIMOZA. Formal agreement or signature is really the first step in the process;
*      Shift the focus towards Provincial level planning and implementation through new institutional
structures such as the Elephant Coast Development Agency, strengthened Provincial TFCA/tourism
units, and the application of new planning instruments such as Strategic Environmental Assessments;
*      Turn the TFCA planning exercises already completed or underway in Limpopo, Lubombo and
Chimanimani into implementable investment and management programs, involving infrastructure, field
level conservation, community demarcation programs, zoning and other activities;
*      Implement the policy changes for the private sectg iand communities through a scaled up
program of land demarcation and titling for communities in the TFCAs and through an open tendering
process for tounsm concessions, and development of community/private sector joint ventures;
•      Extend the TFCA concept and planning exercises to the Niassa and ZIMOZA areas;
*      Develop and implement a sustainable Tourism Development Framework
*      Establish a long term monitoring and evaluation framework
To accomplish the above, the project will consist of six complementary components as follows:
1.    Institutional and Policy Development
This component will build on the experience of the pilot project, namely to ensure that the policy and
institutional environment evolves as the TFCA process is implemented. Focus will be on capacity
building at all levels through:
*      Strengthening of TFCA Unit;
*      Establishment of regional TFCA ecosystem planning agencies/authorities;
*      Preparation of integrated strategies for conservation and tourism (national , provincial, district,
sub-regional);
*      Capacity strengthening of Ministry of Tourism at National and Provincial levels (Provincial
Tourism Facilitation Commissions established);
*      Policy and legal review of wildlife, forestry and land management and other relevant policies
*      Promotion and implementation of private sector tendering, concessions for tourism development
and a framework for community-private sector joint ventures;
*      Implementation of strategic environmental assessments and strengthening capacity for
environmental assessments;
2.    Ecosystem Planning and Management
This component will provide resources to initiate or strengthen conservation area management in the
TFCAs based on land-use and development plans, integrating biodiversity conservation and ecosystem
management. Activities will be tailored according to the state of preparedness and the level of planning
that has already been accomplished (see Annex 2 for more detailed treatment of TFCAs). The project
will carry forward activities in the three original TFCAs of Lubombo, Greater Limpopo and
Chimanimani, and will start work on the new ones of ZIMOZA and Niassa/Cabo Delgado. The project
will provide logistical and other support for eco-system management, including direct management of
core protected areas, based on a process which will: (i) determine and map all existing land uses, the
distribution of communities, analysis of trends and livelihoods in the TFCAs, mapping of private sector
and GoM interventions, and the issues that threaten sustainable biodiversity conservation, and propose
remedial measures; (ii) create a collaborative framework with comprehensive stakeholder identification,
review of existing collaborating mechanisms relating to TFCA development, identification of shortfalls
and recommendations for addressing these (iii) identify, map, and prioritise key biota using various
criteria including: national, regional, and international importance, contiguity, fragmentation, and degree



3
ISDS
of current and future threats; (iv) identify/zone and map biodiversity hotspots, and zone areas of potential
tourism development, including recommended levels of infra- and supra-structures development, and
indicate national and regional linkages that would promote sustainable marketing of the identified
tounsm attractions; (v) develop a GIS decision-making framework with which to monitor management
and sustainable use of terrestrial resources and aquatic resources of the numerous rivers in the area.
3.     Community Empowerment and Private Sector Partnership
This component will focus on providing communities the tools and assets to participate as full partners in
the TFCA process. It will include:
*      Community mobilization, capacity building and awareness raising,
*      Development of Community Action Plans;
*      Demarcation and titling of community areas;
*      Assistance to communities to negotiate tourism and other joint ventures with the private sector;
*      Community investment fund to provide resources for communities to participate in joint
ventures.
4.     Infrastructure
This component will consist of basic infrastructure (e.g. roads, park facilities) for the core priority
terrestrial and marine protected areas in the TFCAs, and basic infrastructure requirements linlong
community and private sector initiatives to TFCA cross-border infrastructure investments. Designing
infrastructure requirements will be done in the context of multi-sectoral planning such that public
investment priorities are aligned with those of TFCAs where possible to ensure complementarity and
prevent duplication or conflict (e.g. in road alignment or design). This component will provide ongoing
technical support for tourism infrastructure planning in the TFCAs.
5.     Sustainable Tourism Framework (STF)
This component will consist of the design and implementation of a Sustainable Tourism Framework
which will focus on reinforcing and facilitating the role of coimmunities as investors in sustainable
tourism development. The process will involve institutional and stakeholder analysis including local
communities, NGOs, private sector and government at different levels. The STF will focus on the
creation of local level tourism planning processes, on which provincial, national and regional plans will
be based. Local communities and authorities will play a leading role in defining the tourism and
conservation assets of the TFCAs, and how these assets will be conserved or sustainably managed. This
component reflects the emphasis that the Government is placing on sustainable tourism through the
creation of the National Directorate for Conservation Areas (DNAC) in the Ministry of Tourism and the
approach adopted by the newly-created Tourism Facilitation Commission and Ministry's efforts to
decentralize decision-making to the Provincial authorities.
6.     Research. Monitorine and Evaluation



4
iSDS
Monitoring and Evaluation will be a fully integrated process, done on a regular basis, involving
ecological, social and policy monitoring. A dedicated monitoring plan with verifiable indicators will be
established during the preparation phase as part of this component. Consultants will be contracted to
support the monitoring process and evaluate and consolidate monitoring data into semi-annual
monitoring reports. These reports will then form the basis of the semi-annual review meetings. In
addition, the consultants will conduct independent mid-term and end-term beneficiary assessments within
the TFCAs. These will serve as the basis for mid-term and completion reviews.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infornation about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Context
Mozambique's natural resources are of global interest and significance. Natural resource based activities
- agriculture, fisheries, mining and tourism - contribute about 45 percent of GDP and 70 percent of total
exports. Forestry and forestry related activities, such as the production of charcoal and timber contribute
far less, but play a significant role in the local economy, and in the degradation of the natural resource
base. Traditional energy (largely woodfuels) still contributes more than 90 percent of Mozambique's
total energy consumption. The resource base is seriously threatened by population growth, extreme
poverty, poor management and utilization and lack of financial resources. Desertification affects more
than half of the ten provinces, and 20-30 percent of Mozaxnbique's population lives on fragile land.
Coastal erosion is a major problem and has nearly destroyed some townships and threatens others. In
particular, the uncontrolled exploitation of the natural resource base, in the absence of an adequate
planning and implementation of the regulatory framework represents a serious threat to the sustained
economic growth that the government is seeking. At the same time, it is becoming increasingly
recognized that there a lack of focus on the part of the government and the international community on
addressing these environmental issues, as the emphasis increases on creating rapid economic growth as
the main weapon against poverty. The link between environmental degradation and poverty has not been
clarified or absorbed into the political decision-making process. Although weak environmental
management is an issue threatening sound private sector investment, this perception is unlikely to prevail
under the present circumstances. Furthermore, the essentially exploitative nature of many of the larger
scale private sector investments (e.g., gas, mining, coastal tourism, energy), requires even greater
vigilance in terms of ensuring both social and environmental sustainability.
The best approach to dealing with this situation may be to focus less on the negative consequences of
present rates of environmental degradation and poor management, and more on a proactive approach in
mainstreaming environment into the development process. Demonstrating that sound environmental
management can play a significant role in facilitating private sector investment and stimulating growth
will require that environmental concems are addressed in a sound development-planning framework
designed to attract high-quality private sector investment. At the same time, conservation priorities need
to be recognized, and the intrinsic value of the maintenance of the country's high biodiversity should not
be lost. Not all high value conservation areas will be able to be justified for management and protection
on economic grounds.
Biodiversity
Mozambique is part of the Zambezian Biogeographic Region, a region known for its high degree of
biodiversity. The country's extensive coastline and large land area makes it unique within the



5
ISDS
Biogeographic Region as it includes such a wide variety of ecosystems, including 22 vegetationihabitat
types. Within this region are areas of particularly outstanding biodiversity from a global perspective,
such as the Gorongosa Mountain Rift Valley Complex, Cheringoma Plateau, Zambezi Delta grasslands
and swamps, Great Inselberg Archipelago, Chimanimani Massif, Maputaland Centre of Endemism,
Coastal Bamer Lakes, Pebane Evergreen Coastal Forests of Zambezia, and Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa.
Forest cover of nearly 20 million hectares has been identified as having high and medium potential for
forestry production. As a consequence of the long period of armed conflict, together with the vast size of
the country, lack of trained personnel and operational support, large areas of Mozambique are poorly
documented from a biological perspective. The current conservation status of Mozambique's flora is still
poorly understood: of the 5500 plant species recorded for Mozambique, some 247 plant species in 67
families may be of conservation concem. Areas with large numbers of endemic plants include
Afromontane areas (Chimanimani TFCA and Gorongosa mountain) and southern Mozambique
(Lubombo TFCA). Mozambique's rich plant biodiversity is also a critical resource for traditional
medicines, the primary first (and often only) medical treatment for the vast bulk of the population.
The fauna of Mozambique aside from mammals and birds is also poorly documented. Moz is
characterized by a rich diversity of mammal fauna with 211 terrestrial mammal species. Large mammals
have been sharply reduced.. Gazetted Wildlife Areas cover 87,000 sq kIn, or about 11% of the country.
With the exception of Niassa Reserve (which has three endemic species), these areas suffered drastic
declines in wildlife, although signs of regeneration are now seen in several of these areas, notably
Gorongosa, Maputo Elephant Reserve, and the National Parks of Banhine and Zinave. Mozambique has
the third largest coastline in Africa, with a diversity of ecosystems including estuaries, wetlands and
coastal lakes. The Coastal Zone is considered unique in the East African Marine Region in terms of the
quality, diversity and species richness of its habitats. These ecosystems support 18 species of marine
mammals, mainly dolphins and whales, and Mozambique is thought to have the largest population of
dugongs along the East African coast (these are, however, extremely threatened). It is the only country in
the region where all five species of threatened and endangered sea turtles occur and breed.
Local populations are exceptionally dependent on the country's biodiversity to fulfil their daily survival
needs. Wildlife provides a major source of protein to about 70% of the population. Woodlands and
mangroves are an essential source of construction material for housing and fishing boats, and fodder for
domestic animals ( particularly in times of drought).
Project Location
To a large extent the location of intervention has been determined in the first phase of the Project
(TFCAI). TFCA processes are well underway in the Greater Limpopo and Chimanimani TFCAs,
whereas in the Lubombo TFCA international protocols have been signed, but the degree of complex and
multifarious interventions in this area have delayed focused and concerted action. All these three TFCAs
will continue to be supported under the Project. Two new areas have been selected for intervention: the
ZIMOZA Transboundary Natural Resource Management Area, which has been facilitated to date by
IUCN-ROSA, and the Lake-to-Coast Biodiversity and Tourism Corridor (LCBTC) in the north. Both
these areas have been chosen for different reasons. The process of preparing ZIMOZA has been
undertaken at both the community and central levels, focusing on the participation as the District
Administrative level of districts in the countries of Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Zambia. As a result of
this process, there has been strong community buy-in, and the foundations for a successful TFCA have
been laid. The LCBTC covers a vast area, but which is already subject to the intervention of the SDI
process, in this case falling under the Mtwara and Nacala Development Corridors. Planning for
ecosystem management, biodiversity conservation and tourism development in the LCBTC will add



6
ISDS
value to the SDI process, and ensure that environmental needs are well balanced with development. At
the same time the investments foreseen in infrastructure in the SDIs (roads, airports, harbors) will greatly
enhance the viability and sustainability of the LCBTC. The MITUR has defined a regional tourism
development strategy in the north as one of its major priorities.
Local populations living within the broadly defined Transfrontier Conservation Areas along
Mozambique's international boundaries will be the main target population. These populations occur in
the provinces of Maputo, Gaza, Manica, Tete, Niassa and Cabo Delgado. Less directly, Inhambane,
Nampula, Zambezia and Sofala provinces are also expected to benefit through the development of
tourism corridors associated with TFCA development. Local populations around protected areas falling
within the TFCAs will benefit through the establishment of more clearly defined access rights, land
titling and the development of sustainable economic activities. These protected areas are Maputo Special
Reserve, Limpopo NP, Banhine NP, Zinave NP and Niassa Reserve. More protected areas are expected
to be developed under TFCA2. Additionally, the Project will target local private sector and develop a set
of incentives for joint venture arrangements between international private sector, local entrepreneurs and
local communities.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is given a Category B rating since the project will be designed to provide a
framework for environmentally sound planning processes. Extensive public consultation processes
considered essential to underpin participatory planning for ecosystem management will be triggered. Project
preparation will design the SEA processes to be carried out as part of project implementation. These
processes will be set out in a disclosable Environmental Management Framework, prior to project appraisal.
All investments financed by the project will be subject to individual environmental assessments according to
the EMF. The project will also strengthen capacity and processes in Mozambique for environmental
assessment.
Major land use changes are not foreseen. However, even without the project, the coming years will see
infrastructure and private sector development in certain areas which could lead to the expansion of
tounsm nodes, population increase, and in-migration. These trends are already being observed in certain
coastal areas. The challenge will be to ensure that the project induces positive change, and encourages
sustainable pro-poor tourism.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on W for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)      0 Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)              * Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                               0 Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                 0 Yes * No   0 TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                            0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     0 Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                        0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No  0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*   0 Yes * No   0 TBD



7
ISDS
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If informration is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The TFCA and Sustainable Tourism Development Project is a major conservation project which is
focused on sustainable use of Mozambique's immense natural habitat estate. Its primary objective is that
of institutionalizing ecosystem managemeni, and mainstreaming it into development planning processes.
As such it is expected to have significant environmental benefits relative to a no-project situation. The
project also has the objective of promoting environmentally sustainable tourism and other sustainable
land uses such as game farming. The project will aim to foster the development of environmental
management and spatial development plans that will underpin the development of the TFCAs.
The project will operate in the context of a highly dynamic socio-economic and political landscape. The
Government of Mozambique is keen to promote private sector investment and is also responsible for a
sizable public sector investment program, so the project will require adaptable experiential learning
processes rather than blueprints.
There are two levels at which the TFCA process will operate by:
*      influencing current and proposed investment plans - both public and private - towards more
environmentally and socially sustainable patterns. This could mean realignment or repositioning of
infrastructure investments undertaken by the Government or the private sector;
*      actively promoting investments which maximize opportunities for sustainable development in the
TFCAs. This could mean supporting the development of infrastructure which is essential for ecological
management or for sustainable tourism development. These investments will not be fully defined during
the course of project preparation, except in those areas where planning is sufficiently advanced (for
example under TFCAI)
Large-scale impacts such as major land use change will not be induced by the project. The development
of Mozambique's coastline and interior is expected whether or not the project is implemented. The
project is intended to provide a framework for promoting sustainable development, through an ecosystem
management approach. The project is also not expected to finance or induce major irreversible impacts.
Dealing with these challenges will require a two-pronged approach:
*      Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA) would be carried out for the proposed TFCAs as
part of the spatial planning process. SEAs are considered more appropriate for the large areas where
boundaries remain undefined and where a number of different development activities will be taking
place. The SEAs will support a zoning process and help identify priority sites for private sector
investment. The SEA processes will identify mitigation activities most likely in respect of the
development of tourism nodes, unregulated access to natural resources, zoning and other factors.
*      Within the broadly designed zones and priorities set by the SEAs, specific public and private
investments will emerge requiring project specific environmental assessments.



e
'SOS
Major involuntary resettlement of populations in Mozambique is neither desirable nor necessary, and
current Govemment policy is that involuntary resettlement should not take place. The Govemment and
other stakeholders are in the process of determining how best to guarantee rights for communities
currently living within protected areas. These rights may apply to land or to other forms of exploitation
such as forest and non-timber products, hunting rights etc. Project preparation will therefore include the
elaboration of a Resettlement Process Framework designed to ensure that any project intervention takes
full account of the rights of communities living within or around protected areas. A Resettlement Policy
Framework will also be prepared to cover the as-yet-undetermined eventuality that resettlement may be
necessary in certain areas.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
TBD
II.D. lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
As mentioned above, the areas in question are very large and are subject to an enormous range of
activities, including mining, forestry, electricity, roads, coastal development, even gas pipelines.
However, these are not project activities. Rather the project is designed to improve the way in which
ecosystem management is carried out, with emphasis on the whole spectrum of planning and
development processes taking place in the areas concemed.
U.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Explicit analysis of alternatives has not yet been undertaken. However, from an environmental perspective
it is anticipated that the with project scenario would be more beneficial than the without project scenario.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Preparation of a disclosable Environmental Management Framework, a Resettlement Process Framework
and a Resettlement Policy Framework before appraisal
I.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for the project are communities, the private sector, govemment at all levels
(distnct, provincial and national), neighboring countries (for intemational agreements, shared
infrastructure, jomt tourism planning), NGOs and other donors. Project preparation will involve a
participatory process designed to ensure that the key stakeholders are integrated in both preparation and
implementation of the program. Precise details on how this process will evolve are not yet available.
E. Safeguards Classifcation (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
]Sl. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
} S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address



9
ISDS
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                9/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            10/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/3/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                9/15/2003
Date of"in-country" disclosure                             10/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11/3/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Exnected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "'m-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If rn-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Siened and submitted by       Name                      2           Zf6  Date
Task Team Leader:             Robert A. Clement-Jones  Aft'  
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Kristi M.zarsdott r/PersonQfrld Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  _J it
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham
Comments                                                            2,    1
Sector Manager/Director       Richard G. Scobey                                       3
Comments



