Report No. 24007
Report No: I073135 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NAMIBIA         Project ID: P073135
Project: Integrated Ecosystem Management in Namibia through the National
Conservancy Network      Task Team Leader: Christophe Crepin
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 15, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 4, 2003     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: AFTES     Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: GEF grant $m 7.1
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Namibian approach towards Community-Based Natural Resource Management
(CBNRM) is embedded in an initial policy and legal framework that grants
rights over wildlife and tourism management and uses to communities on
their lands once they are organized as "conservancies". A communal
conservancy consists in setting aside part or all of the land of a given
community with the intention to conserve and valorise wildlife through its
sustainable consumptive and non-consumptive uses within nature-related
activities.The national CBNRM/Conservancy program responds thereby to
national development and environmental priorities by:
(i) supporting sustainable use and conservation of Namibia's unique
ecosystems and related biodiversity (the majority of biodiversity is found
outside the National Park network);
(ii) promoting appropriate land management schemes in an environment where
availability of water and suitable rangeland as well as land degradation
are the key limiting factors to sustainable management of scarce resources;
(iii) contributing to reduce poverty in rural areas by providing
diversified livelihood strategies through responsibility over local
resources, thereby addressing the root causes of threats to unsustainable
ecosystem management; and
(iv) promoting participatory, accountable and democratic systems of local
and regional governance.
The project development objective is to assist stakeholders, under the
NACSO partnership, to establish, operationalize and strengthen
conservancies and related community-driven sustainable integrated
ecosystem management activities that improve livelihoods and empower
communities in rural Namibia.
The project global objective is to enhance biodiversity conservation and
to alleviate land degradation in the expanding conservancy network of
Namibia.
The Project's expected outcomes can be described as follows:
1. Improved coherent financial, legal, organizational and policy framework
for sustainable development through integrated ecosystem management; in
place



2. Improved capacity of support organization network to deliver efficient,
cost-effective and demand-driven services to conservancies;
3. Enhanced Rrepresentative, accountable, participatory and financially
viable decision-making and management institutions established and
functioning in conservancies;
4. Improved resource base, biodiversity conservation and land management
through ecologically sound integrated planning, management and M&E
mechanisms in conservancies;
5. Increased, tangible, equitably shared, socio-economic benefits accrued
to conservancy members and other stakeholders from sustainable utilization
of Namibia's natural habitats, related biodiversity and other natural
resources.
I.A.3. Project Description:
1. Project components:
The project has 6 inter-related components:
The first component on Coherent framework for CBNRM aims at developing a
national coherent financial, legal and policy framework for sustainable
development through integrated ecosystem management with subcomponents on
(i) co-ordination and harmonization of policies, legislation and strategy;
(ii) advocacy and communication; (iii) incentives and financing mechanism.
The second component on Capacity Building of CBNRM Support Organizations
aims at improving capacity of support organization network to deliver
cost-effective and demand-driven services to conservancies and includes
sub-components on (i) training and research; (ii) stakeholder
collaboration; (iii) investment planning.
The third component on Capacity building of Conservancy Institutions aims
at creating representative, accountable, participatory and financially
viable decision-making and management institutions in conservancies and
involves sub-components on (i) governance and administration; (ii)
planning, management.
The fourth component on Integrated Ecosystem Management aims at creating
an improved resource base through ecologically sound integrated planning,
investments, management and implementation of M&E mechanisms at national
and conservancy levels and includes sub-component on (i) planning and
implementation; (ii) M&E.
The fifth component on Increased Socio-Economic Benefits aims at
generating increased, tangible socio-economic benefits to conservancy
members and other stakeholders through sustainable utilization of natural
resources, and involves sub-components on (i) planning and feasibility
studies; (ii) remove barriers to benefit generation.
The sixth component aims at supportingestablishing a Project Coordination
Unit within NACSO Secretariat to effectively manage project activities.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will support selected communal conservancies in Namibia with
biologically rich abundances of species or ecosystems. Its implementation
is associated with clear and tangible socio-economic and environmental
benefits. The list of existing and emerging conservancies as well as a
map of the conservancy network are attached to the PCD. Today, a total of
15 communal area conservancies have been registered. These fifteen
- 2 -



conservancies incorporate more than four million hectares of wildlife
habitat and involve currently more than 30,000 communal area residents in
conservation efforts. A further 32 emerging communal conservancies, are
also under development. As recommended in the National Action Plan to
Combat Desertification (NAPCOD) as well as in the National Biodiversity
Strategy and Action Plan, the Project will support a landscape approach
and complement the network of existing Protected Areas. Therefore, by
nature of the Project, significant biodiversity and ecosystem assets will
be created, carefully assessed and monitored, the management of the
resource base will be done by and through conservancies and executing
agencies while the overall national capacity of the conservancy supporting
network will be enhanced. Namibia's conservancy approach is based on the
Ministry's of Environment and Tourism established legal and procedural
process for registration and implementation which requires that communal
area conservancies must have a (i) defined geographic area with boundaries
agreed upon by the community, (ii) defined membership, with registered
community members, (iii) representative management committee with the
ability to manage funds, (iv) legal Constitution, which provides for the
sustainable management and utilization of game and (v) plan for the
equitable distribution of benefits derived from the consumptive and
non-consumptive use of game.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: A limited environmental and social assessment will be undertaken
during preparation.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
An independent environmental and social assessment will be undertaken
during preparation.
It aims is to comply with OP/BP/GP 4.01 on environmental assessment, OD
4.20 on indigenous people rights and to confirm whether the project would
trigger or not OPN 11.03 on conservation of cultural property, and OP/BP
4.12 on involuntary resettlement as well with OP/BP/GP 4.04 on natural
habitats.
-3-



Particular environmental issues to pay attention and where possible
impacts should be assessed and a convincing set of proposed and planned
mitigation measures be developed are related to (i) population pressure on
scarce resources, (ii) water supply competition, (iii) induced and
unplanned tourism developments including infrastructure developments, (iv)
hunting and poaching, (v) inadequate local community participation, (vi)
potential land tenure and land use conflicts.
Furthermore, the social assessment will analyze: (i) the different
stakeholder prospects and interests within and among communities, (ii) the
potential for local revenues, (iii) the mechanisms for fair and equitable
sharing of benefits, (iv) the participatory processes in existing local
level institutions and in conservancy governance mechanisms; as well as
(v) the differences in communities for building priorities in investment
and (vi) the participation/outreach strategies capable of seeing the
profounder aspects of local intercultural differences. Each of these
aspects of the social assessment will pay special attention to whether San
people, who are indigenous peoples (IP) in the definition of the World
Bank IP policy, are affected either positively or negatively. In addition,
the project preparation process will lead to a selection of WB/ GEF funded
conservancy priority sites and confirm whether GEF resources will fund
activities in conservancies with San communities.
With respect to the San, the social assessment will clarify the potential
impacts of the conservancy movement on the San. A very limited number of
registered and emerging conservancies have prominent San population (Nyae
Nyae, Mutc'iku-Bwabwata, N#laqna) but the social assessment will try to
determine whether there are San communities in any other of the existing
or emerging conservancy areas. It will analyse whether the interests of
San communities have been or may be jeopardized by the procedures and
legislation allowing interested groups to form conservancies. It will
discuss the potential of marginalizing or excluding San from conservancy
benefits, or from land traditionally held by the San where there are San
claims to lands intended to be included in the conservancies. If and
where such potential negative impacts on San communities are likely to
occur, an Indigenous Peoples Action Plan (IPAP) or a mechanism for
reserving certification of conservancies until such plans are in place
will be designed to best strengthen the benefits of conservancies for San
communities. In the latter instance, a costed plan for the screening and
planning mechanism to enable the full objectives of the IP Policy will be
designed as part of the Social Assessment.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Not identified. As described above, the results of the environmental and
social assessment may identify any potential cumulative impacts (and
proposed mitigation measures) due to the application of more than one
safeguard policy.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
See above, tbd.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
See above, tbd.
-4-



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An environmental and social assessment will be undertaken as part of the
preparation and is expected to be finalized by June 1, 2002 (start-up date
proposed 02/15/02, first draft available by 04/30/02).
The Namibian branch of the Southern African Institute for Environmental
Assessment (SAIEA) will assist the borrower in drafting the ToRs for the
Environmental and Social Assessment, including analysis of potential IP
issues. Upon clearance from the Bank (ASPEN), national independent
consultants including a social scientist member, familiar with the history
of land tenure conflicts and San communities, will be responsible for the
assessments.
Furthermore, the broad range and diversity of member institutions of the
NACSO partnership (i.e. NGOs Namibia Community Based Tourism Association
(NACOBTA) for sustainable community-driven tourism, Legal Assistance
Center (LAC) for legal assistance, University of Namibia for
socio-economic issues and the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET)
with its Directorate of Environmental Affairs as well as the Department of
Parks and Wildlife Management, Department of Tourism and Directorate of
Forestry) will allow for additional input and comments on the proposed
ToRs and reports during the entire process.
In addition, the proposed conservancy screening tool, which is currently
developed during preparation and includes socio-economic (including
institutional) and environmental characteristics for each
conservancancies, will include conservancy specific baseline impact
indicators which will be cross-checked with the environmental and social
assessment findings.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The project represents a partnership between local communities,
decentralized and central governmental services, private sector, freehold
conservancies and NACSO NGO members. The conservancy support organizations
(including government) acting as executing agencies will not be in the
position to service all current and proposed conservancies.
Therefore, information sharing, consultation and collaboration among these
key stakeholders are essential and assured through NACSO's partnership
structure (based on NACSO constitution), the predefined participartory
vision plan (several workshops with multi-stakeholder group) and the
proposed project implementation set-up. All key stakeholders have been
consulted throughout the preparation process and own the project.
The proposed State of Conservancy Report and a new communication strategy
will ensure that results, lessons learned and up-dates on CBNRM and
conservancy network are disseminated.
In addition, NACSO members participate on a continuous basis to meet in
five thematic working groups for review of the design and implementation
of project related activities.
The environmental and social assessment (see references above) and its
- 5-



results will be conducted, disclosed and discussed using the same
participatory processes existing at national and local level. Any IPAP
will be closely developed with the informed participation of the San. The
final EA and SA documents will be publicly disclosed in country and in the
InfoShop following the Bank's new disclosure policy.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      6/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Christophe Crepin
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Arne Dalfelt
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Dan Aronson
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     04/10/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Agnes I. Kiss    04/09/2002
- 6 -



For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



