ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Free ol Poverty
infoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/18/2002                                25153
Section I - Basic Information                                   November 18, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NEPAL                                   Project ID: P071291
Project: Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project  Task Team Leader: Simon C. Bell
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 22, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 19, 2002                 IDA Amount ($m): 16.00
Managing Unit: SASFP                              Sector: Banking (100%)
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and
Status: Lending                                  privatization (P); Corporate governance (S);
Regulation and competition policy (S); Standards
and financial reporting (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overarching objective of the Reform Program in the Financial Sector is to support the renewed
efforts of His Majesty's Government of Nepal (HMGN) to improve the sector in order to bring
macroeconomic stability and promote private-sector-led economic growth. The proposed Financial
Sector Technical Assistance Project is the first major step in this process and focuses on three broad
objectives (a) helping to restructure and re-engineer the Central Bank (Nepal Rastra Bank - NRB), so that
it can effectively perform its key central banking functions; (b) commencing commercial banking reform
in the two large ailing commercial banks that dominate the sector (Rastriya Banijya Bank (RBB) and
Nepal Bank Limited (NBL)) -- by introducing stronger bank management that protects the financial
integrity of the two banks and would take on a conservator role to prepare the banks for the next steps of
restructuring; and (c) supporting a better environment for financial sector reform in areas such as
enhanced credit information, better financial news reporting, and better training for staff in financial
institutions. These actions will help create a more prudently operated and commercially viable
commercial banking system that is overseen by a modern, effective, and technically competent central
bank. If sufficient progress is made during this first phase of reform, then subsequent IDA support would
focus on more longer term objectives. These include further deepening and broadening of the sector,
supporting worker retrenchment in the banks, bank privatization and/or liquidation, and helping to cover
the financial losses in the large publically owned banks.
It is anticipated that IDA's support for the overall financial sector reform program will be in the form of
several, sequential projects. The first of these -- the Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project -- is
centered around the re-engineering of Nepal Rastra Bank (particularly in its core central banking
functions; supervision, monetary policy, banking legislation, accounting and auditing, information
technology, human resources, and training); reform of the two large commercial banks -- RBB and NBL



2
ISDS
(through the recruitment of Management Teams to put these two banks in conservatorship on behalf of
the central bank); and support for capacity building in the financial sector (through support for training,
financial journalism, and a credit information bureau). This project will finance a range of activities that
are necessary to prepare for a major reform operation. This initial phase will also serve to demonstrate
and confirm broad-based commitment to undertake difficult reforms. This sequential approach to
financial sector reform has been endorsed by colleagues in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
Department for International Development (DFID) U.K., and the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The Financial Sector Reform Program is also important in terms of enhancing poverty alleviation. It is
expected to (a) support private-sector-led economic growth and job creation; and (b) reduce the number
of nonperforming loans made through the banking system to the politically powerful elite in Kathmandu.
As the large non-recoverable losses in the banking system will have to ultimately be borne by the
Government -- this represents a transfer of resources from the tax payer in Nepal to the urban rich (who
represent some of the largest defaulting borrowers in the banking system). A more efficient
intermediation of funds should also result in a better allocation of financial resources and hence stronger
economic growth.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has three main components (Table below). Based on its cofinancing agreement, DFID will
provide US$10.0 million equivalent in the form ofjoint financing for this project. The respective DFID
shares for the three components will be: US$1.56 million for re-engineering of NRB; US$8.10 million
for restructuring of RBB and NBL; and US$0.34 million for capacity building in the financial sector.
The balance of US$4.1 million will be provided by HMGN.
Components:
Re-engineering Nepal Rastra Bank
Restructuring the Two Big Banks (RBB and NBL)
Capacity Building in the Financial Sector
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
This is a TA to the Central Bank of Nepal located in Kathmandu. No relocation or resettlement involved in
this project.



3
ISDS
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: Category C - No environmental or social policies are triggered under this TA to the Cental Bank
of Nepal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                       Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C0 Yes * No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  > Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    C; Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        . Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                :D Yes * No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                    Yes* No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            D Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)            Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Not Applicable
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not Applicable
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not Applicable
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not Applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not Applicable
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.



4
ISDS
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Simon C. Bell                               Nov. 13, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                        Nov. 18, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Joseph Del Mar Pemia                        Nov. 18, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here



5
ISDS
SEARCH,        - FEEDBACK.-      S-TE MAP   ' -  ' SHOWCASE       .  S



