Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 22, 2003 
Report No.: AC383 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P083923 
Project Name: Rural Access Improvement 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  November 1, 
2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): US$30 million  
IDA  
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P); Decentralization (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Asif Faiz (environment) and Afshan 
Khawaja (social safeguard)  
Other financing amounts by source: HMG: US$6 million  
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The development objective of the proposed project is to 
provide beneficiary rural communities 
with improved and sustainable transport access
. A central part of the strategy to reach this 
objective is to improve the institutional capacity of the decentralized governance system for rural 
infrastructure provision in line with HMG’s decentralization policy and financing high priority 
investments in the sector, including district roads, trails, tracks and footbridges.  
Monitorable Project Outcomes
: A Project Monitoring Framework will be developed during 
project preparation, and will include monitoring outcomes on (a) increases in the number of 
people with improved access to motorable transport; (b) reduction on travel time and transport 
costs of beneficiary communities; and (c) employment and income generation through the use of 
labor based work methods and road user groups.   
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The proposed project will support participating districts with physical investments and 
institutional development components as follows:  
Page  2
 
 
  
District Road Improvement 
(US$ 20 million). Rehabilitation and upgrading of about 400 km and 
800 km of existing district roads in participating Hill and Terai districts respectively. These 
works will be mostly on existing carriageways and will be designed to provide all-weather road 
access, including construction of proper drainage, culverts, small bridges and causeways, and 
widening, where necessary. Candidate roads will be selected from the District Transport Master 
Plan (DTMP), which districts will be required to prepare and update before participating in the 
project. The recommended roads will be screened for technical and economic viability, as well as 
environment and social issues before they are included for financing under the proposed project.  
 
Trail and Track Improvement
 (US$6 million). Upgrading about 600 km of trails and tracks to 
dry-weather roads in remote hill districts. The works will be carried out using phased
 
construction and the environmentally friendly “Green Roads” approach. Candidate trails and 
tracks will be identified through a District Accessibility Mapping and Planning exercise 
incorporating social and poverty indicators.  
 
 
District Road Maintenance 
(US$ 3 million).
 
Support DDC’s annual maintenance program of 
district roads. DDCs will prepare annual maintenance plans from their respective DTMPs. The 
funding for maintenance will come from the proposed project, DDCs’ own resources, HMG 
block grant, and the Road Fund, and will cover the entire maintainable district road network.  
 
Community Markets, Footbridges, Pilot Rural Transport Services 
(US$1 million)
.
 Based on 
demand from communities, (i) support the rehabilitation of existing markets, (ii) construction of 
footbridges, and (iii) two or three pilots to test the feasibility of proving and developing rural 
transport services in low-volume roads. For maximum impact, the markets and footbridges 
would be within the road corridors to be improved under the proposed project.  
 
Technical assistance, training and logistical support 
(US$ 5 million): (i) update and consolidate 
administrative, managerial, and technical guidelines and procedures; (ii) update and maintain 
DTMPs through the use of GIS-based maps and participatory planning, and on this basis prepare 
annual works programs; (iii) strengthen the capacity of DOLIDAR, DDCs, and community 
organizations to effectively implement the improvement and maintenance of roads, trails, tracks, 
foot bridges and markets; (iv) strengthen DOLIDAR’s capacity to undertake general program 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting, and integrating environmental and social safeguards in 
project planning and design; and (v) undertake socioeconomic impact evaluation and monitoring.  
 
Project Costs and Financing.
 The total project cost is estimated at about US$35 million, with 
about US$30 million being financed by IDA to be implemented over a five-year project period. 
Specific Investment Loan would be the lending instrument, as this would be a scale-up operation 
following the LIL. The final project size and IDA financing will be determined during project 
preparation and suitably adjusted to reflect the districts' capacity to implement the project and 
DOLIDAR's capacity to coordinate.
 
The proposed project will continue to support the eight RIP 
districts in order to consolidate the developments achieved there, as long these districts continue 
to meet the participation criteria. In addition, eight more districts will be chosen for project 
support on pre-specified entry conditions and eligibility criteria. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Page  3
 
 
All road improvements will follow existing alignments and trails and will be located on existing 
ROWs. Where a new alignment or realignment might be needed to provide a safer road or to 
rectify existing environmental problems (landslides, poor drainage, flooding etc) ,  it will be 
selected after considering two or more alternatives to ensure that land acquisition and disruption 
to environmental assets are minimized.. Where an existing alignment or ROW poses 
environmental hazards, these will be addressed through appropriate design and construction. The 
specific road and trail and track improvement and maintenance works will be identified during 
project preparation.   
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
While there is a substantial knowledge base in Nepal in the form of standards and government 
guidelines for environment and social assessment, application of appropriate safeguard measures 
still needs to be secured for the district road improvement and trail and track improvement 
components of the proposed project. To achieve this, the project will install the required 
capacity, systems and procedures at both DOLIDAR and DDCs to meet national standards and 
Bank requirements and closely monitor compliance. The DOLIDAR project preparation team 
has an Environmental Engineer and sociologist to oversee safeguard issues during project 
preparation and implementation. In addition, DOLIDAR will hire an Environmental and Social 
Impact adviser to work with DOLIDAR’s project preparation team.  
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
 
[ TBD] 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them?  
 
The proposed project is expected to have limited negative social and environment impacts. 
Preliminary information indicates that land acquisition is expected to be largely voluntary and 
involuntary resettlement, if any, minimal. Similarly, environmental impact are expected to be 
minimal as the district road and trail and track improvement and maintenance works will be on 
existing right-of-way, and trail and track upgrading will be done using phased construction and 
environment friendly “Green Roads” approach. DOLIDAR, with the help of a consultant, is 
currently preparing an Environment and Social Assessment Framework (ESAF) to be used for 
screening proposed works for environmental and social impacts and developing mitigation 
measures as appropriate. The ESAF, which is essentially a consolidation of existing guidelines 
and procedures used by DOLIDAR, the Department of Roads and other donor-supported 
programs, is expected to include an environmental code of practice, land acquisition/resettlement 
procedures, and social consultation/participation plan. The ESAF will be formulated in 
accordance with HMGN policies and the Bank's Operational Policy OP 4.01 on Environmental 
Assessment, Operational Policy OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and Operational Directive 
OD 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples. All project roads will be screened to identify potential 
environmental and social issues with the proposed works. Environmental mitigation measures 
would be internalized initially through appropriate route location and design and will be 
incorporated in an environmental manual, design and construction specifications and through 
appropriate contract conditions. In cases of involuntary resettlement or where indigenous 
communities are affected, a Resettlement Action Plan and a Tribal Development Plan will be 
prepared and implemented according to the provisions of the ESAF. 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultation 
will be done at national, district, community, and project site levels. Social 
mobilzers will be hired by participating DDCs to facilitate consultation and community 
participation in project planning and implementation.  
 
Disclosure 
will be at national, district and community levels, using public meetings and  media, 
and in the Info Shop according to Bank procedures.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
 
 
