                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)


Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/21/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NICARAGUA                                            Project ID: P073246
                                                              Global Supplemental ID: P075194
Project: Nicaragua Offgrid Rural Electrification for          Task Team Leader: Clemencia Torres
Development
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 5, 2002                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 8, 2003                                  IDA Amount ($m): 11.99
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 4.41
Managing Unit: LCSFE                                          Sector: Power (60%); Renewable energy (40%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Civic engagement, participation and
Status: Lending                                               community driven development (P); Regulation and
                                                              competition policy (P); Infrastructure services for
                                                              private sector development (P); Rural services and
                                                              infrastructure (P); Indigenous peoples (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
Project Development Objective. The main project development objective is to support the sustainable
provision of electricity services and associated social and economic benefits in selected rural sites in
Nicaragua, and to strengthen the Government's institutional capacity to implement its national rural
electrification strategy. This would be accomplished by (i) assisting the Government in the design and
implementation of its national rural electrification strategy; (ii) implementing innovative public/private
off-grid electricity delivery mechanisms in several pilot sites for later replication on a national scale; and
(iii) demonstrating in the pilot areas the potential of targeted rural micro-finance and business
development services (BDS) to significantly enhance the development impact of rural electrification.

While Nicaragua has successfully unbundled its power sector and privatized distribution activities, about
89% of the population in the rural areas are still without access to electricity. Even though more than half
of its population lives in urban areas, Nicaragua is a predominantly agricultural economy (32.7 per cent
of GDP came from the agricultural sector in 2000), and most of Nicaragua's poor live in the rural areas.
Given these characteristics, the lack of electricity and other public services is a serious obstacle to the
economic and social development of the country. To address this problem, the Comisión Nacional de
Energia (CNE) is developing a National Rural Electrification Plan (PLANER) aiming to achieve rural
electrification rates of 70% by 2005 and 90% by 2012. As part of their effort to ensure the achievement
of these access expansion targets, the GON has requested World Bank support for the design and
implementation of the national rural electrification strategy, which covers both grid extension and
off-grid solutions. The requested support includes: (i) the design and implementation of the necessary
legal, regulatory and institutional framework for PLANER, as well as an appropriate financing
mechanism, including output-based public incentives; (ii) transaction advice to CNE for all subprojects
to be financed under PERZA; (iii) institutional strengthening of CNE and the regulatory agency (INE), as
well as training for the new service providers; and (iv) the reduction of existing market barriers to
renewable energy technologies.

The new GON Development Strategy places a strong emphasis on the rapid achievement of results that
will contribute to improve Nicaragua's competitiveness and reduce the poverty level. The Project reflects

                                                         2
                                                                                                        ISDS



these GON priorities, as it includes the design and sequenced implementation of several locally adopted
electricity service delivery mechanisms (mostly based on decentralized off-grid solutions) in various pilot
sites that reflect the physical and socioeconomic diversity of remote rural municipalities of Nicaragua.
The emphasis on off-grid electrification arises from the fact that CNE's strategy, as well as most of the
international aid for rural electrification (RE), has hitherto focused exclusively on programs for grid
extension. However, for a significant part of Nicaragua's poor, such grid-based solutions are
economically unviable, because of their remoteness. The diversity of delivery mechanisms and off-grid
technologies to be implemented in the pilot projects matches real local demand patterns in a more
flexible way, and makes use of the diversity of renewable energy resources in Nicaragua, many of which
are not only environmentally benign but economically competitive in these contexts. Amongst others, the
project will support a national credit line for Solar Home System (SHS), which are the least cost
alternative for electricity provision to a majority of the disperse, mostly indigenous, population along the
Northern Atlantic Coast, a region that lacks other sources of energy and has been overlooked by past RE
efforts. The lessons learned from the pilot projects will help to fill vital gaps in the design of GON's
national rural electrification strategy and ensure greater involvement of the private sector in future
replication efforts. In parallel to implementing concrete RE projects in Phases One and Two, the Project
aims at facilitating this replication process on national scale through a third phase of RE projects, by
providing the necessary technical assistance to CNE to prepare and implement a third set of sub-projects,
based on the lessons from Phase One and Two, as part of the implementation of PLANER.
Electricity access increases the potential for greater economic activity and improved productivity, but it
is not sufficient by itself to realize this potential. Therefore, the project includes accompanying
microfinance and business development services (BDS) components. The high up-front costs of most
off-grid technologies have been identified as one of the key barriers to adoption by rural households, and
the lack of monetary resources in many poor communities is known to limit the possibility of economic
growth for the local economy. By providing microfinance services to the pilot areas, the project will
bring in much needed liquidity to cash-strapped local communities, thereby reducing this affordability
barrier to households and microbusinesses and allowing micro-businesses to invest in and expand their
businesses. To create a client base large enough to attract private sector interest, the microfinance
services will be provided also to communities neighboring the pilot sites. There is a strong correlation
between electricity and BDS. On the demand side, electricity can directly increase the productivity of
rural businesses and thus raise income and employment -- while on the supply side, electricity service
provision becomes more sustainable in turn due to the improved capacity-to-pay of these anchor clients.
By developing targeted business development services, the project will reduce the production, marketing,
technology, and information bottlenecks of small and microbusinesses in the pilot sites and surrounding
areas and thus increase the overall impact of electrification on the economic and social development of
the target communities.

Global Objective. The project's global environmental objective is to achieve greenhouse gas (GHG)
reductions through the reduction of policy, information, financing and institutional capacity barriers that
currently hinder renewable energy technology (RET) dissemination and market development in
Nicaragua (GEF Operational Program No. 6). In support of this objective, the project will engage the
private sector in commercially sustainable activities that reduce long-term implementation costs and offer
a strong potential for nationwide replication in Nicaragua and in other Central American countries.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

Nature of the Components: To achieve the objectives mentioned under section 2, the project will
implement the following components. The first component would support the design and implementation
of PLANER; while the second component will focus on the design and actual implementation of 10 to 12
off-grid pilot sites. The private sector based delivery mechanisms piloted in these sites will later be

                                                      3
                                                                                                        ISDS



replicated on national scale, as part of PLANER. The electrification of these pilot sites will add up to 2.8
MW of installed distributed generation capacity and serve up to 17,000 new users. The project will
accompany the RE components with the provision of targeted rural micro-finance services (component
three) and business development services (component four) to communities in the pilot sites and
surrounding areas. Component five will develop a sound communication and consultation strategy with
indigenous peoples communities, and component 6 will support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)

The project pilot sites have been selected with the goal of future replicability on a larger-scale. Small
hydro resources abound in many remote areas of the country and represent an indigenous and renewable
resource that could reduce dependence on imported fuels. Consequently, the technology choice for many
of the pilot sub-projects involve mini-hydro power generation and electricity distribution to consumers
through independent mini-grids. Two mini-hydro sub-projects (El Ayote and El Bote-El Cua), however,
will be interconnected with the SIN to enable the sale of excess power. This was made not only to
improve the economics of the sub-project. but to pilot a case that may be representative of many
unelectrified sites with hydro resources. Other sites were deliberately chosen from dispersed, low-income
communities in the Atlantic Zone, where the solution to be piloted is centralized battery charging stations
powered by solar photovoltaic panels (SBCS) and small individual solar home systems (SHS). For truly
dispersed users in other remote areas, self-contained individual systems with solar panels of 20-50 watts
would be marketed at the national level, through a Solar PV Market Development Program (SPV).

In all cases, what will be piloted are not the technologies employed but new business models that ensure
an efficient use of scarce public subsidies, maximize private sector participation in service provision and
sharing of investment risks, and improve the chances for long-term sustainable operation, in the technical
and financial sense. The minigrid sub-projects will be developed as investment "packages" where a
combination of private equity, debt and government subsidy enables the private investor/provider to
obtain adequate returns. The packages will be bided out with lowest subsidy amount. Because the
subsidies are one-time capital expenditures subsidies and not on O&M costs (see below), operation of the
subsidized systems could continue after the IDA project terminates. The business models that will be
developed under the project will implement new forms of public/private partnerships in which the
government will play the role of market enabler and subsidy provider, while the private sector or
community based operators will share in the investment risk and deliver the service in an efficient and
least-cost manner.

Subsidies to be provided would be output-based (OB), transparent, well targeted, minimized through
appropriate bidding mechanisms, and designed in a way to minimize market distortions. The direct
investment subsidies will be accompanied by market development measures, such as training to providers
and users, as well as promotion campaigns (for the SHS credit line). Subsidy levels and method of
allocation will depend on the choice of technology and on the capacity to pay of users and local service
providers. In the case of mini-grids, the largest part of the investment subsidy would be paid upon
construction completion, and a smaller portion would be paid against yearly connection targets. This
balances the incentive effect of performance based subsidy allocation with the financial strength of
cooperatives and other small producers in rural areas who do not have sufficient liquidity to bear delays
in investment subsidy payments.

In parallel, the micro-finance component would support a set of increasingly sustainable financial
institutions that provide a range of financial services to low income households and micro and small
businesses in the project sites and to communities nearby, which will enable local micro and small
businesses to take full advantage of the opportunities provided by rural electrification. The project aims
to finance a loan portfolio of about US$600,000 for micro and small businesses in the sites and
surrounding areas and matching grants for institutional development to participating MFIs (this, in
addition to the financing needs of the national solar credit line). With planned matching investments by
participating MFIs, the total loan portfolio would be about US$ 750,000.

                                                       4
                                                                                                         ISDS



The business development services (BDS) component would provide grants to qualified BDS providers
so that new BDS products and delivery models can be provided to the project sites and surrounding
communities. The BDS products will include appropriately designed technical and managerial courses
and consulting services, access to market and technology information, and other support to improve the
productivity and profitability of local firms. Appropriate BDS to assist small and micro enterprises in
pilot sites and surrounding areas will be provided through a program of bonds and development grants
(for new content and delivery mechanisms tailored to the local demand) for demand and provision of
BDS, and through technical assistance to community based BDS providers. Given the marginal nature of
the project sites, vouchers covering a part of the cost of private sector BDS services would be provided to
BDS business clients on a declining basis over the life of the project. This will establish a market for
BDS in local communities without compromising the commercial viability of the relationship between
BDS providers and local businesses.To achieve financial sustainability of service provision, both the
microfinance and BDS components have been designed for a broader coverage, reaching not only the
targeted communities and electrification clients but also surrounding communities to allow for a broader
client base.

Sequencing of Sub-projects: Based on the results of preparatory work, the seven to eight pilot
sub-projects that have been already identified have been divided into two phases: Phase One would
include the three pilot sites that are closest to implementation: (i) El Ayote and (ii) El Bote in the central
region, and (iii) Francia Sirpe, Awastigni, and Sangni Laya (three communnities in the Northern Atlantic
Zone - RAAN) . Phase Two would include the remaining four to five sites that have been studied during
preparation but are still in the process of final selection. Phase Two also includes the national level Solar
Photovoltaic Program (SPV). Phase Three would include a set of sub-projects that will be prepared by
CNE with technical assistance from the PERZA project, and financed through the FODIEN. The final
design of all Phase One sub-projects, including the associated components for BDS and micro-finance,
will be completed by Board date and it is expected that the three projects under Phase I (will be ready for
implementation when the project becomes effective The detailed technical design and business models
for the Phase Two sub-projects and associated micro-finance and BDS components, as well as the SPV
program, will be initiated before Board presentation and fully completed during the first six months of
project implementation. Specific steps to follow to ensure the timely preparation of Phase Two
sub-projects will be included in PERZA's Project Implementation Plan. The SPV program and at least
two minigrid subprojects are expected to start execution before the end of the first year of project
implementation.

The technical assistance to CNE under component one, in combination with the management assistance
under component five, will focus on a fast and efficient learning process for a direct transfer of lessons
learned in Phase One and Two to CNE's National RE Strategy (PLANER): The participatory monitoring
and evaluation strategy which will be designed and implemented by CNE will assemble and analyze
feed-back from the Phase One and Two sub-projects to allow for a phased learning effect: (i) the piloting
of new off-grid delivery mechanisms will provide valuable lessons that will directly help to define and
improve the new processes to be adopted under PLANER; (ii) the successful demonstration of these new,
decentralized business models in the Nicaraguan context will help to attract private sector players and
decrease perceived risk of market entry (and therefore interest rates for local commercial debt); (iii) in
the third year of implementation, based on these lessons, a comprehensive replication strategy on
national scale will be formulated by CNE, which will evolve around the new processes designed and
improved during Phase One and Two implementation, and (iv) this replication strategy will include the
identification of a set of new projects (Phase Three ­investments not financed under this Project) that
will be financed and implemented by CNE with the benefit of lessons learned under Phase One and Two
and with additional technical assistance from the Project as needed. Future projects to be implemented
under this replication strategy would then profit from the full enabling environment which will have been

                                                        5
                                                                                                        ISDS



put in place as an output of assistance to CNE under component one.

This sequencing of the technical assistance component (to improve the framework for RE) and the pilot
projects (to demonstrate and learn from new business models) is crucial for making both levels work
together most effectively: The concrete pilot projects will be implemented fast to create success stories.
This is important because implementing all necessary changes to the regulatory and institutional
framework ­ though identified by effectiveness ­ will take time. In parallel to pilot project
implementation, component one will assist CNE in finalizing the design of the new strategy (the main
elements will be defined by effectiveness), in building consensus for the needed changes, and in
implementing the new framework.

The environmental guidelines that accompany the Project are contained in a general environmental
framework. This framework has been applied already to evaluate the electrification sub-projects of Phase
One and will also be used to evaluate the environmental impact (and recommend eventual mitigation
measures) of the Phase Two sub-projects. Similarly, social considerations have been integrated from the
outset in the preparatory work for the three components of the Project, with a strong emphasis on
community consultations at the early stage of the project design, and this approach will continue to be
used both during preparation of Phase Two sub-projects and during implementation of the whole PERZA
project. In addition, since some of the sub-projects in Phase One will benefit indigenous communities,
preparation work (e.g. demand study) has paid special attention to an appropriate participation of
indigenous groups, an Indigenous People Development Framework has been prepared. A detailed action
plan will be completed prior to negotiations and implemented under the Project to ensure that the content
of the components will take into consideration the particularities of these most particular groups and will
maximize the development impact of the project on these communities.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Pilot projects are located throughout Nicaragua. Characteristics of each site are provided in the
environmental summaries.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project is expected to have wholly positive environmental impacts, as it will promote
renewable energy use. Some subprojects could have limited negative impacts due to construction or
operation.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes   No

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes   No

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes   No

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes   No

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes   No

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes   No

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes   No

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes   No

                                                       6
                                                                                                        ISDS



    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)               Yes     No

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                    Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Environmental Issues: There are no major environmental issues foreseen during project implementation,
since no construction of large generation plants, major access roads or extended transmission lines are
planned under the project. The project is expected to have positive overall environmental impacts due to its
objective of renewable energy promotion. Some minimal negative environmental impacts can be expected,
however, from diesel genset noise and emissions -- the construction of minigrids and from small hydro civil
works. Impacts are expected to be minimal due to the small scale of the projects and the low site sensitivity.

In some of the pilot projects, notably El Ayote and el Bote, the mini-hydro plants will have a positive
environmental impact, because they will displace diesel generators as the principal source of energy.
Furthermore, RETs to be installed will mitigate greenhouse gas emissions through avoided use of fossil
fuel, by replacing kerosene used for lighting or gasoline from small individual gas engines.

Social Issues: Off-grid electricity service provision is specifically targeted at improving the quality of
life of the rural poor and the project has this as a principal objective. However, an important issue for the
pilot project is how to balance the objective of serving the poorest communities and the need to develop
business packages that would be attractive for the private energy equipment and service providers. It will
be important not to focus the project exclusively on the poorest communities. In the poorest communities
a relatively smaller number of households would opt for household electrification, due to cost. They
would still benefit, however, from the electrification of communal centers. In such communities, service
providers will be encouraged to provide less expensive household energy options (e.g. battery charging
stations, smaller solar systems, lanterns), coupled with modest subsidies or incentives. The inclusion of a
Microbusiness Development Component provides for additional social impact for the project, by linking
marginally profitable microbusinesses to reliable, affordable and convenient sources of credit, market
information and business contacts.

Since some of the beneficiaries of the project are likely to be indigenous groups (Miskitos, Mayangas)
and black minorities (Garifunas) of the Atlantic zone, special attention will be given during project
preparation and implementation to ensure that the design of the project components and outputs will take
into account their economic, cultural and social characteristics. Participatory activities and consultation
material (surveys, focus groups) will be offered in the local languages whenever appropriate, and the
adoption of delivery mechanisms, and monitoring and evaluation procedures will be evaluated taking into
account the communal social structure of these groups when the pilot projects are located in areas
inhabited predominantly by these groups. The consultations will be consistent with the Bank's
Operational Guideline 4.20, and as well as all local guidelines. In addition, an Indigenous People
Development Framework has been prepared through a partcipative process, and a detailed Plan will be
finalized prior to project negotiations, to confirm which indigenous communities will be affected by the
project, determine the social impact of the project in these communities, and put in place safeguards to
prevent or mitigate any negative impact.

                                                      7
                                                                                                        ISDS




II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The project has prepared an environmental framework report which: (i) briefly summarizes the potential
for renewable energy projects in Nicaragua; (ii) proposes screening criteria and procedures for ensuring
compliance with Bank safeguard policies for small renewable energy projects; (iii) outlines the main
environmental and social issues that would have to be discussed in EA reports; and, (iv) outlines the
procedures for review and clearance of safeguard policies. This framework has been discussed and
agreed with the Government.

Initially, four subprojects are proposed for financing under PERZA: two run-of-the-river mini-hydros (El
Bote, 900kW, and El Ayote, 700kW), an hybrid diesel/hydro (La Union, 50 kW); and one solar (Francia
Sirpe, 150 kW). Each individual subproject was screened using the framework, and summary EA
documents were prepared which outline key issues such as project location, social and environmental
baseline data, site sensitivity, need for ancillary infrastructure, policies triggered, identification of
possible environmental and social impacts, description of mitigation measures and their respective
indicators, and public consultation undertaken during the EA process. As the subprojects are small, and
the site sensitivities low, no significant negative impacts are expected. The simple Environmental
Management Plans which were developed during the framework application call for proper
environmental management of construction and operation. Guidelines for construction and operation
will be developed before project effectiveness. The siting of minor access roads and transmission lines
for a few of the subprojects has not yet been identified.       These will be subject to an environmental
assessment process to ensure that any natural habitats or sensitive areas are avoided.

Further subprojects will be identified during project implementation. During appraisal, a workshop will
be held for local consultants and government regulatory agencies to train them in the framework
application     Future subprojects will follow a similar procedure for EA, i.e. the application of the
established framework, and be reviewed and approved by the environmental specialist on the project task
team before they are included for financing under the project.

For the micro-enterprise development component, the EA will develop a screening mechanism and
eligibility criteria for the businesses that can be included prior to effectiveness. Businesses that are
harmful to the environment or against Bank policies (such as tobacco and firearms production) are
excluded. These requirements will be included in the project operational manual.

The project will also directly support as a standard activity for CNE, the development of models for
active participation of the community in the environmental management of their community, building up
on the experience that will be acquired in the pilot projects (El Bote and others). This activity is listed
under the project description.

 Proposed actions for addressing social issues: In addition, to the considerations granted to the
indigenous groups and black minorities granted in the context of project preparation of each component
and the Indigenous People Development Plan that has already been finalized, a detailed action plan will
be prepared prior to project negotiations to confirm the indigenous communities affected by the program,

                                                      8
                                                                                                        ISDS



determine the social impact of the program in these communities and examine the safeguards to prevent
or mitigate that impact. This work will complement and reinforce the consultation and participatory of
the project design described in the previous paragraph. The consultations will be consistent with the
Operational Guideline 4.20 of the Bank and the existing guidelines included in the Nicaraguan
legislation.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An environmental framework for renewable sources of energy projects was elaborated for Nicaragua,
and an environment assessment has been completed for the first four sites of the Project.

Attention to the particularities of the indigenous communities has been paid from the outset in all the
studies and surveys done to prepare the three components of the Project. An Indigenous People
Development Framework has been prepared and a detailed Development Plan will be completed prior to
the negotiation of the project to ensure that these communities reap the full benefits of the project.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
User participation.     One of the key lessons learned form past off-grid electrification projects is the
crucial role of a participatory project implementation: Off-grid systems are by definition decentralized,
remote and far from existing infrastructure. The only persons who are continuously there to prevent,
detect and solve problems are the users. Therefore, the user is the most important part of any off-grid
system. In the case of SHS and battery charging stations this is the individual user, while in the case of
village microgrids it is the whole community. Hence, participation will be assured in this project through
the TA activities on several levels:
·        Extensive market surveys will analyze the local demand and match the supply models and
products to the local preferences and willingness to pay.
·        Focus group interviews will involve local dwellers, businesses and opinion leaders in the process
of defining the best suited service solutions for each community.
·        By offering a variety of locally adopted products (e.g. batteries and SHS of various sizes), the
user has choice between different service levels and maintenance arrangements.
·        Users (both households and services) will pay for part of the service, and often own part of the
systems - which increases ownership.
·        Once the delivery mechanism is in place, training will be given by the operators (which in turn
get their training material and "train the trainer" services by the project) to the users (in the case of
isolated systems with each annual visit, in the collective systems more often) to assure a high satisfaction
with the service.
·        For the individual systems, users ­ or their neighbors ­ will be invited to take special training in
basic system maintenance (cleaning modules, filling batteries with distilled water, changing fuses). The
basic indicators of energy storage (charge controller) of these systems will allow the user to regulate his
own energy demand.
·        In many cases, community members will furthermore be involved in the basic maintenance and
operation of the village minigrids systems.
·        Users will be part of the monitoring system for service quality through complaints procedures
and customer satisfaction surveys. Periodic surveys of consumer satisfaction will be part of the
monitoring and evaluation plan during implementation.
Public consultation during the EA and public disclosure. As part of the EA process, stakeholders in
local areas were consulted. The summary EA reports include a section on the public consultation
process, wherein the groups consulted and their comments are detailed.             Each additional future
subproject will undertake such consultation prior to consideration of project financing.           The EA

                                                      9
                                                                                                        ISDS



framework is available at the offices of the project implementation unit, and will be distributed to
a wider audience during the training to occur during the appraisal mission. The summary EA
documents are also available at the PIU offices. Future summary EAs will similarly be made
available to the public. All documents are posted on the Bank's Infoshop website.

Social diversity / indigenous communities. The three communities in the pilot site selected for phase 1
in the Atlantic Zone (around Francia Sirpi) are predominantly Miskitos, an indigenous group with a
distinct language and culture who lives mostly in the Atlantic zone and in Honduras, with a significant
presence of Mayengas in Awastigni. Due to the ethnic diversity in the Atlantic zone, (in contrast to the
more homogenous population in the Pacific zone), some of the phase 2 pilot projects are likely to also
benefit minorities (Miskitos, Mayangas, Garifunas, afro-americans, etc.). To ensure that the minorities
can participate in the project at a very early design stage, surveys will be translated into local languages,
and focus group discussions in minority communities will take place in their language.

Other stakeholders. The other project key stakeholders are private companies in Nicargua and their
external partners, if any, that are potential participants in investment, installation and supply of
equipment, and the national and local governments. The national government and its agencies involved
in rural development indeed have been consulted at the project's inception and during the preinvestment
work carried out with CNE. A consultation workshop was held in November 2000 in Managua
participated in by government personnel, Nicaraguan private sector companies , NGOs and municipal
officials. This provided an opportunity to explain the objectives and proposed implementation plan for
the project and listened to concerns and suggestions by participants.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/3/2002        12/3/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           12/3/2002        12/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            12/4/2002        12/4/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         5/24/2002
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

                                                   10
                                                                                                  ISDS



Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            11/29/2002       11/29/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        11/29/2002       11/29/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/4/2002        12/4/2002

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Clemencia Torres                                   11/26/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Kirsten Oleson                                     11/26/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Violeta Granera
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                       01/31/2002
Sector Manager/Director              Danny M. Leipziger

