Report No. 23458
Report No: I056018 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/21/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NICARAGUA       Project ID: P056018
Project: LAND ADMINISTRATION     Task Team Leader: Isabel G. Lavadenz Paccieri
Appraisal Date: March 19, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: June 18, 2002        IDA Amount ($m): 32.00
Managing Unit: LCSER     Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The long-term development objective of the proposed Land Administration
Project (PRODEP) is to improve the security of land tenure and thereby (i)
boost investment in agriculture, leading to productivity and income
growth; (ii) contribute to social fairness by focusing on the most
vulnerable groups (small farmers and indigenous people); (iii) promote the
sustainable use of natural resources; and (iv) increase revenue collection
at the municipal level, as a means to foster the decentralized provision
of services. It proposes to achieve this objective by regularizing
property rights, establishing a secure and legitimate land rights regime,
and improving land administration services provision. This process will
facilitate elimination of overlapping land claims, pending legal
revisions, extremely centralized and ineffective services delivery (i.e.
titling, registration), land related conflicts, non-sustainable land use
patterns, and other property problems. This will also facilitate and
accelerate the incorporation of regularized property rights in the
country's official land records. In Nicaragua, this task is considerable
since an estimated 60 percent of all properties lack proper
documentation.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Before launching a massive national land rights regularization program, a
suitable land administration framework needs to be established. This is
the focus of the proposed five-year project, whose medium-term objectives
are to develop the legal, institutional, and technical framework for the
administration of property rights, and to demonstrate the feasibility of a
systematic land rights regularization program, initially in the rural
areas where the majority of the poor reside. The project would provide
bridge financing between the Agriculture Technology and Land Management
Project (ATLMP- completed in June 2000) and a possible future National
Property Regularization Program.
PRODEP would build on the experience gained by the ATLMP, through the
execution of a land titling component, a small cadastre pilot,
improvements in the Public Registry, and three extensive research studies.
It would establish, over a five-year period, the administrative and
technical framework required for the clarification and recording of land
rights, test and validate a more integrated process of ownership
regularization/conflict resolution/property registration in three priority
departments, and create a dialogue among key stakeholders for the
formulation of a land policy that would address land administration issues



(e.g. administration service fees, regularization of the lands of
indigenous and ethnic communities, land access, and allocation of
remaining national lands, and taxation). The three priority departments
were selected for their high tenure insecurity and high poverty
incidence. The end result of these actions would be the adoption of a
methodology for a systematic regularization of properties and a
strengthening of the foundation on which to build a sustainable, equitable
and more comprehensive massive program.
The Project, to be carried out over a five-year period, is both
institutional building and transitional in the sense that it will develop
a more coherent and technically superior approach to systematic land
rights regularization and administration. It entails the development of a
policy, legal, institutional and technical framework for the clarification
and registration of land rights by: promoting the analysis and discussion
of national land policies and programs; upgrading the property rights
regularization and administration framework; and reforming the
corresponding legal framework.
The project would support substantial dialogue between government and
civil society to establish a better and more sustainable foundation for
policy, legal and institutional reforms. Key Government institutions (the
Intendance for titling and clarifying property rights, INETER for
producing and maintaining the mapping of properties, and the Public
Registry for recording and updating property rights) will be modernized
and decentralized, and their procedures simplified in order to provide
better client services. Alternative conflict resolution mechanisms
through informal mediation will be favored. Participation of other
actors, including private service providers (for surveys and legal work),
producer and other grassroots organizations (for communication and
dissemination campaigns, and conflict resolution), and municipalities (for
the urban cadastre and territorial management) will be promoted. An
Integrated Information System (SIICAR) will be established at departmental
level, with a one-to-one relationship between the graphical database of
INETER and the alphanumerical database of the Public Registry.
The new approach to land rights regularization and indigenous land rights
recognition and protection will be developed in four parallel activities:
(i) the validation of a systematic parcel-based legal cadastral process in
the three priority departments of EstelU, Madriz and Chinandega selected
as the demonstration areas. This includes mapping and geodetic network,
legal cadastre, clarifying legal rights, conflicts resolution, and
property registration. This methodology, to be applied and fine tuned
over the life of the project, would pave the way for the future expansion
of the regularization program in the rest of the Pacific and Central
Regions of Nicaragua; ii) in these three priority departments, the
demarcation and consolidation of existing protected areas; (iii) an
appropriately designed demarcation, titling and registration of selected
15 indigenous territories and communities in the Autonomous Regions (RAAN
and RAAS), where indigenous territorial claims predominate along with the
communal land claims of Garifuna and creole populations and individual
landholdings. The scope of activities in the RAAN and RAAS will include
the elaboration of Territorial Management Plans and the formulation of
subprojects for their implementation; and (iv) the processing of the
backlog of titling requests in the reform sector (OTR) and in the
- 2-



peri-urban areas (OTU) outside the three selected departments, in an
accelerated manner made possible by a simplified methodology.
The scope of PRODEP is essentially rural. Financing for land
regularization in the four larger cities of the three departments will be
excluded, they will only receive technical assistance. All other towns
and smaller urban settlements will be included. In recognition of the
fundamental role of the municipalities both in the regularization process
and in land administration in the long run, the project will encompass a
sub-component to support capacity building on this level.
In order to make progress in the resolution of key indigenous issues, such
as the adoption of a legal framework and the resolution of conflicts on
the ground, PRODEP will support the implementation of an Indigenous
People's Strategy for the legal recognition and on-the-ground demarcation
of indigenous land rights, as well as for the improvement of the community
capacity related to the understanding and exercise of land and natural
resources rights.
Given the innovative nature of some of the project activities (land rights
regularization, and indigenous territorial demarcation and management
plans in particular), the project will be executed in two distinct phases,
separated by the mid-term evaluation, which will be the opportunity to
refine procedures and revise the Project Operation Manual.
Components:
A. Policy and legal reforms
B. Institutional strengthening and decentralization
C. Titling and regularization services
D. Demarcation and consolidation of protected areas
E. Demarcation of indigenous territories
F. Information systems
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project's components A (Policy and Legal Reforms), B (Institutional
Strengthening and Decentralization), and F (Information Systems) are
nationwide in scope. Components C (Titling and Regularization Services)
and D (Demarcation and Consolidation of Protected Areas) will be carried
out in the three pilot Departments of EstlU, Madriz, and Chinandega.
Component E (Demarcation of Indigenous Territories) will be implemented in
the RAAN, RAAS, and BOSAWAS areas on Nicaragua's Atlantic side, and in
several relatively small areas on the Pacific side.
The proposed Project will clarify the legal status and demarcate 11
existing Protected Areas in the Departments of Chinandega (5), EstelU (5),
Madriz (1), along with one or more new protected areas which might be
established (pending further studies) in these priority departments.
Indigenous communities are mainly concentrated in the Atlantic coast,
which has separate legislation of autonomy for their governance. In 1996,
-3 -



the indigenous population was estimated to be 183,000 inhabitants,
including Miskito, Mayagna, GarUfuna and Rama. The legal recognition and
demarcation of indigenous communal lands will make an important
contribution to preserving the lifestyle and cultural values of
Nicaragua's indigenous communities and ethnic groups and, through their
actions, protect the Atlantic Region's rich natural resources.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: A detailed Environmental Analysis can be found in Annex 11 of
the PAD and has been also sent separately to the Info Shop.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The Project has been designed to ensure compliance with the Bank's
Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Cultural Property, Indigenous
Peoples, and Involuntary Resettlement Policies. The Project does not
trigger any other Bank Safeguard.
The overall environmental impacts of the project (positive or negative)
cover primarily land use, including conservation versus deforestation or
other land use changes. On balance, the proposed project is expected to
be highly positive from an environmental standpoint. The project will
promote conservation of forests and other natural habitats, both directly
through the strengthening of existing protected areas and indirectly
through the demarcation and titling of indigenous reserves on the Atlantic
side.
The potential adverse environmental impacts of land regularization, along
with the planned mitigation measures, are summarized in the table below
(section II.D.2.).
Resettlement issues were carefully examined as part of the social
assessment. The study concluded that involuntary physical displacement
should be avoided in order to minimize major social conflict. To address
- 4 -



possible identified scenarios the GON prepared a Process Framework and a
revised version will be presented as a condition for negotiations.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Indigenous and other land regularization in protected areas (such as
BOSAWAS) and other forested areas will be carried out in accordance with
the Bank's Indigenous Peoples, Natural Habitats, and Involuntary
Resettlement Polices.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
On balance, the Project's long-term environmental and social impacts are
expected to be highly positive.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Potential Adverse Environmental Impacts Ways to Address Impacts
Deforestation in Anticipation of Land Titling    The project would seek to discourage
this practice through a public information campaign which would emphasize,
inter alia, that deforestation is neither necessary nor sufficient to
claim possession or ownership of a parcel of land. This campaign, along
with other regularization and demarcation activities, will be described in
the Project Operational Manual.
Increased Land Clearing from Greater Access to Capital Such induced land clearing
is not likely to be significant over the project cover area of Chinandega,
Esteli, and Madriz, which (except possibly the San Juan del Rio Coco area
of Madriz) are long-settled areas, away from Nicaragua's current
agricultural frontier. Improving land title security would not reduce
landowner's incentives to maintain those limited forest areas that remain,
either because they produce income or environmental services, or because
they occupy land that is poorly suited for cropland or even pasture.
Increased Migration to Forest Frontier Areas     Available evidence on human
migration within Nicaragua suggests that most colonists in the current
agricultural frontier come from those Departments which were the
agricultural frontier in the 1960s and 1970s. By contrast, migrations of
rural lands in Chinandega, Esteli, and Madriz are typically to urban areas
or to Costa Rica, such that no significant migration to forested areas is
likely to result from this project.
To effectively implement PRODEP, there would be no potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts. No involuntary physical
displacement or relocation of people would be required, and none will take
place as a part of this project. Nonetheless, the possibility remains
that some PRODEP activities to establish and consolidate protected areas
might materially affect the current livelihood's of some Nicaraguans
living within or adjacent to other special lands. A Process Framework
addresses these issues and outlines the criteria and procedures which
PRODEP will follow in such cases, to ensure that eligible, affected
persons are assisted in their efforts to restore or improve their
livelihoods in a manner which maintains the environmental sustainability
and territorial integrity of the relevant protected areas. PRODEP's
- 5-



Process Framework includes a series of steps which would mitigate adverse
livelihood-related impacts even if they existed; these steps include
socioeconomic studies, a census prior to demarcation, and special legal
resolutions in each scenario.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As described above, the borrower will address safeguard issues through
components D and E, through environmental provisions in the Project
Operational Manual, and through the project's Process Framework.
Environmental issues will be an integral part of project monitoring and
evaluation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders and target population includes landholders who suffer
from land tenure insecurity, including small to medium-sized agricultural
and/or commercial producers in rural and peri urban areas. Those with
greatest needs include the rural poor, landless households, women and
indigenous peoples.
Workshops were conducted during project preparation to reach consensus on
the Process Framework and the Environmental Analysis and to facilitate the
proper disclosure of project information. The project will assure the
effective participation of civil society and local governments through a
variety of measures to promote community participation and local capacity
building. Among the tools in the Project's Participation Plan is the
Participatory Impact Evaluation System, that will be implemented to
improve the prospects for effective social and institutional learning
processes in support of a national program.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      3/19/2001       2/12/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/19/2001       2/12/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
- 6 -



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      3/19/2001        6/20/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/15/2001         1/24/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available    12/21/2001
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/22/2001        1/24/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure          1/24/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop           12/13/2001
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. The Environmental Analysis is in Annex 11 of the PAD
(English)
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Isabel G. Lavadenz Paccieri      12/20/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        George Ledec     12/202001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Alonso Zarzar Casis
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Juan D. Quintero         12/20/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         John Redwood     12/20/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
Lucy Njuguna
M:\InfoShop - Tonya's weekly directories\January 11, 2002\I056018.txt
January 7, 2002 10:53 AM
Lucy Njuguna
M:\InfoShop - Tonya's weekly directories\January 11, 2002\I056018.txt
January 7, 2002 10:54 AM
-7-



