                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC154
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NICARAGUA                                              Project ID: P077826
Project: Broad-Based Access to Financial Services               Task Team Leader: Michael J. Goldberg
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 15, 2003                      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 10, 2003                                IDA Amount ($m): 7.50
Managing Unit: LCSFR                                            Sector: Micro- and SME finance (75%); General
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)             finance sector (25%)
Status: Lending                                                 Theme: Rural markets (P); Other financial and
                                                                private sector development (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to improve access to a range of financial services by low income
households and small and microbusinesses in underserved areas, and to lower related transaction costs.
To achieve this project development objective, the project concept focuses on three areas directly related
to access to financial services provided by sustainable financial institutions: (i) legal and regulatory
framework and supervision issues for microfinance and microcredit, (ii) restructuring and strengthening
of the Financiera Nicaraguense de Inversiones (the Government's second tier financial institution), and
(iii) the development of an incentives and capacity building system to promote the increased outreach of
private financial institutions (including NGOs, banks, finance companies, cooperatives and credit
unions) in underserved markets.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project has three components, which all contribute directly to the Project Development Objective.
These components include: (i) Legal and Regulatory Framework and Supervision, (ii) Strengthening of
the FNI (the government's second tier financial institution), and (iii) Outreach Expansion through
Capacity Building.

Legal and Regulatory Framework and Supervision. The component will help the Superintendency of
Banks and Other Financial Institutions (SBIF) to establish and implement a set of prudential norms and
related policies to insure the sound development of non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), including
microfinance and microcredit institutions. This will be achieved through the provision of specialized
technical assistance to address legal and regulatory framework issues for microfinance and microcredit
institutions, given the different risk profiles that such institutions and portfolios represent. Some of the
changes would include a phasing in of minimum capital requirements for non-governmental organization
microcredit institutions seeking to transform into regulated financial institutions, adjustments to borrower
guarantee requirements, and taxation issues. The component will also strengthen the credit information
system of the SBIF, addressing bank confidentiality regulations and concerns and linking the SBIF credit
information system to private credit information systems, incorporating credit information from all
NBFIs that have access to funds from Government sources (such as the FNI, as described below). This
will enable the SBIF to ensure that all private credit information systems meet the requirements of
Article 111 of teh Banking Law, and are linked to the central SBIF system.

Institutional Strengthening of the Financiera Nicaraguense de Inversiones (FNI). This component will

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS



assist the FNI to develop a risk-based credit line for non-bank financial institutions, particulary
microcredit and microfinance institutions (including credit unions). This will replace, over time, the trust
fund (Fideicomiso) approach of the FNI, which administers credit lines for rural and microfinance for
third parties (principally bilateral and multilateral donors) without credit risk. Specifically, the
component will provide technical assistance and other support to assist FNI senior management to (i)
design the credit line (including eligiblity criteria, reporting requirements, and financial terms), (ii)
establish a monitoring system, (iii) implement the norms established by the SBIF for microfinance and
microcredit institutions, and (iv) conduct annual evaluations and strategic plans related to the new credit
line. The credit line will not be financed by the component, since there are sufficient funds from donors
and government programs to finance the estimated $20 million needs of qualified microfinance and
microcredit institutions in the next five years. (This component has been designed in close collaboration
with the Inter-American Development Bank (Multilateral Investment Fund) to insure complementarity,
since a recent IDB loan and grant have been provided to the FNI to improve (i) overall strategic planning
and (ii) the existing commercial bank credit line).

Outreach Expansion and MFI Capacity Building. This component focuses on the capacity building of
retail MFI operations, providing fee-based services directly to experienced microfinance and microcredit
institutions (including credit unions). The services to be provided will vary by the type of client
institution involved. For commercial banks and finance companies,

Five types of support will be provided: (i) fee-based technical training courses for middle level and
senior management, (ii) matching grants for institutional strengthening and small scale outreach
expansion investments technical assistance, (iii) seminars, exchanges, and sector and regional market
studies, (iv) specialized training for industry support services (such as auditors, information systems
experts, local rating firms, and technical trainers), and (v) donor coordination and best practice training
in rural and microfinance.



Components -- Detailed Description:

Legal and Regulatory Framework and Supervision
1.1 Supervision of micro and small-scale finance
This component will support the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions (SBIF) to
implement new prudential norms related to micro finance. As micro credit is a specialized activity,
portfolio quality and institutional risk evaluations are significantly different for institutions which
engage in micro lending. The technical assistance activities under this component will thus include
strengthening for on site and off site inspection capabilities, among other micro finance monitoring and
evaluation activities. It will also strengthen the ability of the SBIF to supervise the FNI, which would
increase its exposure to institutions specialized in micro lending.

1.2 Regulatory and supervision framework for financial cooperatives

This sub-component will develop a detailed legal, regulatory and development framework and involve
extensive consensus building efforts with government stake-holders to bring the effort before the national
assembly, or, barring passage, to enable informal institutions to remain, so long as they adhere to limited
activities. What is most needed, however, is a more transparent path for institutions seeking to transform
from microcredit institutions to supervised microfinance institutions using the existing "sociedad
financiera" framework.

                                                      3
                                                                                                           ISDS




1.3 Credit information system
The precise activities to be undertaken have yet to be defined under this subcomponent but the assistance
would be targeted towards helping the SBIF and the Central Bank upgrade there systems and improve
their capacity to monitor credit quality and institutional exposure to individual debtors. At the same
time, a system which allows the creation of private bureaus which can enrich the SBIF and Central Bank
systems and which includes information on clients of unsupervised financial institutions and other types
of credit providers would be developed.



2. Institutional Strengthening of the FNI
Under the proposed project, FNI will assume the credit risk of its lending to MFIs (see project framework
and expected benefits in Figure 1 below). (For an assessment of the potential impact of FNI's lending to
Microfinance Institutions on the overall Nicaraguan banking system, see Annex 4a). If FNI commits its
own resources and risks its own net worth to finance activities of institutions not supervised by the
SBIOF, it should limit its exposure to these institutions. Suggested criteria to limit FNI exposure in the
microfinance field include: (i) no more than 4% of FNI net worth can be lent to non-supervised
institutions and 6% to supervised institutions, (ii) no more than 25% of an MFI's portfolio can be
financed by FNI, and (iii) each MFI cannot borrow more than twice its equity. Additional limitations may
be put on cooperatives to avoid high leverage of member savings and shares. The application of these
limitations, combined with projected growth of the MFIs, finds that FNI could lend about US$18.3
million to the microfinance market in the next five years (see Annex 4 for detailed demand projections).
For FNI to successfully increase its market in the microfinance field (i.e., increase its portfolio in this
area from $3.1 million of administered funds to about $18 million in direct lending), a number of
conditions must be met (Table 2 below). (Figure 1 in Section C. of the PCD illustrates the flow of funds
and benefits at each level of the system, from donors and FNI to MFIs and their clients.)



3. Outreach Expansion and Capacity Building

This component would offer fee-based high quality training and technical assistance services to MFIs.
The services will vary by the type of client financial institution, including matching grants to finance part
of an institutional development plan (per Operational Policy 8.30 guidelines), specialized technical
training to the MFI sector, and limited one-time subsidies for outreach expansion by regulated,
supervised financial institutions. Activities would be organized in four areas.

Outreach expansion for supervised financial institutions
For commercial banks and finance companies (supervised by the SBIF), technical assistance would be
provided to provide expand outreach without sacrificing institutional soundness. Examples of technical
assistance topics include market and product development, technological innovation (to improve
efficiency), loan processing and supervision strategies, and risk management strategies. One-time
subsidies for outreach expansion may be provided to expand branch coverage (such as for windows,
mobile units, or mini-branches). For NGO MFIs that meet FNI prudential norms, technical assistance and
the outreach expansion subsidies would be provided to assist in the transformation process and
expansion.

Improving commercial viability of unsupervised MFIs and cooperatives.
For NGO MFIs that do not meet FNI requirements and the SBIF special MFI norms, technical assistance
and specialized courses would be provided in areas such as             financial management systems, loan
portfolio tracking and internal controls. For savings and loan cooperatives, technical assistance and

                                                        4
                                                                                                         ISDS



training based on international best practices will be provided on a fee basis. Once the legal and
regulatory framework and supervision issues are addressed, additional support for outreach expansion
could be provided.

Strengthening local support service providers
The component would offer specialized training for industry support services (such as auditors,
information systems experts, local rating firms, and technical trainers).

Monitoring access to financial services
The component would also be responsible for donor coordination and monitoring activities (focused on
transaction costs and access). Finally, the component will also provide support (on a declining basis) to
the Central Bank's Economic Analysis Department, as it takes on an expanded monitoring role in rural
financial markets.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project geographic focus will be secondary cities and surrounding rural settlements. The project does
not target environmentally fragile areas. The project would reach out to microfinance institutions and
financial services cooperatives in areas with high concentrations of indigenous people including RAAS and
RAAN (such as Pana Pana in Waslala). The project operational manual would set transparent promotional
processes for project activities (such as technical training courses, technical assistance, one-time outreach
expansion subsidies). The PHRD grant includes a census of the microfinance institutions in the country, and
would be used largely to identify smaller ones in more remote areas that could be supported by project
services (particularly the Outreach Expansion Component)


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: The QAT memo of March 19 classified this project as a "C".


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,

                                                      5
                                                                                                        ISDS



describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No safeguard issues have been identified for this technical assistance loan.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None identified.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Participating microfinance institutions (whether receiving credit from FNI or participating in Outreach
activities) would be required to provide their clients with information related to the subloan negative list
(to be included in the project operational manual, and adapted from one already approved for the Mexico
Southeast Regional Development Project), the pesticides/insectcides and other inputs that are not to be
purchased with loan proceeds (based on the WHO list). Although the project has been designated as a
"C" for environmental safeguards, it is expected that the midterm evaluation of the project would include
a review of impacts (including environmental, gender, indigenous peoples) of impacts, if supervision
missions and PCU monitoring reveal any safeguard-related issues.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During project preparation and early implementation, orientation sessions are planned with key
stakeholders (including a range of Government agencies, private sector institutions representing medium,
small and microbusinesses, microfinance institutions and financial service cooperatives) to review
project objectives, World Bank safeguards, project component and specific activities, and monitoring
systems to be put in place.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                          Expected        Actual

                                                    6
                                                                                                    ISDS



Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Michael J. Goldberg                                April 2, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                       03/18/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Susan G. Goldmark                                  03/12/2003

