                                 Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                          Report No: AC174
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/29/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NICARAGUA                                                 Project ID: P077822
Project: Forestry and Agroforestry Development Program Task Team Leader: Paola Agostini
(PROFORESTAL)
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 16, 2003                     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 13, 2004                                       IDA Amount ($m): 6.00
Managing Unit: LCSER                                               Sector: Forestry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)                   Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P)
Status:


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
A well-managed forest sector has a strong potential to contribute to economic growth, poverty alleviation,
biodiversity conservation and environmental sustainability in Nicaragua. Forested lands still cover a large part of the
country and their sustainable development could become a pillar of the rural economy. Furthermore, the areas of
greatest poverty in Nicaragua tend to correspond with areas of remaining forest (see maps in Annexes 5 and 6 of
PCD), so development in this sector will have an immediate impact on the alleviation of poverty in the poorest rural
areas of the country. Finally, forests in Nicaragua provide many environmental services, including conservation of
globally critical biodiversity, and the ongoing provision of these services depends on a well-managed sector. The
Government of Nicaragua (GoN) has proposed a Forestry and Agroforestry Development Program
(PROFORESTAL) to help achieve these goals.

PROFORESTAL is intended to minimize the country's current reliance on isolated donor-specific projects by
focusing on the preparation and implementation of a single national program supported by many donors. This is in
line with the new World Bank Sectorwide Approach Programs (SWAps), which aim to improve donor support to
sector investment programs, based on a country's long-term vision for its development. SWAps have evolved from
the traditional investment project and are intended as a means to enhance development impact by scaling up,
building stronger donor partnerships in support of country-led sector reform programs, and improving the
performance of borrower institutions in managing all sector issues. In this context, the Forestry and Agroforestry
Development Program is intended to be the sub-sector Sectorwide Approach (SWAp) input into the more extensive
agricultural/forestry SWAp that is being developed by the Government of Nicaragua.

PROFORESTAL builds on the experience of the 1998-2002 Sustainable Forestry Investment Promotion Project
(PROFOR), a World Bank Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL), and the project experience of many other donors,
GTZ, FINNIDA, IDB, WWF and FAO. It also builds on the experience of the GEF Atlantic Biological Corridor
Project and is partially blended with the new GEF Transfrontier Corazón Biosphere Reserve Project to be
implemented in Nicaragua and Honduras. The Program is conceived by the Government as a two-phase program
over the next twelve years during which donor support is increasingly coordinated and pooled, critical institutional
reforms will be completed, the forestry private sector will be strengthened, forest-related businesses will be
developed, best practices in both use and conservation of forests will be scaled up, biodiversity will be protected and
significant contributions will be made to alleviate poverty in the poorest rural areas of the country through income
and employment generation (Phase I, Establishment 2004--2009; Phase II, Consolidation 2009--2014).

Objective of Phase I of the Program
The objective of Phase I of this multi-donor program is to modernize and consolidate public and private institutions
capable of developing a forestry sector that is sustainable, responsible and competitive.

                                                             2
                                                                                                                    ISDS




Objective of World Bank Investment
The World Bank contribution to the multi-donor Program will be US$6 million that is currently allocated to the
Bank's Agricultural Technology Project (ATP), but which has been redirected to the forestry sector for the
Competitive Forest Development Fund since the ATP received new funds from The Netherlands Government.
The proposed World Bank Investment will finance Component 5 (Competitive Forest Fund) of the Program (see
Project Description). The Development Objective of this component is to establish and implement a transparent and
competitive financial mechanism for investment in the forest sector. The Competitive Forest Fund would finance, on
a cost-sharing basis, a program of grants for reforestation and sustainable forest management sub-projects.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Phase I of PROFORESTAL, to be supported by the Bank investment and other donor resources, consists of the
following five components:

 i. Institution-building in the public sector
ii. Sustainable management of natural forests
iii. Sustainable plantation and agro-silvopastoral production systems (Trees Outside Forests Program)
iv. Sustainable private sector development
 v. FONADEFO (Competitive Forest Development Fund)


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Certain components (see I.A.3.), such as institution-building of public institutions, sustainable private sector
development, and the Competitive Forest Development Fund, are of a national scope. Other components, such as
sustainable management of natural forests and forest plantations and sustainable agro-silvo-pastoral productions
systems, will be targeted to specific geographical areas of the country. There are going to be conservation units in the
vicinity of proposed project sites; these are being or are already mapped to avoid any potential conflict. Management
plans will be prepared and implemented for BOSAWAS reserve by the GEF project. Interventions in areas of
cultural sensitivity such as archeological sites are not anticipated.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Although this project triggers various safeguard policies, the project does have low potential for generating
negative environmental or social impacts. It is expected to be highly beneficial environmentally, as it will promote
conservation of areas important for biodiversity. Moreover, by supporting the forestry sector in general, it will lead
eventually to more standing forests that can provide an array of environmental services improving people's livelihoods.

                                                                3
                                                                                                                      ISDS




C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on     for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                          Policy                                                 Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                                    Yes      No       TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                            Yes      No       TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                             Yes      No       TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                               Yes      No       TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                           Yes      No       TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                            Yes      No       TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                   Yes      No       TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                                       Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                            Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                                 Yes      No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project could have unintended minor negative environmental impacts from investments in reforestation, forest
management, or even conservation. Supporting the establishment of plantations, could generate negative
environmental impacts due to the use of chemicals in tree nurseries and during seedling establishment stage.
Therefore an Environmental Assessment (EA), as well as two specialized studies (on Sustainable Natural Forest
Management and on Establishment of Forest Plantations) are being undertaken by the borrower as part of project
preparation activities. The above mentioned studies will define if the possible impacts will require the OP 4.09 (Pest
Management) to be trigged and if so, define what impact may occur and what steps need to be followed in order to
mitigate these.

The project would finance forest management plans, land-use planning and other studies to help rationalize forestry
activities. Such planning often includes creating set-asides for wildlife, watershed protection and other purposes as
well as identifying land suitable for forest management. No road-building or other major infrastructure required for
forest extraction or any other purpose is contemplated.

Every project support to individuals or communities would follow all national laws and guidelines with regard to
forestry operations including obtaining all necessary permits. The project would not finance forestry operations such
as felling, transport, processing, etc., if required certification standards are not in place (see OP 4.36). The project
would support non-timber forest products use, based on studies on the ecology and reproduction of plant and animal
materials that might be exploited, showing that no major impact will be caused (e.g. habitat protection and
conservation of rare and/or endangered species). The GoN (MARENA - Ministry of the Environment and of
Natural Resources) has conservation biologists who will screen projects that present potential adverse impacts. The
project would not make investments inside of any conservation units or buffer zones unless adequate mitigation
measures are going to be put in place and management plans are elaborated.

The borrower is conducting a Social Assessment (SA) as part of project preparation. The reports intention is to
analyze the project's social impacts and long-term social viability. It is expected that this study will confirm that the

                                                           4
                                                                                                                  ISDS



proposed project will have an impact on indigenous people and therefore an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan
(IPDP) will need to be prepared. This plan intends to identify the specific benefits and potential negative impacts on
indigenous communities.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Potential cumulative impacts will be evaluated within the EA being prepared by the borrower.


II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Potential long-term impacts associated with project activities will be evaluated within the EA and SA being prepared
by the borrower.


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not required


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project will adopt the same rules and guidelines established for subproject environmental scooping as have been
used under the current IDA-financed PROFOR and Agricultural Technology Projects. The results of the social and
environmental assessments currently being prepared by the borrower will also propose and evaluate specific
measures to ensure compliance with applicable safeguard policies. If appropriate the Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan will propose and evaluate necessary compliance requirements.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Bank's new forest policy (OP 4.36 Forests) promotes the active involvement of people living in and near forest
areas in all aspects of the management, conservation, and sustainable development of their natural forests. The key
stakeholders, previously identified as being: i) indigenous communities; ii) farmers; iii) consumers of wood; iv)
consumers of other environmental services such as water; and v) commercial timber dealers and processors, will
participate in the preparation of the environmental and social assessments. They will further participate in
consultation workshops in the course of the project preparation as reflected in the Project Implementation Plan.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

                                                    5
                                                                                                  ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            12/1/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        12/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive      Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            12/1/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        12/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12/1/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Paola Agostini                                     06/05/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Ricardo L. B. Tarifa/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:    Juan Pablo Ruiz/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                                       06/24/03
Sector Manager/Director              John Redwood                                       06/24/03

