ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                         AWortd Frae of Povcrky
-lnfoShop
'd1 A  , fW},
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/21/2002                                 25148
Section I - Basic Information                                   November 21, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NIGERIA                               Project ID: P076754
Project: Delta Development Project             Task Team Leader: Wendy E. Hughes
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 26, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 5, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 25.00
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Sector: Sub-national government administration
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  (55%); General information and communications
Status: Lending                                sector (15%); Micro- and SME finance (15%); Other
social services (15%)
Theme: Civic engagement; participation and
community driven development (P); Decentralization
(P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To assist the Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) in becoming an effective regional
development institution, with built-in mechanisms for accountability to beneficiaries.
NDDC was established by an act of the National Assembly in 2000. Its broad mandate includes
bringing about infrastructure development in the Niger Delta area and, more generally, catalyzing
and facilitating development in the region, including formulating policies and guidelines to
promote development. As stated in the enabling act of the NDDC, the commission is to receive
15% equivalent of the statutory allocation of the 9 member States from the Federal allocation and
3% of the budget of Oil and Gas Companies and from the Joint Venture Equity. It is possible
that the 9 Niger Delta States will also contribute to funding NDDC. The proposed project would
focus on strengthening NDDC and its civil society partners, particularly Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) and Community-based Organizations, so that the resources that are made
available to NDDC for development of the region are used as effectively as possible, with a
sustainable impact on poverty reduction. Strengthening civil society organizations to partner
with NDDC is a step toward developing a mechanism for accountability to the beneficiaries.
I.A.3. Project Description:
(i) NDDC Institutional Strengthening Component.



2
ISDS
The goal of this component would be to help create a professionally-staffed and
well-performing institution that is recognized as a major positive influence and partner in the
Niger Delta region, and is engaged in active and constructive partnerships with all stakeholders.
(a) Strategy Development and Capacity-building.
This sub-component would include: (i) identification of NDDC's core functions and
prioritization of other functions listed in the NDDC Act, based on a review of NDDC's role and
institutional relationships with the other key actors; (ii) development of a strategy to position
NDDC to perform the core functions, including clear performance targets and indicators; (iii)
capacity and training needs assessment and capacity building program in line with the strategy;
(iv) a change management program to reorient NDDC staff to a new management culture
characterized by partnerships, client orientation, results orientation and accountability; (v) design
and implementation of a Management Information System; and (vi) a Staff Exchange Program
and possible twinning arrangement between NDDC and a similar Delta Development
Commission. It is expected that capacity building will be carried out in core public management
and governance areas of strategic planning, budgeting and financial management, procurement,
human resource development, project analysis, management, monitoring and evaluation,
communications, and mechanisms for accountability. In addition, it is expected that there will be
technical capacity building in areas identified as priority areas for NDDC. For example, this
would include environmental and social safeguards (discussed in the next sub-component),
conflict resolution, participatory and community-driven development approaches, public/private
participation in infrastructure and HIV/AIDS awareness. The specific areas will be determined
based on the strategy.
(b) Environment and social issues.
The Act establishing NDDC mandates the commission to "tackle ecological and environmental
problems that arise from the exploration of oil mineral and advise the Federal Government and
member states on the prevention and control of oil spillages, gas flaring and environmental
pollution". NDDC is also mandated to "identify factors inhibiting the development of the Niger
Delta area and assist the member states in the formulation and implementation of policies to
ensure sound and efficient management of the resources of the Niger Delta States". As specified
in the law, NDDC has created a Directorate of Environmental Protection and Control. The
Director is the Head of the Project Coordination Unit for the World Bank-assisted project.
NDDC has prepared an initial outline of a program for addressing environmental issues including
environmental assessment, inventorisation of impacted areas, environmental audits, remediation
and contingency planning. As part of the development of the Master Plan, NDDC will
commission studies of the biodiversity, natural resources and water resources in the region.
Potential regional environment-related roles for NDDC include: (i) monitoring of compliance
with federal and state environmental regulations, environmental education and information
sharing, periodic studies to identify and assess environmental issues; (ii) providing
recommendations to the Federal and State Governments regarding environmental and social
safeguards policy, mediation in environment impact-related disputes; and (iii) providing an



3
ISDS
example for government and private sector in terms of developing and implementing
environmental and social safeguards policy. This sub-component of the project will include:
* Development of an NDDC Environmental and Social Management policy framework,
including a resettlement policy framework. This will provide guidance on environmental and
social safeguards including impact assessments, mitigation and compensation strategies. The
work will include review of NDDC's policies and guidelines in the context of the legal and
regulatory framework and social safeguards and assessment policy in Nigeria - both at the
federal and state level. This policy framework will help define NDDC's role relative to other
agencies with responsibilities for environmental and social safeguards, and would guide the
design and implementation of NDDC's activities and projects. The framework would also
specifically provide guidelines on environmental and social issues associated with
community-scale "micro-projects", for example, initial screening, assessments, and design of
projects to avoid unwanted consequences, monitoring, and environmental management plans
(EMPs).
* Follow up to the environmental and natural resource studies to be undertaken as part of the
development of the regional Master Plan, including economic evaluation of strategy options
and integration of environmental and social issues into the overall strategy for sustainable
development with a poverty-reduction focus.
* Technical assistance and capacity building to enable NDDC to carry out its defined role. This
would include training of teams within the Directorate for Environmental Protection and
Control on environmental and social impact assessment for both large scale projects that
NDDC might finance directly, and micro-projects to be implemented by communities with
NDDC funding.
* Training for NDDC's partners, including training for civil society organizations in
environmental impact screening, assessment, mitigation and environmental management
plans in community-scale projects, and increased awareness of community rights under
existing environmental regulations.
*   Development of a public information resource center for environment and social issues. The
GIS system being developed as part of the Master Plan process will be a valuable tool in
storing and analyzing data on environment and social issues.
* Support for NDDC's role as a regional mediator in potential conflict situations arising from
concerns about environmental and/or social impacts. This would include financing expert
advisors, both technical and in mediation/conflict resolution, and provision for supporting
stakeholder discussions, workshops etc.
(c) Support for the Master Plan.
In December 2001, NDDC launched an ambitious 18-month program to produce a Master Plan
for the Development of the Niger Delta. The process involves consultations with stakeholders



4
ISDS
from the state governors to the community level. It will include detailed sectoral studies
(information gathering and strategy development) in key sectors. This sub-component could
include support for workshops aimed at exposing a wide range of stakeholders to international
development experience in specific areas targeted in the Master Plan. The workshops would be
an integral part of the Master Plan consultation process and would be linked to the sectoral
studies and subsequent strategy development. The World Bank Institute (WBI) will be a partner
in developing this program. The WBI could also assist in planning a program of study tours
linked to training workshops as part of an awareness and consensus-building initiative for a range
of stakeholders. The component could include financing for some of the sectoral studies.
NDDC together with their consultant coordinating the Master Plan process, will propose
additional areas of support for the development and implementation of the Master Plan.
(ii) Communications Component
The goal of the communication component would be to assist the NDDC in developing a policy,
strategy, action plan and institutional mechanisms to promote dialogue, consensus-building and
the active participation of the multiple stakeholders in the development of the Niger Delta
Region, with a particular focus on the beneficiary populations. After a communications audit to
assess the efforts already in place, five major activities could be envisaged under this component:
(a) Internal communication - to build trust through dialogue and regular information exchange
between Board, management and staff of the Commission at its Headquarters and State offices;
(b) External Affairs - to respond to the need for information by the various external groups and
institutions involved with or interested in NDDC programs. These include the media, advocacy
NGOs, academics, government policy-makers at national and local levels, the private sector, etc.;
(c) Program/Project Support Communication - to advise on the design and implementation of
communication strategies and campaigns to elicit beneficiary input and feedback regarding
programs and projects funded by NDDC and to provide information to civil society about
plamied and on-going development projects and programs. This would include periodic surveys
and impact assessments.
(d) ANGO Liaison and Partnership Development- to actively liaise with the agencies and
organizations willing to partner with NDDC in the execution of projects and programs.
(e) Communication Infrastructure and Information Centers - communication infrastructure to
promote efficient information delivery systems, particularly in the rural areas. This could
include: (i) establishment of a public information center at NDDC designed to facilitate remote
access; (ii) computer-based information network system between the NDDC Headquarters and
its State offices; (iii) pilot Community Radio stations in selected isolated areas; and (iv) pilot
series of Community Information Centers.
(iii) Partnerships and Empowering Beneficiaries
The goal of this component would be to strengthen partners and partnerships to foster ownership



5
ISDS
and sustainability, demonstrate delivery mechanisms that will facilitate beneficiary-driven project
design and implementation, and unlock the potential of the small and medium scale private
sector. This would include:
(a) NGO/CBO Development, Capacity building and Networking. NGO/CBO Development,
Capacity building and Networking. This sub-component will include capacity-building for
NGOs, (for example in fiduciary capacity, project identification, preparation of proposals, project
monitoring and evaluation, training in business skills, micro-finance administration,
communications), and the development of an NGO Resource Center, with communication
facilities. Further definition of this sub-component will be done in close collaboration with
NGOs and CBOs.
(b) Demonstration of the Social Fund service delivery mechanism. Demonstration of the Social
Fund service delivery mechanism. Under this sub-component NDDC would pilot a social fund
program through provision of grants to community-based organizations and non-government
organizations based on proposals of interventions (micro-projects) in the area of social and
economic infrastructure, identified and designed by community members and to be implemented
by them and/or in partnership with NGOs.
(c) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) development.
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) development. The goal of this sub-component
would be to : (i) assist NDDC in developing a strategy and implementation plan for the
promotion of MSMEs; (ii) enhance NDDC's internal capacity and expertise; (iii) assist NDDC to
develop a series of SME projects that can have a demonstration effect; and (iv) define NDDC's
information dissemination role in this area. NDDC could play an important role in supporting
MSMEs growth by creating an enabling environment. This will require identification of state
and federal government policy constraints, and a plan to address the constraints through
information dissemination, stakeholder consultation and demonstrations. NDDC's regional role
and mandate would allow NDDC to play a bridging role between the government and the private
sector.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Cieographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Niger Delta consists of 9 States: Cross River, Akwa Ibom, Rivers, Bayelsa, Delta, Edo, Imo,
Abia and Ondo. The population of the Niger Delta is estimated at about 13 million. 70% of the
population lives in rural communities. The 1996 Federal Office of Statistics household survey
put the poverty incidence of the south-south region at 58.2%. The region, along with the
southeast and the southwest, accounts for the highest severity of poverty in Nigeria. Available
statistics on literacy levels, access to and usage of health services, access to safe water and
unemployment confirm the impoverished situation of inhabitants of the region.
The Niger Delta is one of the world's largest wetlands and includes coastal barrier islands,
mangroves, freshwater swamp forests and lowland rainforests. Over 60% of Nigeria's mangrove
forest (third largest in the world and largest in Africa) are found in the Niger Delta. Over 80% of



6
ISDS
the Niger Delta is seasonally flooded.
This high incidence of poverty is in sharp contrast to the region's critical importance to Nigeria. It
is the primary source of oil and gas, which account for 80% of total government revenue. Not
surprisingly, the situation in the Niger Delta has attracted national and international attention.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
The project will not finance any significant infrastructure investment and is not expected to result
in any significant negative environmental or social impacts. However the project is located in a
region prone to social unrest in part related to concerns over environmental and social impacts.
The project is designed to support institutional strengthening of NDDC, the project implementing
agency. NDDC will finance infrastructure projects, with environmental and social implications.
NDDC will also likely play a role in mediating disputes and facilitating stakeholder consultation
with respect to projects or programs in the region with controversial environmental or social
impacts. Because of NDDC's activities and role in the region, the project is classified as a
category B.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                  0 Yes C No   C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                     0 Yes C' No  * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                             C' Yes 0 No   * TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                               ! Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   Yes   uNo  * TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     C Yes * No    3 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                Yes 4 No   0 TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                Yes * No   CD TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         0 Yes * No     . TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       0 Yes * No   C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are envisioned as a result of the
proj ect.
As part of the proposed project, NDDC would pilot a social fund program through provision of
grants to community-based organizations and non-governnent organizations based on proposals
of interventions (micro-projects) in the area of social and economic infrastructure, identified and



7
ISDS
designed by community members and to be implemented by them and/or in partnership with
NGOs. Selection of micro-projects will be demand-driven by communities, so specific projects
have not yet been determined. They could include small infrastructure projects such as buildings,
small roads, clinics, etc. with typical impacts such as construction camps, spills, waste, etc. The
project will also help strengthen NDDC's role as a facilitator of the development of the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) sector. The social fund and MSME components could
indirectly result in local impacts typical of small infrastructure (construction camps, waste etc)
and small-scale business activities (for example, the effects of feeds or medications in fish
farming), although the specific projects and impacts are unknown at this time. It is also possible
that there could be some cumulative impacts if there are multiple investments in the same sort of
enterprise.
The NDDC Environmental and Social Management policy framework will specifically provide
guidelines on environmental and social issues (including resettlement) associated with
community-scale "micro-projects", as noted in the above project description. The project will
fund capacity building both within NDDC and for civil society partners (e.g. NGOs and CBOs)
to assist communities to assess potential environmental impacts during the preparation and
design of micro-project proposals. In this way, communities will include EA concerns and any
necessary mitigation measures in the design of micro-project proposals. Guidelines and training
on environmental and social impact assessment, mitigation and management will be part of the
program for facilitating MSME development.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None identified at this time. It is possible that there could be some cumulative impacts if there
are multiple investments in the same sort of enterprise, as a result of the capacity-building under
the MSME sub-component.
1I.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The potential long term impact is an improved awareness, capacity and policy framework for
identifying, mitigating and managing environmental and social impacts of projects in the region.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Prior to appraisal NDDC will, with the assistance of consultants, develop and adopt an
Environmental and Social Management policy framework. See section B above.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Prior to appraisal NDDC will, with the assistance of consultants, develop and adopt an
Environmental and Social Management policy framework. As Section IA3 notes,
capacity-building for environment and social inputs and impact studies will be undertaken. The
goal of this activity is to enable the Directorate of Environmental Protection and Control to play
its full role in good environmental stewardship, and to oversee the remediation of past and future



8
ISDS
social and environmental impacts and liabilities, as determined by NDDC planning processes,
and in concert with other state, federal, and private stakeholders.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Development of the Environmental and Social Management policy framework will involve
participation of key stakeholders, including federal and state agencies responsible for
environmental and social safeguards and representatives of civil society, through direct
discussions and a stakeholders' workshop to discuss the proposed draft policy framework. Civil
society will be represented by NGOs and Community-based organizations at the workshop. The
policy framework will include a procedure and mechanism for consultation and disclosure to be
followed for all projects.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             4/4/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable



9
ISDS
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by        Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Wendy E. Hughes                              Nov. 19, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Serigne Omar Fye                        Nov. 21, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Dan R. Aronson/Person/World Bank        Nov. 20, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                          Nov. 21, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Scobey Richard G.                           Nov. 20, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEED8ACK    - SffE MAP        SHOWCASE      g



