Report No. 23985
Report No: I069892 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/12/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NIGERIA         Project ID: P069892
Global Supplemental ID: P071817
Project: Local Empowerment and Environmental Management Program           Task Team
Leader: Talib B. K. Esmail
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 4, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 30, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 105.10
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 8.10
Managing Unit: AFTR2     Sector: MC - Community Action Program
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The program is to be financed by IDA and GEF. The IDA components will have
following two inter-related project development objectives:
(1) Beneficiaries in the participating states will have planned,
co-financed, implemented and will be continuing to operate and maintain
environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive multi-sectoral
micro-projects.
(2) The institutional framework (at federal, state and local government
levels) for supporting environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive
development will have been strengthened.
The GEF Global objective is as follows:
(1) Management of the targeted protected areas will have improved,
resulting in increased species diversity within these areas;
(2) Beneficiaries within the support zones around targeted protected areas
will have planned, co-financed, implemented and are continuing to operate
and maintain environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive
micro-projects.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The components are as follows:
(i) Multi-sectoral Community-Driven Investments. This component will
finance direct investments in communities to implement their development
priorities, through a series of micro-projects included in Community
Development Plans (CDP). The CDPs will be evolved through a thorough
participatory process facilitated by Multi-sectoral Implementation Teams
(MITs) established by a State Program Support Unit (SPSU) and based in a
local government town near the targeted communities. NGOs, may also be
contracted by the SPSUs to act as MITs if they have sufficient capacity.
Communities of a social unit of 1,000 to 3,000 individuals will produce
their CDP within a budget envelop of US$ 50,000 (in equivalent Naira)
provided by the program. They will be required to elect a Community



Project Management Committee (CPMC) to represent the interests of the
community as a whole. The CPMC will be required to register themselves
with the local government, open a bank account in a local commercial bank.
The CPMC will manage and supervise the implementation of micro-project
works (e.g. renovation and rehabilitation of school buildings;
construction of new school buildings; construction or rehabilitation of
health centers; rehabilitation of rural feeder roads; water supply - bore
holes and hand pumps for wells, catchment tanks; alternative energy such
as photovoltaic driven water pumps; completion of a partially built
electricity distribution network, or rehabilitation of a network and
connection to the local Nigerian Electric Power Authority transformer;
agro-processing/cottage industries; erosion control measures, improved
agricultural and land management practices; drainage; private and public
sanitation facilities; solid waste management; markets - constructions of
small stalls, construction of shelter for stalls, etc.). Funds will be
transferred to the CPMC bank account in tranches for each micro-project by
the SPSU. Release of subsequent tranches will require verification by the
Local Government Review Committee (LGRC), SPSU and/or MIT that
environmental management plans and mitigation measures are being addressed
during implementation of works.
(ii) Local Government Assessment and Capacity Building. This component
aims to build local government capacity for budget formulation, execution
and reporting. It will include an initial assessment of the current
capacity of LGAs in each of the states involved in the LEEMP, and a
ranking of the LGAs with most capacity to participate in the Program. For
those LGAs that do not qualify for participation, this component will
conduct training to help build their capacity to enable them to
participate in the future.
(iii) Protected Area and Biodiversity Management Component. GEF will
finance the incremental costs of activities which have global benefits,
consistent with the goals of the National Biodiversity Strategy.
Activities under this component will aim to strengthen institutional and
organizational capacity of a number of agencies for effective
participatory protected area management in four selected protected areas
and their support zones. This component will also support micro-projects
for communities living within the support zones of the selected protected
areas and promote the involvement of local stakeholders more closely in
protected area management (e.g. community woodlots using indigenous
species; decentralized nurseries raising saplings of economic trees,
indigenous grass species and medicinal plants; agro-forestry using
indigenous species; homestead fish products using indigenous species;
cottage industries - handicrafts, pottery; bee-keeping and apiculture;
snail farming - indigenous species identified by communities; medicinal
plants - indigenous species identified by communities). Established and
experienced NGOs will be contracted by the National Parks Service to
facilitate a participatory planning process to evolve micro-project
proposals. The micro-projects will aim to promote sustainable livelihoods
while emphasizing the linkages between biodiversity conservation and
benefits for communities neighboring the protected areas. Key stakeholder
groups will be assisted to establish collaborative mechanisms to support
conservation-linked development and reduce unsustainable use of shared
resources.
(iv) Strengthening Environmental Institutional and Management Support
- 2-



Services. This component aims to improve the legal framework and build
state and local capacity for environmental protection and enhancement of
the natural resources management regime. Activities under this component
will: (i) carry out an institutional assessment; (ii) harmonize current
legislation and regulations to make them consistent with the establishment
of the FME; (iii) strengthen enforcement capacity for environmental
monitoring, protection and natural resources conservation; (iv) review the
existing policy and regulatory framework for protected area management and
identify options for promoting more effective and participatory approaches
for promoting conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and
critical ecosystems; (v) establish state and local level capacity for
environmental review and monitoring, including the development of an EA
Procedures Handbook, EA checklists, and project specific monitoring
requirements; and, (vi) provide intensive training to project staff, state
and local government officials in environmental assessment, management and
monitoring.
(v) Program Management. This component will finance the establishment of
the Federal Program Support Unit (FPSU), State Program Support Unit
(SPSU), and Multi-sectoral Implementation Teams (MITs). It will also
finance the preparation of the EA Procedures Manual, as well as the
training of all actors in participatory techniques and environmental and
social assessments. Development communication will also be included in
this component, as it will create and sustain a dynamic information
network between the various levels of stakeholders to achieve optimal
project implementation.
Components:
(i) Multi-sectoral Community-Driven Investments
(ii) Local Government Assessment and Capacity Building
(iii) Protected Area and Biodiversity Management
(iv) Strengthening Environmental Institutional and Management Support
Services
(v) Program Management.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The participating states in the first 2 year phase are as follows:
Sahelian zone, dry grassland (Northern Nigeria): Katsina, Niger (Kainji
Lake National Park)
Semi-arid zone, montane grassland (Middle belt): Benue, Bauchi (Yankari
National Park, Lame-Burra Game Reserve and Maladumba Lake and Forest
Reserve), Adamawa
Humid zone, rainforest (Southeastern Nigeria): Enugu, Imo
Humid zone, (Southwestern Nigeria): Oyo
Delta Region, rainforest (Southern Nigeria): Baylesa
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
-3-



Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
All safeguard issues that may arise during the project will result from
community-driven micro-projects financed by both the Multi-sectoral
Community-Driven Investments component, and the GEF-financed Protected
Areas and Biodiversity Management component. The specific micro-projects
that communities will propose in these two components will be
demand-driven will be identified by the beneficiaries through a
participatory process. The projects are still to be determined.
Therefore, an EA process pursuant to OP 4.01 will be integrated into the
micro-project cycle. This process is described in the Environmental and
Social Management Framework, where multi-disciplinary teams, local
governments and state staff will be intensively trained under the
Strengthening Environmental Institutional and Management Support Services
component in order to assist communities to assess potential environmental
impacts during the preparation and design of micro-project proposals.
Thus, EA concerns and any necessary mitigation measures will be included
by communities in the design of micro-project proposals.
Microprojects that will be eligible for financing are likely to have only
site-specific environmental and social impacts due to the small scale
nature of the activities. Some of the potential impacts of the types of
micro-projects that will be financed by the LEEMP include:
n Soils - site specific contamination or erosion of soils
n Biodiversity - vegetation and habitat loss, disturbance of forest
ecosystems
n Water - local contamination, blockage of drains
n Air quality - local pollution, dust, smoke, etc.
n Social - increased refuse, construction accidents
Only those micro-projects that could be classified as either Category B or
C will be eligible for financing as a general practice, and the most
likely safeguards issues to arise will be alteration of natural habitats
and/or soil erosion. For this reason, the multi-disciplinary teams will
conduct rapid assessments of the critical habitats of the area within
which the selected community resides, in order to identify sensitive areas
- 4 -



that may be affected by the micro-projects, as well as erosion-prone sites
and causal factors. This information will be used to help communities
select sites for micro-projects that do not significantly impact natural
habitats or critical ecosystems. Similarly, these rapid assessments will
also endeavor to identify cultural property within the micro-watershed, to
avoid impacts on such property.
The project has a highly participatory approach to the formation of
Community Development Plans. In each participating state, Multi-sectoral
Implementation Teams (MITs) will be established and trained to help build
capacity in the selected communities for prioritizing development needs,
as well as to help communities assess potential environmental impacts of
proposed micro-projects, redesign micro-projects so as to avoid these
impacts or include mitigation measures and complete the EA checklists that
will highlight these potential impacts. These MITs will initiate the
process of dialogue and partnership building with the communities, and
will help them to establish the Community Project Management Committees
that will outline development priorities for investments under the State
Program Support Units. To assist communities to prioritize development
needs, create micro-project proposals and incorporate environmental
assessment into the design of the micro-projects, MITs will follow a
participatory process that will include the following steps: prepare a
socio-economic profile of the communities within the districts of selected
LGAs (this has already been completed for the 6 pilot states as part of
the Social Assessment undertaken during preparation); conduct
Participatory Rural Appraisal and Planning (PRAP) and baseline studies of
the natural resources and sensitive habitats or areas; facilitate the
formation of Community Project Management Committees and the election of
officers: Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary/Treasurer and Extension
workers; help Community Project Management Committees prioritize their
development needs and prepare micro-project proposals; on approval and
sanction of micro-project proposals from the Local Government Review
Committee, CPMCs will open a bank account and prepare other registers and
books of accounts; together with the SPSU staff, conduct EA training and
education for community members, user groups and the Community Project
Management Committees; provide technical support to Community Project
Management Committees in designing, procurement, etc. of micro-project
activities, as well as quality control checks and supervision; liaise with
LGRC to ensure that EA checklists represent potential environmental
impacts of proposed micro-projects, are accurate, and include any
necessary mitigation measures.
The GEF-financed Protected Area Management Component will contract
national NGOs to work with communities living in the support zones of the
protected areas. The NGOs will facilitate a participatory process
involving representatives of the management of the respective protected
areas and community members. In this way, key stakeholder groups will be
assisted to establish collaborative mechanisms to support
conservation-linked development and reduce unsustainable use of shared
resources. The protected area management plans will not exclude historic
uses of resources in the support zones without identifying mutually
acceptable alternatives. The protected area management plans will focus
on providing options for sustainable livelihoods to communities within
support zones (within the parameters of biodiversity conservation and
poverty alleviation). Activities proposed in the plans relating to
- 5-



management and enforcement of protected area boundaries will need to be
generally accepted by all the key stakeholders.
IDA or GEF funds will not be used to finance any form of land acquisition
or resettlement. If acquisition of land is required (e.g. to build a new
school or health center), written evidence will need to be provided by the
elected Community Project Management Committees that the land has been
voluntarily contributed by the community as a whole and that any
individuals that are negatively affected by such land acquisition have
been adequately compensated by the community.
Micro-projects that would be placed on the positive list include:
renovation and rehabilitation of school buildings; construction of new
school buildings; construction or rehabilitation of health centers;
rehabilitation of rural feeder roads; water supply - bore holes and hand
pumps for wells, catchment tanks; alternative energy such as photovoltaic
driven water pumps; completion of a partially built electricity
distribution network, or rehabilitation of a network and connection to the
local Nigerian Electric Power Authority transformer;
agro-processing/cottage industries; erosion control measures, improved
agricultural and land management practices; drainage; private and public
sanitation facilities; solid waste management; markets - construction of
small stalls, construction of shelter for stalls; community woodlots using
indigenous species; decentralized nurseries raising saplings of economic
trees, indigenous grass species and medicinal plants; agro-forestry using
indigenous species; homestead fish products using indigenous species;
cottage industries - handicrafts, pottery; small scale post-harvest
infrastructure - groundnut oil expeller units and Shea butter units;
bee-keeping - apiculture; soil erosion control; sustainable agriculture
using crop rotation, soil moisture conservation and other agronomic
practices to increase yields; snail farming - indigenous species
identified by communities; medicinal plants - indigenous species
identified by communities; development of alternative sources of energy -
briquette manufacture, solar and wind energy.
In summary, the process for screening micro-projects for social and
environmental impacts and compliance with the World Bank Operational
Policy is as follows:
MITs will be trained in EA so that they can work with communities and
assist them in designing or re-designing proposals (using EA checklists
and EA Procedures manual)
From here the proposals are submitted to the Local Govt. Review Committee
which will include staff trained to review proposals from an environmental
and social perspective. Both a desk review and field appraisal will be
conducted and a determination will be made whether EA should be carried
out or not.
From here the proposals are sent to the State Level where a TOR for the EA
will be developed and prepared, as needed. The state level will also be
responsible for monitoring compliance of all micro-projects with
environmental and social safeguards.
State and local levels review and verify completion of an EA and EMP and
approve proposal subject to the integration of recommendations emanating
from the EA and incorporation of needed additional EMP implementation
costs.
-6-



With regard to GEF-financed investments one staff in each of the relevant
agencies responsible for managing the protected areas -whether the
National Park or the Department of Forests in Bauchi State will be trained
in EA process. These staff will liaise with the contracted NGOs, National
Park authorities and community leaders through an intensive consultatory
process to help identify micro-project proposals to be funded by the GEF.
The consultations will help identify: (a) potential environmental impacts
of the proposed micro-projects; (b) mechanisms for redesign of the
proposed micro-projects to avoid the impacts; or (c) identify and help
incorporate mitigation measures. Like in the IDA supported activities, EA
checklists will be used to facilitate the micro-project prioritization
process. Upon prioritization, the proposals will be submitted to the
relevant State Environmental Agency or the Environmental Impact Assessment
Department of the FME, as appropriate. The proposals will be submitted to
the FME only in cases where a microproject may have the potential for
significant environmental impact. The relevant State or Federal agency
will either request a further EIA and help the NGO, National Park or
Community Organization with drafting terms of reference, review and
approval of an EMP, or approval for the project based on the EA
checklist. The funds from GEF will only be disbursed upon receipt of the
necessary clearances.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
While micro-projects will be small in scope and scale, and their
individual environmental impacts limited, cumulatively these
micro-projects could have a significant impacts on natural habitats and
soil erosion. For example, several micro-projects involving construction
of schools, cottage industries, etc. within a community could potentially
disrupt wildlife corridors within natural habitats, or have cumulative
impacts on runoff and silt loads to streams and rivers. For this reason,
an initial rapid assessment will be undertaken to identify natural
habitats and erosion-prone sites, so that micro-projects can be designed
and sited to take these considerations into account.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
No potential negative long term impacts are envisaged as a result of
micro-projects financed by the LEEMP. However, if they are not designed
properly, micro-projects could cumulatively have a long-term impact on
soil erosion and fertility in community areas where the LEEMP will
operate.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Erosion control and natural resource management is one of the fundamental
objectives of the LEEMP, and multi-disciplinary teams will be trained to
identify erosion sites and causal factors, as well as the potential for
proposed micro-projects to enhance or exacerbate soil erosion. They will
work with the communities to educate them about causes of erosion, as well
as designing micro-projects that avoid or mitigate erosion, and/or promote
natural resource management.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project has been designed to integrate the environmental and social
-7 -



dimensions of community development and management. Mechanisms will be
put in place help local communities identify, assess and manage
environmental and social impacts associated with community development.
This will be achieved through the following interventions:
The Strengthening Environmental Institutional and Management Support
Services component will build capacity at the state and local level for EA
through an intensive 2 - 4 week training module for 2 to 5 environmental
staff from each of the participating states (who will then be seconded to
the State Program Support Units). These modules will 'train the
trainers', and the trained staff will be supported by the LEEMP to conduct
a similar module in each state to train the multi-disciplinary teams, and
staff from each participating local government.    This component will also
provide the state and local government staff and the multi-disciplinary
teams with EA Procedures Handbooks and EA checklists for micro-project
proposals.
Multi-disciplinary teams who will themselves be trained in EA will work
with communities to: (a) assess micro-project proposals; (b) identify
possible environmental impacts; (c) determine necessary mitigation
measures that should be included in proposals; (d) design modifications to
avoid potential impacts. The multi-disciplinary teams will assist the
communities to complete EA checklists for each micro-project proposal that
will help prioritize projects and identify potential environmental impacts
and possible mitigation measures.    Completed EA checklists will be
submitted with micro-project proposals to the Local Government Review
Committee ( these committees will include 2 - 4 local government staff
trained in EA under the Environmental Institutional and Management Support
Services component).
The Local Government Review Committee will first conduct a desk appraisal
of the EA checklist and micro-project proposal to ensure that they are
complete, followed up with a field appraisal to verify and confirm all of
the information provided in the EA checklist. Based on that information,
the Local Government Review Committee will either approve the
micro-project for financing by the State Program Support Unit, or will
send the micro-project proposal to the EA-trained staff at the State
Program Support Unit to draft a terms of reference for an environmental
impact assessment of the proposed micro-project. With the EIA completed,
the multi-disciplinary teams will take the results and work with
communities to include an environmental management plan in the
micro-project proposal. When that plan is approved by the State Program
Support Unit, the micro-project proposal will be approved and funds
disbursed.
The Local Government Review Committee will periodically audit all
micro-projects to monitor environmental impacts and safeguards issues, and
the State Program Support Unit will also periodically audit selected
micro-projects as well. The State Program Suport Unit will be responsible
for the implementation and monitoring of environmental assessments and
environmental management plans.
With regard to GEF supported investments, one staff each from the relevant
agency responsible for managing the protected area in Bauchi and Niger
States as well as in the National Parks will be trained in EA processes.
- 8 -



These staff will liaise with the contracted NGOs, National Park
authorities and community leaders through an intensive consultatory
process to help identify micro-project proposals to be funded by the GEF.
These consultations will help identify potential environmental impacts of
the proposed micro-projects, and enable the identification of mechanisms
for redesign of the proposed micro-projects to avoid the impacts, or
include mitigation measures. Like in the IDA supported activities, EA
checklists will be used to facilitate the micro-project prioritization
process. Upon prioritization, the proposals will be submitted to the
relevant State Environmental Agency or the Environmental Impact Assessment
Department of the FME, as relevant. The proposals will be submitted to
the FME only in cases where a microproject may have the potential for
significant environmental impact. The relevant State or Federal agency
will either request a further EIA and help the NGO, National Park or
Community Organization with drafting terms of reference, review and
approval of an EMP, or approval for the project based on the EA
checklist. The funds from GEF will only be disbursed upon receipt of the
necessary clearances.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Micro-projects will be determined by the communities, and
multi-disciplinary teams will help them assess potential safeguards that
could be triggered by proposed micro-projects. The communities are the
key stakeholders, and thus will be involved in every step of the process.
All EA documents - micro-project proposals and EA checklists, Local
Government Review Committees' field appraisal verifications of EA
checklists, environmental audits of micro-projects, and any EIAs
conducted, will be publicly disclosed and entered into a management
information system created by the LEEMP.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              11/29/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
9



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Talib B. K. Esmail      4/2/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank   4/3/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Serigne Omar Fye         4/2/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Joseph Baah-Dwomoh       4/2/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 10 -



