Report No. 23284
Report No: I070447 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/27/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NIGERIA         Project ID: P070447
Project: Nigeria University System Innovation Project     Task Team Leader:
William Saint
Appraisal Date: January 15, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: July 17, 2002        IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: AFTH3     Sector: ET - Tertiary Education
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To improve the quality and relevance of staff teaching and student
learning, and to strengthen capacities for system and institutional
management in 24 federal universities.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project will have six components of differing dimensions.
1. INNOVATIONS IN TEACHING AND LEARNING.
a. Innovation Fund($68.0 million). This will be the largest component of
the project. It will support innovation and modernization of teaching and
learning activities with the aim of improving their quality and their
relevance for graduate employment. Within the framework of each
institution's strategic plan, funding would be made available to
university faculties, departments, libraries, centers and student groups
in response to specific proposals that seek to introduce improvements in
educational quality and relevance. Using publicly announced criteria and
a transparent decisionmaking process, an independent panel would evaluate
proposals received and award funding.
b. Capacity-building for tertiary distance education ($2.0 million).
This modest sub-component would expand the existing small cadre of
Nigerian specialists while updating them in the current theory and
practice of distance education, including the use of information and
communication technologies. It would also begin to nuture two or three
centers of specialization in training on distance education methods and
the production of distance education materials. As the Nigerian
Universities electronic network (NUNet) develops (see below), the
resulting distance education capacities would hopefully be able to employ
these new technologies for the effective delivery of tertiary distance
education in the future.
c. Graduate fellowship program for women($2.8 million). While the
proportion of female students in Nigeria's federal universities has
increased from 25 to 34 percent over the past decade, the proportion of
female academic staff has stagnated at a level of about 14 percent. Such
unrepresentativeness produces two negative consequences for the university



system. First, it deprives universities of access to some of the
country's best minds for teaching and research. Second, it undercuts the
academic performance of women students through the limited provision of
female role models who may be more appreciative of the special challenges
faced by women on campus. To address these shortcomings, the project will
underwrite a fixed number of MA and PhD fellowships for university women
on each campus who have chosen an academic teaching career. Universities
with the lowest proportions of female academic staff would receive higher
numbers of fellowships.
2. MANAGEMENT SKILLS DEVELOPMENT.
This component will support two sub-components aimed at strengthening
university management skills at all levels.
System-wide training at the zonal level ($1.7 million).     Practical
training in various types of management skills would be provided to groups
at different levels of university management through zonal training
workshops. The following groups would benefit: University Council
Members, Senior Managers, Middle-level Managers, Junior Academic Staff,
and Student Leaders. The training for Junior Academic Staff would contain
an emphasis on curriculum development, teaching techniques, and
educational administration. An estimated 2,500 persons would be trained
over the life of the project through these workshops.
Institutionally defined training programs ($11.0 million). Using a
formula based on relative staff numbers in each institution, these funds
would be allocated among the federal universities for their use in
building management capacities identified as essential in their Strategic
Plans. At the beginning of each year, university Project Coordination
Committees would submit their proposed staff development plans for that
twelve month period. The plans would indicate the persons or groups to be
trained, the type of training to be provided, the level of competency that
each participant would be expected to achieve through this training, the
provider or location of the training, and its estimated cost.     Training
would take place in-country, either at registered training institutions or
by contracting national, regional or international experts to provide
specialized training on campus. In addition, university staff development
officers would be identified and trained in order to assist their
institutions to develop the necessary annual training plans.
3. ELECTRONIC NETWORKING ($16.4 million).
E-mail communication capacities (with the possibility of eventual Internet
connectivity) within and among the university system are expected to
generate substantial benefits for university teaching, learning, research
and management, as well as for performance monitoring of the system and
for implementation of NUSIP itself. This component, possibly assisted by
complementary funding from other donors, would seek to establish
operational "backbone" infrastructure, training capacity, and maintenance
expertise for the Nigerian Universities Network (NUNet). It would also
support individual universities in the design and implementation of
appropriate local area networks (LAN) on campuses where the conditions
exist to do so, provide technical assistane for the preparation of ICT
business plans to ensure the financial sustainability of these new
systems, and train necessary LAN maintenance personnel.
4. NATIONAL UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION/SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES ($4.1
million).
-2-



This proportionately smaller component would seek to support the new
mandate of the NUC with the staff skills and institutional resources
necessary to carry out its future responsibilities with professionalism
and effectiveness. To this end, funding could underwrite a strategic
planning exercise for the NUC itself, capacity-building in quality
assurance and in monitoring institutional performance, and higher
education policy studies and related skills development on various topics
of likely future importance for the development of Nigerian higher
education e.g., assessment of the state universities; design and
management of student loan programs.
5. HIV/AIDS PREVENTION ($2.1 million).
This component will pursue two purposes: (a) to slow and ultimately stop
the spread of HIV/AIDS within the campus communities; and (b) to provide
assistance to members of the campus communities who are directly or
indirectly affected by HIV/AIDS. The term "campus community" is
understood to mean all university students, employees and their families.
The HIV/AIDS component will have three sub-components: (1) a seed-money
fund for AIDS proposals submitted by groups within the campus community
for activities that are consistent with the two objectives noted above;
(2) a University Community AIDS Program (UniCAP) that would be defined and
undertaken by a UniCAP Committee constituted within each university; and
(3) a workplace AIDS intervention program for the NUC itself.
6. PROJECT MANAGEMENT ($5.5 million).
Project management expenses would also include various quality control
activities and cover three general types of management costs: (a) the
periodic convening of expert panels comprised of national and/or
international academic specialists to assess proposals submitted under the
Innovation Fund and the HIV/AIDS fund, and to recommend the best of these
for funding; (b) certain staff salaries and benefits, consultant
honoraria, travel, and publications costs directly associated with the
Project Coordination Unit at the NUC; and (c) limited equipment,
transportation and meeting costs associated with the six regional project
secretariats.
Components:
1. Innovations in teaching and learning.
2. Management skills development
3. Electronic networking.
4. System support services by the National Universities Commission.
5. HIV/AIDS Prevention.
6. Project management.
7. Project Preparation Facility
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: The project has been categorized as a "C" because it will not
include civil works, with the possible exception of minor renovations
linked to specific teaching innovations.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
-3-



Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)        No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
- 4 -



community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. N/A
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        William Saint   11/15/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Serigne Omar Fye         11/27/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Rosemary Bellew 11/27/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



