Report No. 23582
Report No: I074963 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: NIGERIA         Project ID: P074963
Project: Lagos Urban Transport Project Task Team Leader: Dieter E.
Schelling
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 4, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 28, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 60.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR     Sector: TU - Urban Transport
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project aims at building capacity to manage the transport system in
Lagos Metropolitan Area. The focus is on technical assistance to the
Lagos Metropolitan Transport Authority (LAMATA). It also includes the
preparation of technical, environmental and social measures for possible
future mass transit development (light rail and busways) which might be
supported in a private-public financing framework in a possible follow-on
project. The only physical component of the project concerns the
maintenance and repair of the main road network in the Lagos metropolitan
area (about 800 km), which will exclude any expansion of the network, land
taking and resettlement.
Detailed project objectives are as follows: (i) establishment of an
adequate policy and institutional framework for the management and
financing of the transport system of Metropolitan Lagos; (ii)
establishment of a framework for the development of urban rail mass
transit; (iii) enhanced provision of bus services; (iv) improved road
network efficiency; and (v) increased utilization of water and
non-motorized transport means, towards improving the transport system in
Metropolitan Lagos sustainably such that contributes to poverty reduction.
I.A.3. Project Description:
(i) Policy and Institutional Reform: This component focuses on the
establishment of an adequate policy and institutional framework for the
management and financing of the transport system of Metropolitan Lagos and
the provision of support to the development of urban transport policies
and strategies at the national level. It includes the following elements:
(a) creation of and bringing into operational effectiveness of the Lagos
Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (LAMATA) including establishment of
units responsible for safeguards assessment; (b) creation of a dedicated
Transport Fund from sector based road user charges for use by LAMATA to
discharge its key responsibilities; (d) restructuring and enhancement of
the capacity of existing transport sector agencies, in particular the
Lagos State Ministry of Transportation (LSMOT), the Lagos State Ministry
of Works (LSMOW), state agencies responsible for the administration and
collection of road user charges and the highways Unit of the Office of the
Controller of Works of the Federal Ministry or Works and Housing (FMWH) in
Lagos State; (c) establishment of Traffic Management Unit (TMU) in key
local Government Areas (LGA) with priority given to the LGAs of Lagos
Island. Ikeja Mainland, Shomolu, Oshodi, Apapa and Agge; (d) detailed
demand study to establish the characteristics of transport demand and



supply in urban Lagos and to evolve a strategic plan for responding to
identified needs, including detailed assessment of the economic and
financial analysis of the proposed rail mass transit an scope for future
expansion; and (e) support to the development of urban transport policies
and strategies at the national level and in three other major cities
(Abuja, Kano and Port Harcourt).
(ii) Rail Mass Transit Development: The current project will assist in
preparing a framework which will be the guiding document for future
projects. This component will lead to the establishment of the framework
for the implementation of the proposed rail mass transit. It comprises
(a) detailing of the plan of works for securing the use of the existing
Nigerian Railway Corporation (NRC) right of way including proposals for
needed resettlement /compensation and land acquisition; (b) concessioning
of the rail mass transit involving preparing bid documents and agreeing
the concession agreement; and (c) detailed design of the fixed
infrastructure. Physical works will not be carried out under this Project.
(iii) Bus services and Traffic Flow Improvements: This component is
focused on achieving the enhanced provision of bus services through
productivity gains arising from improved use of existing infrastructure,
adoption of better regulatory and operational practices and use of more
appropriate buses by private sector operators. It includes (a)
establishment of a regulatory framework for the provision of bus services
including pilot implementation along identified bus route network; (b)
preparation and implementation of a strategic plan for improving the
performance of private bus operators including non-infrastructure related
measures to improve service quality, increase service differentiation, and
improve environmental impact; (c) detailed feasibility studies for
proposed bus ways, especially that along Murtala Mohammed Way; (d)
detailed design and implementation of low cost Transport Systems
Management measures on Lagos Island for improved bus operations in and out
of the area; (e) introduction of low cost bus public transport priority
measures along identified major public transport routes; (f) financing of
bus fleet renewal by private sector operators; and (g) preparation of
detailed plan for use of Transport Systems Management measures to improve
traffic flow at Ikeja.
(iv) Road Network Efficiency Improvements: this component is designed to
enhance the efficiency of use of the existing road space and to improve
road safety. It comprises of (a) maintenance and repair of about 820
kilometers of high priority road links in the Lagos Metropolitan Area
along existing corridors; (b) rehabilitation and improvement of major
junctions using mainly low cost Transport System Management measures; (c)
establishment of a Road and Bridge Management System (including Pavement
Management System and a Geographical Information System (GIS) for the
management of roads in Metropolitan Lagos; (d) preparation and
implementation of a road safety audit along the priority road links and
development of guidelines for the conduct of road safety audits by LAMATA
and other relevant agencies.
(v) Water and Non-Motorized Transport Promotion: This component
contributes to improving modal diversity by promoting the enhanced
provision and use of water and non-motorized transport (MNT) services. It
includes (a) development and implementation of a detailed strategic plan
- 2 -



for improving the use of the waterways of Metropolitan Lagos for transport
services including privatization of existing state owned ferries,
encouragement of private sector participation in the provision of water
transport services including establishing an appropriate regulatory
framework and rehabilitation and judicious addition to existing routes and
terminal facilities; (b) development and implementation of a strategic
plan for the promotion of the use of non-motorized modes including
preparing guidelines for conducting NMT impact audit of proposed
interventions and use of these to finalize design proposals, pilot project
to promote the use of bicycles, and demonstration project on use of
pedestrian priority measures.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The target area for the project is principally Metropolitan Lagos, an area
comprising about 14 of the 21 local Government Areas (LGA) of Lagos State,
the management of the transport system of which will be the proposed
Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (LAMATA). Metropolitan Lagos
as defined in the project excludes some urban areas of Lagos State such as
Badagry, Ikorodu, and Lekki Pennisula. In an advisory capacity, LAMATA is
required to provide policy guidance to the Lagos State Government (LASG)
with regard to transport matters and through this, facilitate the overall
coordination of transport decision-making in Lagos State.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared
outlining the possible environmental and social impacts of the project
with regard to its strategic and component specific objectives prior to
appraisal in February 2002. The EMF comprises of the following inputs:
(i) an EA/SA overview, ii) detailed EA/SA for the road network efficiency
component, iii) action plan for environmental and social management unit
at LAMATA, and iv) TOR for a full sectoral EA/SA, including a resettlement
framework to be prepared during project implementation to guide future
follow-on projects. The EMF will also contain guidance on participatory
and consultative processes that will accompany EA/SA at the strategic and
component levels. The proposed project will not involve any land
acquisition. The expected follow-on project will involve the
implementation of major investments that will have been prepared under
this credit. Prior to implementation of any of these physical elements of
the proposed follow-on projects, a detailed and specific EA/SA for each
project will be prepared. The environmental classification for the
follow-on project would most likely be A.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
-3 -



Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
All planned physical works under the proposed project will be along
existing road corridors with no land acquisition (to be confirmed in the
EA). It is therefore not expected to have any large scale, significant
and/or irreversible impacts. However, the expected follow on project will
have significant impacts. The principal concern under the proposed
project is therefore to ensure that (i) an adequate EMF responsive to the
needs of this and a follow on project is prepared and fully implemented;
(ii) institutional capacities for dealing with ES/SA concerns are
developed at relevant agencies; and (iii) appropriate guidelines are in
place including a framework for monitoring compliance with regard to
EA/SA. Concern with an awareness of EA/SA issues by the public seems weak
and ways of raising these will need to be found.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N.A.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The only physical component of this project is road maintenance. The
other components are Technical Assistance and preparation of future
components with potential environment impacts. The new transit component
will be executed under a new project.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Guidelines to be prepared as part of the EMF will be used to undertake an
assessment of proposed designs. Feasibility studies will take
environmental and social dimensions into consideration.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
LAMATA and other federal, state and local government agencies responsible
for transport and environmental matters will be the focus of capacity
building activities (workshops, training etc.) during project preparation
and implementation to raise their awareness of EA/SA issues and to enhance
their capacity to manage them. The results of the institutional analysis
carried out as part of the EA/SA will be implemented and a framework put
in place to monitor compliance. The unit within LAMATA responsible for
EA/SA will have overall responsibility for ensuring that all project
activities are in compliance with relevant safeguard guidelines whilst the
proposed TMUs at the LGA level will delegate this responsibility at the
local level. LAMATA will be required to include a statement on compliance
with EA/SA guidelines and report on trends with regard to specified
-4 -



environmental and social indicators in its Annual Report.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders are the inhabitants of Lagos State, in
particular, those in Metropolitan Lagos. Unfortunately, the level of
public awareness of environmental issues and of how to deal with them
would appear not to be at desired. This problem will be addressed by
using an Information, Education and Communication strategy to be developed
for the project as a specific tool for dissemination of information on
EA/SA dimensions of the project. Outputs from these exercises will then
be used to establish relevant processes for participation and consultation
with the public on EA/SA concerns in the process of project design and
implementation..
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
- 5-



If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by         Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Dieter E. Schelling     01/29/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:       Nina Chee/Person/World Bank     01/29/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Charlotte S. Bingham    01/29/02
Sector Manager/Director:        Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard     01/29/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
Lucy Njuguna
M:\InfoShop - Tonya's weekly directories\February 2, 2002\I074963.txt
January 30, 2002 4:13 PM
-6-



