ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Frce of Poverty
lofoShop
I ,j1bc im:J ll t
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/20/2002                              25152
Section I - Basic Information                                 November 20, 2002
A. Basic Pro ect Data
Country: NIGER                                  Project ID: P065991
Global Supplemental ID: P073011
Project: Community Action Program               Task Team Leader: Daniel M. Sellen
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 4, 2002      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 20, 2003                   IDA Amount ($m): 35.39
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 4.00
Managing Unit: AFTR2                            Sector: Sub-national government administration
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  (100%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Decentralization (P); Poverty strategy;
analysis and monitoring (P); Small and medium
enterprise support (P); Civic engagement;
participation and community driven development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The CAP will assist the Government of Niger to establish and operationalize decentralized, participatory,
and transparent financing mechanisms that empower poor communities to take charge of their own
development, with the support of their local governments.
The CAP will also benefit from GEF financing to address the alarming rate of degradation of Niger's
natural resources. The global environmental objective pertaining to GEF is "to promote
community-based integrated ecosystem management as a means of reducing the region's vulnerability to
desertification, while fostering multiple global environmental benefits".
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project will have five components, consisting of  (a) community support, (b)
decentralization support (c) a Local Investment Fund, and (d) poverty monitoring, and (e) program
management.
A.     The Community Supportcomponent is aimed at introducing decentralized and participatory
planning procedures and to build the capacity of community-based organizations (CBOs), and other local
institutions to design, implement, and manage micro-projects.This component will be implemented in a
selected sample of communes (about 15 - 20 percent of the total), and will cover all villages or village
groupings within these communes.



2
ISDS
Strengthening capacity of CBOs will involve participatory appraisal (PA) and planning to facilitate the
micro-project cycle of needs assessments, local development planning, implementation, monitoring, and
evaluation. Capacity-building efforts will operate on the principle that there exists substantial, yet latent,
social capital, that hitherto lacked the institutional framework and resources with which to emerge.
Accordingly, rather than designing an extended preliminary phase of training on participatory appraisal
and fiscal management, the CAP will quickly offer access to local development financing after a short
period of PA, in the belief that communities will best learn by doing and will be encouraged by quick
results. Pilot operations undertaken as part of CAP preparation suggests that the micro-project cycle can
be be completed in fourteen months. However, the CAP will recognize that certain communities require
more capacity-building than others, and will focus efforts to match existing conditions.
The hallmark of this component is the systematic use of PA techniques in the micro-project cycle. This
will require building consensus on such techniques among NGOs or other facilitators, who will assist
communities to (i) conduct needs assessments, (ii) draft local development plans (LDPs), and (iii)
facilitate implementation of micro-projects. The needs assessments and LDPs will be submitted for
approval and assessed using transparent criteria known in advance to all stakeholders. The development
plans will be implemented by the communities themselves, under the leadership of committees created
for this purpose. Communities will be able to exercise choice over source of technical assistance,
technology type, and investment design. Local government, NGOs, and sector specialists may give input,
guidance, and training, but may not interfere in implementation. This is essential to empower
communities, ensure correspondence of investment to needs, and ensure accountability to the community.
The GEF resources will support i) the CBOs in the incorporation of the analysis of the linkages between
poverty reduction and integrated management of the natural resources as part of ecosystems, ii) the
identification and inclusion of the various types of primary stakeholders within communities having
interest in the maintenance of the various type of production functions of the ecosystems (such as
sedentary and non-sedentary livestock livestock holders; croppers; collectors of household products such
as food, water and energy; fishermen; hunters and traditional healers and nature conservationists and iii)
the ability of the CBOs and communities to design and implement relevant micro-projects related to
CBIEM.
B.     The Local Governance Support component is aimed at strengthening administrative and fiscal
dimensions of local governance. This effort will be modest and experimental in the first phase, but will
scale up in subsequent phases based on successes learned in the first phase.This will involve efforts at
local and central levels within two sub-components:.
* Local governance: First, the CAP will work actively with a select set of new local governments to
build capacity in administrative and fiscal management, and ensure that they work effectively with
their constituents -- the local communities. This set of new governments will be selected from the
communes selected for the first phase of the CAP. Formal relations will be established between the
CBOs involved in the first component, and fiscal capacity would be enhanced by operating the
matching grant facility (see component C). The goal of this component is to increase capacity such
that these governments "graduate" and are able to assume the fiscal and administrative
responsibilities performed by the CAP in other communes. GEF funds may be used to assist the
Secretariat of the Rural Code in the development of a local environmental governance framework
promoting CBIEM. For example as defining the nature, composition and authority of local land
tenure committees with inclusion of representatives of various socio-economic and occupational
levels including non-sedentary livestockholders.
*   Policy and institutional reforms. Second, the CAP will work with the central government, notably



3
ISDS
the High Commission for Decentralization, to accelerate the process of decentralization. This
component can provide studies and communication that helps enforce the legal and regulatory
framework for decentralization, while strengthening the capacity of central Ministries responsible for
decentralization. Working with line ministries, the project will assist in planning for the
deconcentrating staff and resources to the lowest possible level of local government. Such line
agency staff must eventually be accountable to local government and communities, as opposed to
receiving instructions and pay from Niamey. GEF funds will be earmarked to support the Secretariat
of the Rural Code in the development of a national and local environmental governance framework
promoting CBIEM for example through natural resources tenure policies covering the interest of
non-sedentary livestockholders, discouraging cultivation of marginal lands and banks of surface
waters and resolving conflicting interests and use of surface waters.
C.     The Local Investment Fund(LIF) is the financial facility that will channel small fungible
capital grants to communities or local government for the financing of micro-projects. Initially, the LIF
will flow from regional PMUs to communities. Eventually, the goal is to have the LIF flow through local
governments to support fiscal decentralization once accountable and democratically elected governments
are in place and have reached a level of capacity to serve their communities in this way (i.e. through
component B). Such micro-projects will be proposed by communities as part of an approved local
development plan, and providing that a participatory needs assessment has been successfully undertaken.
A central principle of the CAP is that communities may decide to use the LIF for any micro-project they
deem important. These may include, but are not limited to, natural resource management (soil fertility
control, erosion control, tree plantings and nurseries. fuelwood); production of crops, fish, and livestock
(irrigation, gardening, seedling production, livestock fattening, cereal banks, fish farming, food
processing, stockraising, beekeeping), water and sanitation (wells, boreholes); education (village schools,
literacy programs); health (clinics, health posts, disease prevention); rural transport (rehabilitating local
roads, bridges); etc. An important principle is that the LIF may be used for both social and productive
infrastructure and activities.
The LIF is a matching grant. As such, communities are expected to contribute a certain percentage of the
value of the investment, either in cash, or more likely in the form of labour or materials. The amount of
the initial grant would be small, from $2 - $4 per inhabitant. As a limited fund, the LIF would encourage
priority-setting and avoid creation of "wish lists". Communities that effectively access and execute the
LIF would be eligible in subsequent financing rounds for additional funding. In contrast, those
communities who do not respect the terms of the grant would be excluded for a certain period.
Half of the available GEF funds will be blended with the IDA funds, representing about eight percent of
component financing. To promote and support in particular the global environmental interests of CBIEM
related activities, the proportional community contribution required will be significantly lower for
CBIEM related activities pertaining to a) community awareness raising activities relating to the interest
of integrated ecosystem management such as determining the degree of importance of native natural
rangelands species to poverty reduction, b) the maintenance of the productivity, biodiversity and soil
cover of the natural rangelands, including the preservation and/or recovery of marginal lands and banks
of surface waters, c) the introduction of valuable native species of the natural rangelands within the
cropping systems and d) allocation of cultivated areas to fodder production by native fodder species.
D.     The Poverty Monitoring component is the CAP's M&E system. It will serve three purposes: (i)
measure levels and trends of poverty; community access to social services and to local markets; and the
state of natural resources; (ii) monitor the CAP in order to provide timely feedback to both communities
and program  management in terms of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact of program



4
ISDS
interventions, in order that rapid corrective action can be taken if necessary; and (iii) enhance local
communities' capacity to analyze and manage their own development process. The poverty monitoring
component will have two related sub-components:
*   National poverty monitoring system: The CAP, as an important instrument of the PRSP, will attempt
to focus investments on Niger's poorest people to achieve sustainable poverty reduction from the
poorest upwards. As such, the national poverty monitoring system will seek to harmonize the access
to and use and maintenance of several of Niger's socio-economic and natural resources data sets.
Instead of generating new data, the CAP will integrate several disparate data sets on socio-economic
and environmental issues into a spatial geographic information system (GIS). Because the data sets
are currently sector-specific and unconnected, they fail to provide a multi-dimensional view of
poverty. In support of GEF objectives, this monitoring system will incorporate data relating to the
use and condition of the natural resources by incorporation and extension of the monitoring and
evaluation system being development within the context of the National Action Plan of
Desertification Control and Natural Resources Management (PAN/LCD-GRN). A series of poverty
maps from the data available have been generated as part of project preparation, creating a baseline
assessment of the Nigerien population's vulnerability down to the village level. This baseline
provides a way to measure future progress, under either the CAP or other poverty reduction and
NRM efforts. The poverty maps and supporting data and analysis may also be used to prescribe
possible development solutions. The CAP could support the national poverty monitoring within the
Census Statistics Office, or within the CAP offices itself. (A decision for the location of this system
will be made at appraisal.) The coordinators of the data system would have two initial objectives : (i)
to work with Niger's research institutes, government statistical bodies and NGOs to create the initial
spatial assessment of poverty and the condition of the natural resources, and (ii) to develop a strategy
for sharing, using and maintaining data within Niger, making data spatial and congruent with
harmonized data sets as necessary. The sub-component would finance a small team (two or three
people), some hardware and software, training, and consultants.
* Community-based M&E: The CAP will develop and implement a system for facilitating a
community-wide reflection on communities' development and the evolution of that development over
time. Within this process, a community Monitoring and Evaluation Committee will define the
indicators that will be used to: (i) monitor CAP micro-projects; (ii) evaluate each micro-project at
completion; and (iii) evaluate the CAP within the community on the basis of a locally-elaborated
baseline. Community development agents will formally transmit a subset of these findings to the
decentralized project implementation units. This system will be developed by: (i) improving the
participatory monitoring and evaluation/assessment methodology used by each; (ii) establishing a
system for selecting the community-level monitoring and evaluation information needed by project
management; and (iii) developing a mechanism for transmitting that information to project
management at the regional and national levels. This system will also develop a mechanism for
exchanging information on and from the poor between the CAP and the PRSP. The sub-component
will finance data collection, analysis, training, workshops and dissemination of results.
E.     The Support to Project Management component will cover project coordination, field services,
financial management, and establishment of a communication program. Project coordination will include
support for coordination meetings, liaison with the World Bank and other donors, and exchange of
experience at national fora. Field services include the training, personnel, equipment, and operating costs
associated with the regional project implementation. Financial management includes operational
planning and monitoring of the physical and financial execution of the CAP, procurement, accounting,
internal audit, and personnel management. The communication program includes development and
dissemination of information concerning program activities, approaches, results, and possibly education



5
ISDS
in schools, on radio, and on television. Most activities of this component will fall under the project
management unit and project steering committee (see Section C4). The various aspects of project
management will also coordinate cross-cutting CBIEM-related activities, while in addition a specific
communication program will be developed to reach out to other relevant national and region/global
environmental programs. In view of this, close collaboration and coordination of the activities will take
place with the Africa Land and Water Initiative as coordinated in the region by CILSS .
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The geographical coverage of the first phase of the CAP will select 15 - 20 percent of the population of
Niger, based on administratively defined (communes) and socially defined (village groupings) areas,
which do not necessarily correspond to local ecosystems. However, based on prior identification of the
territory of communes characterized by complex agro-ecological production systems comprising
sedentary and non-sedentary livestock systems, cropping systems and/or substantial shared surface
waters providing ample opportunity to benefit from CBIEM, the selection of the target areas of the CAP
will give weight to the selection of these areas in the first phase. A GEF financed PDF-B preparation
study has identified ten such zones for priority attention: (i) complexe de mares de Albarkaize', (ii)
complexe Kokorou-Namga, (iii) Mare de Tabalak, (iv)foret classee et reserve totale defaune de
Gadabedji, (v)foret de Marigouna-Bela, (vi) cuvette e Gonedi, (vii) lac de Madarounfa, (viii)foret de
Korap, (ix) foret du lac Tachd, (x) complexe de Droumn Malori. All these sites are located in the two
southern agro-pastoral agro-ecosystems. While the coverage of the CAP is expected to eventually be
national, initial preference will be given to communes that include or border these zones.
B. Chreck Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments: This project has been classified as an Fl because local governments or local communities will
receive grants to help them develop capacity in the management of micro-projects, and because none of the
details of micro-projects to be financed are known at this stage.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       * Yes 3 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                C Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 C Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                    X      Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes C0 No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                Cr Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*              Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          ^ Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.



6
ISDS
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The EA has not identified major safeguard issues, although it has noted that certain environmental
problems may arise from micro-projects if they are not adequately screened prior to funding agreements
with communities. For example, the EA identified potential negative environmental impacts, particularly
with regard to micro-irrigation, road rehabilitation, as well as the construction of schools and health
posts. Extensive use of water for irrigation, including the inundation of forest areas to establish
mini-barrages, are also possibilities.
There are no potential large scale or irreversible impacts foreseen from the CAP. On the contrary, the
objective of the GEF financing of the CAP is to contain and reverse long-term environmental problems
of land and water degradation. Geographical coverage of the CAP will concentrate initially in several
areas identified by a GEF PDF-B preparation study, which included ponds, classified forests and
reserves, and some lakes. Local environmental governance frameworks will also be funded by the GEF.
Screening of micro-projects will also have to be conducted at regional and central level, because,
although individual micro-projects may not have significant impacts, collectively, over the national
territory, the impacts may be significant e.g. irrigation and pesticides in agricultural micro-projects.
The process for screening micro-projects is outlined in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), which is an annex to the EA. The ESMF is a framework that screens micro-projects
are they are presented to the CAP. The EA by itself is not adequate to address environmental issues in the
CAP, because proposed micro-projects are not known in advance.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
In light of the project's aim to offer communities an open menu of possible micro-projects, the CAP must
carefully monitor potential cumulative impacts of sub-projects such as irrigation (lowering of
groundwater tables, deforestation, loss of habitat), a tannery (pollution due to liquid and solid wastes) or
market gardening (use of fertilizers and pesticides).
As part of the mitigation plan, the EA report proposes the use of checklists to identify these and other
environmental impacts. Questions include whether various types of habitats (aquatic and others) or parks
will be impacted, how severely ecosystems may be degraded, and whether people would have to move or
might lose their income sources. Mitigation measures are presented in the EA. Any potential negative
impacts that might occur will be handled by the project consistent with Bank policies, particularly OP
4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), and OP 7.50 (International Waters). The RPF,
which will be used to assess future activities, is included in the ESMF.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen, although positive long-term impacts are expected through the
GEF development objective and financing.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues



7
ISDS
A local environmental consultant, expert in Niger's environmental legal framework, carried out an
environmental assessment (EA). An Environmental Management Plan has been specified in the
consultant's report. The main recommendations of the EMP are the following:
*   Recognition of villages groups / grappes in the CAP as legal entities
*   Training of staff and partners of the national and regional coordination units.
*   Environmental control and monitoring through the establishment and implementation of an
intersectoral consultation framework;
*   Systematic screening / environmental impact assessment for all identified micro-projects before
entering into a funding agreement with communities.
*   Execution of an Information-Education-Communication program aimed at improving environmental
management in the CAP through concerted efforts of NGOs and mass-media;
*   Reinforcement of coordination meetings of harmonization and consultation at all levels among
stakeholders.
The institutional arrangement for the EMP involves specialized units, which are integrated into the CAP's
national and regional coordination structure. These units are involved in environmental screening of
proposed micro-projects. Technical capacity to implement the EMP is a major concern, since the
implementation decree for the EA law is only one year old, and the BEEEI (national bureau for
environmental impact assessment) has limited experience. For this reason, the EMP proposes
considerable resources and efforts to upgrade the capacity in this area.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A consultant, recommended by the Africa Region's Safeguards Policy Enhancement unit (ASPEN), was
hired to undertake the environmental assessment (EA) and the environmental management plan (EMP).
ASPEN approved the terms of reference. Work began in November 2001 and a preliminary draft was
submitted and reviewed by ASPEN on January 4, 2002. The draft was also reviewed at a validation
workshop in Niger, which was attended by the Bureau dEvaluation Environnementale et des Etudes
d'lmpact (BEEEI) of the Ministry of Water Resources, Environment, and Desertification, together with
the CAP's preparation unit. Comments from BEEEI and ASPEN were forwarded on March 11 to the
consultant, who integrated the changes in the EA report.
The EA included community and donor consultation in the process of identifying and classifying a wide
range of possible micro-projects based on other projects in Niger, and through a consultation process
with CAP pilot communities. Communities will participate in project implementation through village
committees and management committees; the EA report recommends that the authority of such
committees be legally recognized.
The EA, the ESMF (which included the RPF), and the annex on the Environmental and Social
Management Framework, were disclosed in country and at the World Bank's InfoShop in May 2002.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are



8
ISDS
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2001    3/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            3/25/2002      5/26/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/25/2002     4/30/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2001    3/28/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/25/2002     5/26/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/25/2002      4/30/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest MlJanagement Plan.                                     Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Daniel M. Sellen                            Nov. 14, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Remi Kini/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank  Nov. 18, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     Nov. 18, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                          Nov. 18, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAARCH    -;EOBACK      SITE MAP           SHOWCASE :



