                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                               Report No: AC153
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NIGERIA                                             Project ID: P083082
Project: NIGERIA - Micro- Small & Medium Enterprise          Task Team Leader: Peter Mousley
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 22, 2003              IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 30, 2003                              IDA Amount ($m): 32.00
Managing Unit: CSMSE                                         Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P)
Status: Lending


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
This project is part of a joint International Development Association (IDA)/ International Finance
Corporation (IFC) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Pilot Program in Africa Program
Framework Paper for a Joint IDA/IFC Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Pilot Program for Africa,
World Bank/IFC (considered by the Board of Executive Directors, June 19, 2003 designed to respond directly to
the need to accelerate private sector growth in Africa by focusing on micro and small and medium scale
enterprises' (MSMEs), which, together, account for the vast majority of private sector activity in most
African countries. This Project aims to assist Nigeria, one of the pilot countries selected under this
program, to increase the growth of their MSMEs in selected non-oil industry sub-sectors in selected
States (Lagos, Abuja, Anambra/Abia, and Kano/Kaduna are being considered with the aim of ensuring a
balanced coverage in the country). To boost the contribution of these MSMEs to employment, national
growth, and poverty reduction, the Project will strengthen the capacity of, first, providers and
intermediaries to deliver financial and non-financial services to MSMEs and, second, the performance of
MSMEs as a result of their increased access to services and markets. The Project will also support
improvements in the investment climate to remove some barriers that constrain MSME growth. In
selecting the target group, the Project will follow an expanded definition of MSMEs provided in the
Small and Medium Industries Equity Investment Scheme (SMIEIS) adopted in Nigeria in 1999, i.e., any
enterprise with a maximum of 300 employees and an asset base of up to Naira 200 million
(approximately US$1.6 million) excluding land and working capital.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project will comprise four components: (i) access to finance; (ii) business development services;
(iii) investment climate; (iv) monitoring and evaluation.

Project Component 1: Access to Finance (IDA $9 million; Other $9 million)

With the shortage of institutions and limited range of products and services responsive to the financial
requirements of MSMEs, this component will: assist commercial banks to develop the related
institutional capacity and technical expertise necessary to expand and effectively manage an SME loan
portfolio; fund the development of institutions and financial products better tailored to MSME risk
characteristics; and establish sound and reliable SME credit reporting capability nationwide.
Sub-components include:

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS



(a)     Micro-finance services (IDA: $5.0 million; Other: $6.0 million) - technical partner(s), and
commercial investors will provide investments to set up commercially viable microfinance companies.
IDA resources will cover technical assistance and operational cost over an initial period until the
microfinance companies build up their loan portfolio and sufficient funds to cover their operational
requirements.

(b)     Credit Bureau (IDA: $1.0 million; Other: $3.0 million) - establishment of a national credit
reference bureau that will increase banks' access to credit information countrywide, facilitate lending to
MSMEs, and reduce lending transaction costs. While a credit risk management bureau exists in the
Central Bank of Nigeria, banks have been reluctant to access their services as they find the agency is
poorly run and insufficiently independent and information is not sufficient, IDA resources would cover
set-up costs, legal and regulatory reforms necessary for an effectively functioning credit bureau, and TA
over an initial period until the Bureau establishes its revenue flows from its services. IFC and other
private sector partners are expected to invest in this initiative.

(c)     Capacity building in commercial financial institutions (IDA: $2.5 million) - development and
implementation of a technical skills transfer program designed primarily to introduce to selected
commercial financial institutions new systems and lending methodologies for MSMEs. The technical
assistance will be provided on a cost-shared basis to commercial banks that provide strong evidence of a
corporate commitment to extend further into the MSME credit market.

(d)     Leasing services (IDA $0.5 million) ­development of appropriate policies and the legal and
regulatory framework supporting the leasing industry and possible downstream investments in leasing
companies. IDA will finance the technical assistance work for establishing the laws and regulations
together with a training and capacity building program to ensure that the opportunities and implications
of these legal and regulatory reforms are fully understood by relevant stakeholders including not just
financial institutions and MSMEs, but also commercial lawyers, judges and relevant agencies of
government (eg tax authorities).

Project Component 2: Business Development Services (IDA $15 million, Other $3 million)

This component will focus on the provision of business support services to MSMEs to enable the
enterprises to increase their production and sales levels and to grow. The Project will address constraints
to the provision of non-financial services through initiatives designed to:

(a)     Expand MSMEs' access to services that address constraints faced by firms in specific industries.
The project will design tangible interventions to raise the availability, demand, and quality of specific
services that can have the highest impact on firm growth in specific industries. The BDS program will be
designed based on (i) a selection of high growth potential industries, (ii) an analysis of the issues that
firms in the industry are facing, (iii) a selection of BDS that can raise productivity of firms in that
industry based on the problems identified; and (iv) an assessments of the most sustainable and cost
effective mechanisms to increase the quality and availability of services as well as the demand for such
services (for example through use of vouchers or matching grants).

(b)     Expand commercially-based BDS provision to significantly downscale or high risk, e.g., start-ups
and micro-enterprise segments of the MSME market. Local BDS providers will be selected based on the
quality and demonstrated uptake of their services, their track record and their absorptive capacity for
funding under a BDS Fund that will be established through the project. This BDS Fund would seek
proposals for funding on a yearly basis and make allocations ­ disbursed over a multi-year period - based
on a set of entry and operating performance criteria.

                                                      3
                                                                                                       ISDS




Project Component 3: Investment Climate (IDA $2.5 million, other $2 million)

The investment climate component of the project will focus on reducing transaction costs to private
MSMEs by reforming the business registration process and developing commercial dispute resolution
mechanisms.

(a)      Registration Reform (IDA: $1.5M; Other: $1 M) ­ project resources will be utilized to:
modernize and decentralize the information systems of the Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC);
provide training to local business membership organizations and commercial banks so they are accredited
to extend CAC's services; and conduct awareness raising programs to increase MSME understanding on
the role and services of the CAC and the benefits of registration;

(b)      Commercial Dispute Resolution (IDA: $1M; Other: $1 M) ­ project resources would finance the:
drafting and enactment of necessary legislation for commercial courts; training and capacity building on
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms (such as mediation and arbitration) including support for the
implementation of selected instructive case management pilots; and information systems and equipment.

Project Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (IDA $3.5 million, other
$0.5 million)

To facilitate the implementation of this Project, resources allocated to this component will fund financial,
audit, training, and other consultancy assignments that will be required by implementing agencies from
time to time; equipment and vehicles; and operational costs within an agreed framework. A
comprehensive impact assessment survey will also be conducted (to include quantifying and
benchmarking constraints through implementation of state-level enterprise surveys that would provide
baseline data on enterprise productivity and cost of doing business).

About US$2 million will remain unallocated but available to finance expansion of the above components,
subject to results from project monitoring and evaluation reports and the State conformity with the
selection criteria to be spelled out in the project implementation manual. Also, approximately US$3.5
million will be provided from trust fund resources to implement project components.



Components:



Access to Finance
Business Development Services
Investment Climate
Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation
Unallocated

                                                        4
                                                                                                        ISDS




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Abuja, Anambra/Abia, Lagos, and Kano/Kaduna are being considered.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: The MSME Project in Nigeria would provide capacity building support to the local
intermediaries. It is proposed to focus on financial and business development services to private
enterprises, non governmental institutions and organizations, and investment climate improvement
to federal and State governments.

Therefore it will not likely have any environmental impact on natural habitats or any other areas
listed below.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Not applicable

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

                                                      5
                                                                                                        ISDS



Not applicable

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
No safeguard issues are triggered.




II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Workshops will be organized during project preparation and project launch with all the principal target
groups for this project, viz: BDS providers and financial institutions, FGN and State Governments and
business membership organizations representing the target sectors.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             Not Applicable Not Applicable

                                                   6
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Peter Mousley                                      7/09/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Serigne Omar Fye                                       7/09/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Demba Ba                                           7/09/2003

