Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC231
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/21/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: NIGERIA                                 Project ID: P063622
Project: Second National Fadama Development Project  Task Team Leader: Sidi C. Jammeh
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 27, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December H1, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: AFTS3                             Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Public expenditure, financial management
Status: Lending                                  and procurement (P); Rural services and
infrastructure (P); Rural policies and institutions (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Project development objective is to sustainably increase the incomes of fadama users -- those
who depend directly or indirectly on fadama resources (farmers, pastoralists, fishers, hunters, gatherers,
and service providers)-- through empowering communities to take charge of their own development
agenda, and by reducing conflict between fadama users. Fadamas -- the hausa name for irrigable land --
are flood plains and low-lying areas underlined by shallow aquifers and found along Nigeria's river
systems. The proposed Project will take a demand-driven approach whereby all users of fadama
resources will be encouraged to develop participatory and socially-inclusive local development plans
(LDPs). The LDPs will provide the basis for support under the Project.
A separate project -- to be funded by the Global Enviromnent Facility -- will contribute to the
development objective of the proposed Project by focusing on the conservation of critical ecosystems
within the fadama areas as well as enhance the conservation of biodiversity and environmental services
of global significance.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Component 1: Capacity Building
This component will support measures to build capacity of Fadama Community Associations (FCAs) and
their constituent user groups (FUGs) so that they are equipped to access Project advisory services and
financing. This training support will also give them the skills and know-how to carry out participatory
planning as well as to implement, operate and maintain subprojects. Through the use of trained
faciliators in social mobilization, the Project will assist FCAs to carry out needs assessments, prepare
local development plans, and to implement, operate, and maintain subprojects. Each of these activities
will be conducted with the full participation of FUG members, with a particular focus on women. FCAs
will also be trained to administer ftnds and to negotiate contracts and administer contracts.
FCAs do not currently exist, but will be created to facilitate the Project's objectives at the local level.
Each FCA will each comprise representatives of various FUGs, which currently exist or which will be
encouraged to form to engage in Project activities. FCAs will elect an executive committee, adopt a basic
set of rules and regulations governing their functioning, and have bank accounts to receive and manage
financial resources as part of the community contracting arrangements. Priorities of individual FCAs will



2
ISDS
be identified through an inclusive participatory planning process, with special attention paid to giving
voice to marginalized and vulnerable groups. The output of this planning process will be a local
development plan (LDP) on which consenlsus has been reached with the members of the FCA.
The LDP will provide the basis on which most of the Project financing will be directed, and will
comprise at a minimum: (a) an agreed list of priority public infrastructure subprojects that are technically
and economically feasible, environmentally sustainiable, consistent with existing development plans of
local and state government authorities, and that will contribute towards raising the productivity and
incomes of all fadama user groups; (b) a list of constraints and opportunities to be addressed through
advisory services, with respect to Fadama enterprise production and marketing; (c) agreed mechanisms
for financing the operations and maintenance of subproject investments (including levying user fees
where appropriate); (d) a plan for training and building the capacity of FCAs in financial management,
community-based procurement, social atid environmental impact screening of subprojects, conflict
mitigation and management and other aspects of organization and management of the associations; (e)
identification of recipients for a matching grant under the pilot component (see below), and (f) an agreed
mechanism to manage and resolve conflicts, especially concerning fadama usufruct rights. In addition,
This component will also finance a communications education program designed to enhance the quality
of participation and increase transparency and accountability in project implementation. This support
would include: (a) improved communications dissemination campaigns (at national, state, local
government and community levels) to raise awareness and understanding of the project objectives,
approach, guidelines, implementation arrangements and mechanisms for discussing and resolving
conflicts; and (b) hands-on training in communications education. Finally, the project will support
training in savings and credit management, prepare the beneficiaries to form their own savings and loan
associations, and establish the conditions for better access to commercial finance, if the policy and
institutional environment improves.
Component 2: Rural Infrastructure Investment
The main thrust of the Project is to support the creation of economic infrastructure and local public goods
to improve the productivity of fadama user households. This component will finance the construction or
rehabilitation of eligible small-scale infrastructure projects specified as priorities in LDPs and larger
subprojects that cut across LDPs but which are considered priorities by the FCAs. Eligible subprojects
include inter alia cattle troughs, fish drying equipment, boreholes, water catchments, drainage systems,
irrigation systems, agroprocessing, resting points for stock routes, livestock watering points (boreholes,
water pumping machines, overhead tanks, water troughs) and marketing infrastructure (village markets,
milk collection facilities), storage facilities, fish spawning pools, rehabilitation of small feeder roads, and
culverts, drifts and stock routes. Infrastructure such as schools and health posts that are not specifically
and directly linked to productive activities will not be funded. Guidelines to be used in preparing,
screening and implementing subprojects are specified in the Project Implementation Manual and are
summarized in Annex 13. Facilitators will be contracted (under Component 1) to train and assist the
FCAs to prepare and implement their subprojects. All subproject proposals must specify components,
site, cost, community contribution, enviromnental and social management plan, financing agreements for
maintenance needs, and arrangements for participatory monitoring and evaluation. Beneficiaries will be
required to contribute ten (10) percent of costs of the total budget envelope for the implementation of
infrastructure under the LDPs; contributions for each type of subproject may, however, vary.
Component 3: Pilot productive asset acquisition support
The overall objective of this component is to enhance the improvements in fadama users' productivity



3
ISDS
and income by facilitating the acquisition of productive assets by individuals or fadama users groups.
This objective would be achieved by supporting the clients' enterprise management skills, their capacity
to mobilize own funds and by providing matching grants for income-generating activities (IGAs) to
fadama user groups. The pilot would promote the acquisition of productive assets and reduce the impact
of market failures in the rural finance sector on the poor fadama user groups through matching grants. All
pilot activities will be community-based and led. A matching grant of fourty (40) percent would
supplement the beneficiaries' financing share of sixty (60) percent of cost of the asset. Eligible items
include (a) assets to allow the community to benefit from infrastructure investments under Component 2,
such as irrigation pumps, cattle drinking troughs, simple vehicles to transport goods to market; (b)
investments to raise productivity friom activities such as agriculture, fishing, improved hunting techniques
and improved gathering and extraction techniques (such as honey), improved milk storage for cattle
herders; (c) equipment for processing fadama resources (agriculture, fishing, grasses, honey); and (d)
selected goods and equipment to operate riural non-farm enterprises. The positive list of assets are
included in Annex 13. Pilot activities would be intensively monitored through participatory monitoring,
and subject to thorough evaluation during the Project's Mid-tenn Review at which point this component
could be revised or scaled up or down
Component 4: Demand-responsive Advisory Services
This component supports advisory services that will enable fadama users to adopt output-enhancing
techniques and more profitable marketing practices in their fadama enterprises. The Project will finance:
(a) advisory services that will accompany new investment activities in fadama areas, on request by the
user groups; (b) advisory services that will support ongoing activities by fadama users. Beneficiaries of
the Asset Acquisition Support component of this Project will receive training on technical and
managerial aspects to equip them with the necessary skills to properly utilize the acquired assets.
Advisory services which address know-how and market linkage constraints common to many FCAs will
also be supported under this component. The Project will also fund training and learning events to
promote sharing of knowledge and lessons learned about emerging good and bad practices in the
implementation of the component's activities (processes and methods, subject matter issues). In support
of supply chain development and to enable a broader range of service providers to qualify for service
provision, the Project will: (i) fund awareness and training workshops to create understanding of Project
principles, the approach and methodology of the advisory service component, and opportunities and
requirements for involvement of potential service providers; (ii) create and maintain a database of service
providers which will be made accessible to all concerned actors; (iii) encourage the participation of
service providers in the learning and experience sharing events that will be arranged by the SFDO; and
(iv) fund training on environmentally friendly practices, particularly on IPM (Integrated Pest
Management) for selected service providers.
Under the umbrella of the FCA, fadama user groups will elaborate in the LDP advisory services activities
(to overcome constraints identified as priorities in the LDP) that will enhance their know-how (enterprise
production and marketing) and help to establish sustainable linkages between them and other actors
(input supply, processing, marketing, credit etc.). Suitably qualified service providers will be eligible to
provide services funded under the component. These include, in addition to the public Agricultural
Development Programs (ADPs), private enterprises, NGOs, research and educational institutions, other
public sector departments, as well as farmers and marketing agents, other actors in the input and output
marketing chain with specialized skills. Since the ADPs currently provide most agricultural advisory
services in Nigeria, they are likely to continue to provide a substantial part of these services in the early
part of this Project. The Project will, however, foster the entry of non-ADP providers through the
orientation and learning events mentioned above and empower the user groups to choose the most
suitable service providers. The State Fadama Development Office (SFDO), which coordinates the Project



4
ISDS
at the State level, will provide technical assistance to user groups for the evaluation of proposals from
service providers but the FCA will be responsible for selecting and contracting the service provider. The
SFDO will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of advisory services that cut across
many FCAs, but will ensure the participation of the affected FCAs and local governments in the
implementation and evaluation processes.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
4.1 Project management
The Project management sub-component will support new or existing institutional entities and
mechanisms at the federal, state and local levels of government for overall project coordination and
supervision and would help to strengthen the effectiveness and quality of project operations. It will
support at the federal level the National Fadama Development Office (NFDO), which is attached to the
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) of FMARD, and which will be responsible for overall Project
coordination. The component will also support the State Fadama Development Office (SFDO), housed at
the ADP. At the local government level, the Project will support a Local Fadama Desk and
multi-stakeholder committee which would be responsible for, respectively, screening and approving
LDPs and subproject proposals submitted by the FCAs. Specific items and activities to be funded include
equipment, vehicles, operations and maintenance costs, and minor civil works for office rehabilitation at
both the NFDO and SFDOs of participating States. It will finance specialized technical assistance and
training at the federal, state, and local levels aimed at developing capacity for coordination of
implementation. The Project will enhance the current database and policy and strategy formulation
capacity of FMARD, and incremental expenses of collecting data, training staff, providing technical
assistance to strengthen the monitoring system, and the like. The project will also finance consultant
studies and an impact assessment at midterm and at the end of the project. The component will also
finance communications (via a Comm-lunications Officer in each State office) to raise awareness and
understanding of the Project objectives, approaches, implementation arrangements, and mechanisms for
discussing and resolving conflicts. Finally, it will finance the facilitation, coordination, financial
management and reporting, financial auditing, financial flows, and contract management of the Project.
4.2 Monitoring and evaluation
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system sub-component will measure performance at various
Project milestones and has two elements: (i) management information systems (MIS); and (ii) impact
evaluations and beneficiary assessments. This sub-component will finance the establishment of M&E
mechanisms at the SFDO and NFDO levels, including a new or up-grade of the Management Information
System (MIS) to monitor and evaluate implemenitation of the Project. The MIS will produce periodic
progress reports, develop baseline surveys, gather information on cropped area and yield, and conduct
thematic and market surveys and generate data for impact evaluation as well as guide the FCAs in
developing monitoring and evaluation indicators and an M&E plan. The Project will finance consultant
studies and an impact assessment at the mid-tenn and end of the Project. The impact evaluation surveys
will be conducted by experienced investigators from independent Nigerian institutions which will be
competitively selected by the NFDO. Results of both the quantitative and qualitative evaluations would
be used to identify areas of improvements during the course of Project implementation in order to
increase the impact of Fadama activities.
Components:
1. Capacity Building
2. Rural Infrastructure Investment



5
ISDS
3. Pilot Productive Asset Acquisition Support
4. Demand-responsive Advisory Services
5. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
Project Preparation Facility
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
It is recognized that the states would differ in their potential for participation in the different activities
involved in fadama expansion, from crop production to complementary activities such as input
production and distribution, processing and marketing, or diversification into aquaculture, livestock
development and social forestry. A committee established by Government has proposed the following
eligibility criteria for the selection of participating states in Fadama II, which have also been ratified at
the stakeholder workshop: (a) a written proposal with detailed action plan for both the upstream and
downstream activities to be undertaken; (b) a written commitment for regular payment of the counterpart
funds, deductible at source on a monthly basis; (c) evidence of mitigating measures against
fanners/pastoralists/fishermen conflicts; (d) evidence of viable and active Fadama Users Associations
(FUA); (e) completion of a detailed assessment of existing fadama infrastructure (baseline survey); (f) a
loan recovery rate of at least 75% under Fadama I Project; (g) an acceptable staffing of the ADP
management; (h) evidence of inclusion of farmers and private sector representatives on the ADP
Executive Committee (ADPEC); (i) submission of an action plan for the utilization of the Escrow
Accounts under Fadama I, satisfactory to the Federal Ministries of Finance and Agriculture as well as the
World Bank; and (j) evidence of repayment of over commitment on previous projects. State governments
are expected to endorse these requirements before appraisal.
With regard to the Environmental and Social Protection and Conservation component, the environmental
monitoring and mitigation activities will be undertaken in the selected states. Activities that promote
conservation and integrated ecosystem management of ecologically fragile areas will largely be within
the states being selected under this project. Where biological corridors are being demarcated or where a
specific protected area or fragile ecosystem spans state borders the program activities will adopt an
ecosystem approach to implementation.
B. Chleck Enviromnental Classification: A (Full Assessment)
Comnments: Environmental Classification Approved by Environmental Assessment Team
The following potential impacts could result from fadama expansion: (a) conflict between economic
interest groups (farmers/pastoralists/fishermen) competing for access to limited water and land resources;
(b) water-use control and management problems; (c) land and soil erosion; (d) soil, water and air
pollution from agro-processing; (e) bio-diversity loss through conversion of natural habitat to farm land;
(f) conflicts that may arise from riparian rights; (h) spread of waterbome disease; (i) spread of
HIV/AIDS; (i) possible depletion of the underground water resources, and therefore, the need for
continuous monitoring of the recharge characteristics of aquifers; and (j) possible adverse effects on
socially disadvantaged groups such as women.
Fanner-pastoralist conflicts were a major problem under Fadama I, partly because the project failed to
provide a mechanism to compensate pastoralists for the loss, through fadama production, of stock routes,
grazing reserves and watering points and, in part because the project failed to integrate livestock-related



6
ISDS
activities. The conflicts were particularly severe in Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa and Imo states, where violent
confrontations often led to the loss of life and destruction of property.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on ED for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessnment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)      0 Yes (9 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                * Yes (9 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 * Yes (9 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   * Yes () No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              (9 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               (9 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes (9 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          ( Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes (H No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*    (9 Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all r elevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be tak-en to obtain necessaty data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The potential negative social and enviroimlental effects of fadama expansion is defined in detail through
the Environmental and Social Impact assessment (ESIA). The findings of the ESIA are the basis for the
development of an environmental management plan (EMP) which defines appropriate prevention and
mitigation measures. Possible negative environmental and social externalities that may result from the
investments in fadama development include: (a) environmental degradation; (b) conflict between
economic interest groups (farmers/pastoralists/fishennen) competing for access to limited water and land
resources; (c) water-use control and management problems; (d) soil erosion; (e) soil, water and air
pollution from agro-processing; (f) bio-diversity loss; (g) riparian rights problems, including other
regional interests; (h) developmental problems such as the incidence of HIV/AIDS; (i) possible depletion
of the underground water resources, and therefore, the need for continuous monitoring of the recharge
characteristics of aquifers; and (j) adverse effects on socially disadvantaged groups such as women.
Fanner-pastoralist conflicts were a major problem under Fadama 1, partly because the project failed to
provide a mechanism to compensate pastoralists for the loss, through fadama production, of stock routes,
grazing reserves and watering points and, in part because the project failed to integrate livestock-related
activities. The conflicts were particularly severe in Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa and Imo states, where violent
confrontations often led to the loss of life and destruction of property.
Il.D.]b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Despite the fact that many of the sub-projects are expected to be small in size, particularly at the
community levels, they may, however, result in cumulative impacts due the their large number.



7
ISDS
Mitigation measures, including monitoring of relevant indicators, to address with these impacts are
addressed in the project EIA/EM P.
ll.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No adverse long-term impacts are anticipated. Nonetheless, questions related to such impacts are
discussed in the context the EJA/EMP and proper mitigation measures are identified to avoid adverse
long-term impacts.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatmenit of alternatives (if required)
The potential negative social and environmental effects of fadama expansion are defined in detail in the
Environmental and Social hImpact assessment (ESIA). The findings are the basis for the development of
an environmental management plan which defines appropriate prevention and mitigation measures.
In terms of mitigation of social impacts, the preparation of Fadama II is benefiting from a thorough
analysis the social issues identified during the implementation of Fadama I and the active participation of
the Miyetti Allah Cattle Breeders Association of Nigeria (MACBAN), a national level NGO with
branches in all the states. The project will deal with the social conflict problems by: (a) empowering the
security agents and MACBAN to enforce the regulations on the movement of nomads into the country;
(b) providing and clearly demarcating stock routes, grazing reserves and watering points; (c) providing
basic social infrastructure along the stock routes for nomads, including education for the nomads and
their children; (e) by promoting investments in livestock-related income-generating activities, including
dairy production, commercial production of fodder, hides and skins production, etc. to economically
empower the pastoralists; (f) supporting the conflict resolution committees set up by the state
governments; and (g) encouraging the involvement of community/traditional leaders in fadama
development as these have been helpful in grassroots mobilization and in the resolution of conflicts.
Gender targeting in Fadama II will be achieved through: (a) a comprehensive gender assessment, to be
financed by DFID, which will provide useful information for the design of a targeted program; (b)
proactive support to increase women's access to credit and land resources; (c) training of women on
relevant skills and general sensitization of communities for their empowerment; and (d) support for
research on gender-friendly technologies.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The ESIA and the ESMF have been integrated into the Project implementation plan manual, and will be
used to screen all activities and subprojects in the LDPs. As needed, activities and subprojects will be
subjected to either partial or full environmental and social (safeguard) impact assessments. The ESMF
has linkages to a resettlement policy framework, a pest management strategy, and a strategy for dealing
with critical ecosystems through the separately-funded GEF Project. A training module on Environmental
Govemance would be used in the training of the FCAs to ensure mainstreaming of the Bank's
environmental safeguards policies. In addition, all investment sub-projects would be subject to
environmental screening to ensure compliance with all the applicable safeguard policies. To address pest
management issues, a Pest Management Plan has been developed. The Involuntary Settlement safeguard
is addressed by the Resettlement Policy Framework.
1I.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of the project include smallholder farmer associations, pastoralist groups, associations
of traders, distributors, and artisans. Other potential beneficiary groups, include women, NGOs,



8
ISDS
govermmental agencies, including the ADPs, federal and state Govermnent officials responsible for
Agriculture and Rural Development, Forestry, Water Resources, Environment, National Parks, local
government councils, large-scale farmers, private banks, private input service providers including those
in the business of seed multiplication and Nigeria's development partners, notably, DFID, USAID, ADB,
IFAD, FAO and UNDP.
The Government and the Bank agreed that stakeholder participation was essential throughout the
preparation of this project because of: (i) the demand-driven nature of the project; (ii) the reliance on
existing, experienced intennediaries for provision of support services to beneficiaries; (iii) the
importance of ownership to ensure sustained maintenance of project-financed investments; and (iv) the
explicit project development objective of increasing beneficiary organizational and management
capacity.
Participation during project preparation began with an initial consultation with key stakeholders
throughout the country. A stakeholder workshop attended by over 300 potential beneficiaries from every
state in the federation was held to synthesize the findings of the beneficiary consultations which took
place during the initial project preparation stage. Finally, further consultations were held during project
pre-appraisal and appraisal, leading to the design of a participation action plan for project
implementation. The participation action plan will facilitate stakeholder involvement and awareness at all
levels of project implementation, and will ensure that infonnation required for decision making is
available to all interested parties.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[  SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requlirements
Environinental Assessment/Anahlsis/Managemenit Plan:       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/23/2003     6/23/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            6/30/2003     7/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             6/27/2003     6/27/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  6/27/2003  6/27/2003
Directors (For categot;y A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/23/2003     6/23/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            6/30/2003     7/1/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             6/27/2003     6/27/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framnework:            Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank



9
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/23/2003     6/23/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            6/30/2003     6/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             6/27/2003     6/27/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expecled       Aclual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:             Sidi C. JaTmmeh                            07/07/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Roxanne Hakim/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                 Namiic                                      Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                        08/11/2003
Sector Manager               Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                          08/07/2003



