                                                                                  ~~ri~~~~


                 Integrated Safegua-rds Data Sheet Pilot
                                                             Print-ready

  *'By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claimson the disputed
  areas



         A. Basic Project Data                        ..              -.                        -            .                              l

|Regli.:                   ARVcP*                             Couhy:: *                    fige'na       IY:       -                2003

  ProjetNaime:,-,          FADMA'nI
                      e                                       ProjeeIl32.             -         2        Saua                        LEND   l

  Tasklgr:                                       .-LendIntr                   '             SIL   .      Type:                       PE

lM2JSeC.tof- ;.        ::; AI-lDgatiqn &Drainag                    Category                  A'
                                                                                        .EA              Un!t:'                    |F

I App;rDahiDuf     S-. ' 0545-200i       t     ,      .' '- IBRD Amt (SlMl):            - .L ,X              ;-           * ii ;       0;
,BoaidDateij7>' ^'          '- fi     '               o > s-2T-2oo2
                                                              IA'DA I ($.T-..
                                                                    A:mI0(,2):                              -Al
                               .s   -.                                                     1165
                                      .                      '                 ¢'               a




   'Project Objectives
     To assist small holder farmers and related entrepreneurs to overcome the production,
     organizational and marketing constraints on fadama (small scale irrigation) expansion in
     order to obtain sustainable increases inagricultural production as well as to contribute to
     enhanced food security and reduction of rural poverty. The related subsidiary objectives are:
     (a)to increase local capacity to assess and mitigate the social and environmental impact of
     investments infadama expansion; and (b)to improve the institutional framework for
I management of common water resources by improving the effectiveness of the Niger/Nigeria
     Joint Commission, (c) to promote public participation and foster increasing gender
     involvement inagriculture, as indicated by: the preparation of national and state-level
     strategies which reflect concerns of broader stakeholders and incorporates available
     statistical information on the role of gender in agricultural enterprise; (d)promote the
     conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and natural habitats within protected areas
     and other ecologically fragile areas within areas targeted under this project. Environmental
     and social safeguards will be put inplace based on community-based environmental impact
     assessment and mitigation plans. The global environmental objective isto demarcate,
     strengthen the monitoring, conservation and sound management of fragile ecosystems and
  l key components of ecosystem services within targeted states.

     Project Description
     The components of Fadama IIwill be as follows:

     (i) Fadama Investment Facility (FIF)-US$150 million. This component would finance
     demand-driven sub-projects on the basis of market determined interest rates. The Facility
    would be constituted by a consortium of private banks who will be autonomous indetermining
!
!    the bankability of sub-projects submitted by eligible project participants, on-lending terms and
     conditions, as well as well as the borrower's creditworthiness. The sub-projects may be
     production related or for input production and distribution, produce processing and marketing,
     and may be for either crop or non-crop activities, or all two.. It is expected that the percentage
l contribution to the Facility would be: Federal Government 5%, State Government 20%, World
     Bank 45%, Participating banks 20%, and Beneficiaries 10%. Part of the contributions of the
    World Bank, the Federal Government and the State Government would be applied for cost
I    and risk-sharing arrangements to reduce the exposure of the lending institutions. The private
. banks would be assisted with logistical support, technical assistance, training to reduce
     administrative costs and the perceived risks associated with rural lending. The criteria
l applicable to selection of participating banks, the credit eligibility and beneficiary-selection
I criterion would be defined indue course. The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) will be involved
L in th. onArntion nf tha! fiund to en.simr                that nartirinntinn hqnk. nlRv hv thprnilp.s An qltprnqtivp

  better than the former can including the delivery of appropriate research and extension
I services (c) assist with awareness-raising campaigns to help farmers adopt the new project
  philosophy; (d)facilitate the linkage of the participating economic interest groups with
  markets, input suppliers and other partners; and (e)strengthen the Women InAgriculture
  (WIA) unit of the ADPs to enhance its support for targeted gender interventions and training
  support to the women groups. The project would incorporate a comprehensive manpower
  development program designed to transform the network of participating ADPs into centers of
  excellence. Training topics for ADP staff would include: use of Management Information
  System, managing technical assistance, contract management, subproject evaluation and
  communication skills. State-of-the art office technology will be installed to expand the
  outreach and enhance the operational performance of the participating ADPs.

  (v) Strengthening Farmers' Organizations-US$15 million:--user groups, farmer/pastoralist
  associations, cooperatives will be strengthened so they may benefit from economies of scale
  ininput supply (including technical assistance and information) and output marketing, storage
  and processing. This component is designed to empower the participating economic interest
  groups, especially the FUAs, the pastoralists and the marketing and distribution associations,
  to become financially autonomous and efficient organizations. In addition, as part of a
  decentralization thrust, the project would strengthen the capacity of the participating LGCs to
  mobilize the communities for development actions. The project would finance technical
  assistance, training ingroup dynamics, entrepreneurial skills and leadership development
  and studies. Inorder to improve the availability and quality of production and marketing
  support services to beneficiaries, the project would support capacity-building interventions for
  participating NGOs and other private operators, including those involved in seed
  multiplication, para-veterinary service providers, local artisans and groups/individuals

  as well as the social assessment would provide further information for proper design of this
  involved inequipment repairs and maintenance services. The baseline study on institutions

  component.

  (vi) Environmental and Social Protection and Conservation-US$20 million. This component
  aims to build capacity to monitor and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social
  impacts of fadama development activities. It also aims to promote the sustainable
  management of fragile ecosystems and ecosystem services within the target areas. Funds
  from both the GEF (US$10-16 million) and IDA (US$4 million) will be utilized for activities
  under this component. GEF funds will support the management of fragile ecosystems and
  ecosystem services. Relevant documents from previous initiatives such as the EIA carried out
  for the NFDP I and the comprehensive EA and Social Assessments currently being carried
I out as part for this project, studies carried out by DFID, NCF, FME and other partners will be
  used as baseline information for the design of this project.

  The activities would include: (a)monitoring of aquifers (recharge characteristics, impact of
  extraction) and surface water (flow, discharge), leading to the development of simple
  guidelines on efficient water management; (b)monitoring of water and soil quality, including
  pollution levels around fadama production and processing sites (fecal coliform concentration,
  contamination by chemical fertilizer, agro-chemicals, processing waste) and assessment of
  the impact of such pollution on human health; (c) training workshops and studies to outline
  proposals for mitigation measures to prevent and reduce potential environmental, health and
  social impact. This will also lead to the preparation of guidelines on the appropriate use of
  fertilizers and maintenance of groundwater tables and soil fertility; (d)support for integrated
3 ecosystem management with community involvement. Key activities will include: (i)
  strengthening the management framework for conservation and management of fragile
  ecosystems including zoning, demarcation and development of management plans; (ii)
  promotion of agro-forestry and social forestry for carbon sequestration; (iii) improved fishery
  management; (iv) restoration of degraded ecosystems; (v) conservation farming; (vi)
  1Pcct:;h1i h  n nf  ilf1riifP rnrriHnrc qnd (iiil nrnmntinn nf in-citii AnrPY-Citi ifprminn nf

 _ medicinal plants; and (viii) analysis ofviable options and establishment of an Ecosystem
   Management Fund to promote sustainable natural resource management; (e) support to
   community-based conflict resolution mechanisms; (f) targeted interventions to support
   HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention inrural areas; (g) support to the Nigeria/Niger Joint
   Commission to strengthen its capacity to address riparian rights issues and the overall
   management of common water resources. This component will be implemented largely by
   FME, Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR) and FMARD in association with selected
   community organizations and NGOs.

   (vii) Policy Formulation-US$5 million: This component is designed to enhance the cost-
   effectiveness and efficiency of the public agencies which deliver technical, development,
  administration and management services to fadama clients, notably the Departments of
  Agriculture (FDA) and Rural Development (FDRD) of FMARD, FMWR, FME and NAFDAC.
  The funds dedicated to improving rural and poverty alleviation policy at the national and state
   levels is necessary to help Government achieve its objectives of: (i)ensuring that the
   concerns of the poor, rural communities are integrated into policy formulation and analysis;
   and (ii) increasing decentralization of implementation responsibility (operational and financial)
  to state governments as fiscal status and accountability improves. The institutional audit will
   provide an action plan for strengthening the participating public agencies to deliver services
I efficiently. The project would provide technical assistance, training   and studies to improve the
   capacity of these agencies and a few selected government agencies at the Federal and State
   levels to undertake policy formulation and program/project design and implementation for
   rural poverty reduction. Integrated ecosystem management activities       being supported under
  this project will be guided by the findings of: (i)analyses being initiated on Policy Framework
  for Protected Areas (Microwatershed and Environmental Management program); and (ii)
  analyses on natural resource dependence, crop production and poverty (study entitled:
   Environmental Degradation, Impacts on Poverty and Options for harmonization of Sectoral
   Initiatives).

   (viii) Implementation Coordination Component-US$10        million. This component would
7 finance the establishment and maintenance of the Fadama Development Coordinating Unit
   (FDCU), which will be answerable to the Projects Coordinating Unit of the FMARD. The unit
i will provide administrative support and oversight for national-level coordination of project
. implementation, including procurement and disbursements, project accounting and reporting
  (consolidation of periodic and progress reports, annual operating plans, etc), establishment of
  management information systems (MIS), project supervision, monitoring and evaluation, and
  audits. The FDCU's annual performance reviews would include semi-structured beneficiary
  interviews, while the mid-term and final project evaluations would include participatory
  workshops to ensure the incorporation of stakeholder views       regarding project implementation
  progress, effectiveness, and needs for modifications in the    operational manual/procedures.
I Evaluation activities would include the establishment of baseline project impact indicators
  during the first year of the project. While the ADPS and other federal agencies implementing
  the project will also be involved in coordinating the environmental and social protection and
  conservation component, the main implementing agencies for this component will be a range
  of stakeholders including the Federal Ministry of Environment (FME),       National Park Service
1 (NPS), relevant State Environmental Ministries,    NGOS such as the Nigerian Conservation
  Foundation (NCF) and Savannah Conservation (SC); and community based organizations.

  Proiect Location
  It is recognized that the states would differ intheir potential for participation in the different
I activities involved in fadama expansion, from crop production to complementary activities
l such as input production and distribution, processing    and marketing, or diversification into
l aquaculture, livestock development and social forestry. A committee established by
  Government has proposed the following eligibility criteria   for the selection of participating
  stftp in F;drms II whinh hRvp also hpn rqtifiRd At thp qtqkphnldr.r workqhonr (a a writtpn

  proposal with detailed action plan for both the upstream and downstream activities to be
  undertaken; (b) a written commitment for regular payment of the counterpart funds,
  deductible at source on a monthly basis; (c) evidence of mitigating measures against
 farmers/pastoralists/fishermen conflicts; (d)evidence of viable and active Fadama Users
 Associations (FUA); (e)completion of a detailed assessment of existing fadama infrastructure
  (baseline survey); (f) a loan recovery rate of at least 75% under Fadama IProject; (g)an
  acceptable staffing of the ADP management; (h)evidence of inclusion of farmers and private
  sector representatives on the ADP Executive Committee (ADPEC); (i) submission of an
  action plan for the utilization of the Escrow Accounts under Fadama I,satisfactory to the
  Federal Ministries of Finance and Agriculture as well as the World Bank; and () evidence of
  repayment of over commitment on previous projects. State governments are expected to
  endorse these requirements before appraisal.

  With regard to the Environmental and Social Protection and Conservation component, the
  environmental monitoring and mitigation activities will be undertaken inthe selected states.
  Activities that promote conservation and integrated ecosystem management of ecologically
  fragile areas will largely be within the states being selected under this project. Where
  biological corridors are being demarcated or where a specific protected area or fragile
  ecosystem spans state borders the program activities will adopt an ecosystem approach to
  implementation.

  B. Environmental Classification

  Environmental Classification Approved                                     A
  by Environmental Assessment Team

  Environmental Classification Comments
  The following potential impacts could result from fadama expansion: (a)conflict between
  economic interest groups (farmers/pastoralists/fishermen) competing for access to limited
X water and land resources; (b) water-use control and management problems; (c) land and soil
  erosion; (d)soil, water and air pollution from agro-processing; (e)bio-diversity loss through
  conversion of natural habitat to farm land; (f) conflicts that may arise from riparian rights; (h)
  spread of waterborne disease; (i) spread of HIV/AIDS; (i) possible depletion of the
  underground water resources, and therefore, the need for continuous monitoring of the
  recharge characteristics of aquifers; and () possible adverse effects on socially
  disadvantaged groups such as women.

  Farmer-pastoralist conflicts were a major problem under Fadama I, partly because the project
  failed to provide a mechanism to compensate pastoralists for the loss, through fadama
  production, of stock routes, grazing reserves and watering points and, in part because the
  project failed to integrate livestock-related activities. The conflicts were particularly severe in
  Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa and Imo states, where violent confrontations often led to the loss of
  life and destruction of property.

  C. Applicabilityof Safeguard Policies

  Environment Assessment (OP/BP/GP                                      t           r  N
 14.01)                                                                   YES1         NO       - TBD

  Natural Habitats (OP/GP 4.04)                 1                         YES       r  NO     (- TBD

L Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                                             r
                                                                        ' YES          NO         TBD

  Pest Management (OP 4.09)                     f                         YES |        NOT_ TBD_|

i Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                 1
                                                                          YES        -NO          TBD

  Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                  1-                        YES |        NO     r   TBD

  Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)
   I                                                                           !
                                                                         ( YES       7-NO  |      TBD

 lTSafety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           7 YES |      - NO |      TBD

                                                                               I
   Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP/GP                                    YES
   7.60)*

   Projects on International Waterways                                   ¢Y          C N
   (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                                                         YES          NO        TBD


   D. Summary of Key Safeguard lssues -;s                .     -

_ 1.Describe any safeguard issues associated with the proposed project. Identify and
l describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Describe any
   potential cumulative or long term impacts.
I The potential negative social and environmental effects of fadama expansion will be defined
   indetail through the Environmental and Social Impact assessment (ESIA) that is currently
   under preparation. The findings will be the basis for the development of an environmental
   management plan which defines appropriate prevention and mitigation measures. Possible
   negative environmental and social externalities that may result from the investments in
I  fadama development include: (a)environmental degradation; (b)conflict between economic
I  interest groups (farmers/pastoralists/fishermen) competing for access to limited water and
   land resources; (c) water-use control and management problems; (d) soil erosion; (e) soil,
   water and air pollution from agro-processing; (f) bio-diversity loss; (g)riparian rights
   problems, including other regional interests; (h)developmental problems such as the
   incidence of HIV/AIDS; (i) possible depletion of the underground water resources, and
   therefore, the need for continuous monitoring of the recharge characteristics of aquifers; and
   ! adverse effects on socially disadvantaged groups such as women.
    )

   Farmer-pastoralist conflicts were a major problem under Fadama 1,partly because the project
   failed to provide a mechanism to compensate pastoralists for the loss, through fadama
   production, of stock routes, grazing reserves and watering points and, in part because the
   project failed to integrate livestock-related activities. The conflicts were particularly severe in
   Bauchi, Gombe, Jigawa and Imo states, where violent confrontations often led to the loss of
I life and destruction of property.

I 2. In light of 1,describe the proposed treatement of alternatives
   The potential negative social and environmental effects of fadama expansion will be defined
   indetail through the Environmental and Social Impact assessment (ESIA) that is currently
   under preparation. The findings will be the basis for the development of an environmental
   management plan which defines appropriate prevention and mitigation measures. The
   preparation of Fadama 11is benefiting from a thorough analysis of the environmental and
   social impacts identified during the implementation of Fadama I and the active participation of
   the Miyetti Allah Cattle Breeders Association of Nigeria (MACBAN), a national level NGO with
   branches in all the states. The project will deal with the social conflict problems by: (a)
l empowering the security agents and MACBAN to enforce the regulations on the movement of
l nomads into the country; (b)providing and clearly demarcating stock routes, grazing reserves
   and watering points; (c) providing basic social infrastructure along the stock routes for
   nomads, including education for the nomads and their children; (e)by promoting investments
1 in livestock-related income-generating activities, including dairy production, commercial
   production of fodder, hides and skins production, etc. to economically empower the
   pastoralists; (f) supporting the conflict resolution committees set up by the state governments;
   and (g)encouraging the involvement of community/traditional leaders infadama development
   as these have been helpful ingrassroots mobilization and inthe resolution of conflicts.

lGRndrr tnrnAtinn in Fsd;ms will hp qrhipvpd thrniinh- (;; Arnmnrmhpnqive. npndrir
                                   il

assessment, to be financed by DFID, which will provide useful information for the design         of a
targeted program; (b)proactive support to increase women's access to credit and land
resources; (c) training of women on relevant skills and general sensitization of communities
for their empowerment; and (d)support for research on gender-friendly technologies.

A full assessment of the spread and impact HIV/AIDS will be undertaken during the project
preparation work, leading to the design of a sub-component to support awareness-raising and
other prevention programs.

3.Describe specific implementation measures for borrower to address safeguard
issues
The environmental and social safeguards that will be identified during project preparation
through the ESIA and other assessments currently underway will comprise a chapter inthe
implementation manual. The implementation of the safeguards will be monitored by a team
comprising representatives of FME, State environmental agencies and representatives of
NGOs.

An environmental and social management plan will be developed to ensure that adequate
mechanisms are established for the screening, categorizing, and executing of key project
activities. Appropriate budgetary allocations will be provided.

In addition, training and capacity building will be provided to all key stakeholders involved in
the implementation of project activities for identification of issues associated with the social
and environmental safeguards, to ensure compliance with the safeguards and
prevent/mitigate negative impacts.

4.Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of the project include smallholder farmer associations, pastoralist groups,
associations of traders, distributors, and artisans. Other potential beneficiary groups, include
women, NGOs, governmental agencies, including the ADPs, federal and state Government
officials responsible for Agriculture and Rural Development, Forestry, Water Resources,
Environment, National Parks, local government councils, large-scale farmers, private banks,
private input service providers including those in the business of seed multiplication and
Nigeria's development partners, notably, DFID, USAID, ADB, IFAD, FAO and UNDP.

The proposed project is potentially a participation flagship project for the Africa Region. The
Government and the Bank agreed that stakeholder participation was essential throughout the
preparation of this project because of: (i) the demand-driven nature of the project; (ii) the
reliance on existing, experienced intermediaries for provision of support services to
beneficiaries; (iii) the importance of ownership to ensure sustained maintenance of project-
Inanced investments; and (iv) the explicit project development objective of increasing
beneficiary organizational and management capacity.

Participation during project preparation began with an initial consultation with key
stakeholders throughout the country. A stakeholder workshop attended by over 300 potential
beneficiaries from every state inthe federation was held to synthesize the findings of the
beneficiary consultations which took place during the initial project preparation stage. Finally,
further consultations will be held during project pre-appraisal and appraisal, leading to the
design of a participation action plan for project implementation. The participation action plan
will facilitate stakeholder involvement and awareness at all levels of project implementation,
and will ensure that information required for decision making is available to all interested
parties. Ongoing ESIA and other assessments are also facilitating consultation with potential
beneficiaries as well as groups that may be adversely affected by the project. The draft ESIA
will hP first rmlpqsrl for niihlir review in thp nrnier.t srps ;;nrl in thp Stntp r.;qnit;ls and

   members of the public will be invited to comment. Subsequently the draft report and the
   comments received will be forwarded to the FME for review and approval. Participation by
   benficiaries will also take place through the monitoring and evaluation system of the project to
   ensure disclosure of and adherance to safeguard policies.

   E.Safeguards Classifications

                                                  °S1-Significant, large scale, cumulative and/or irreversible
                                                 impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in one or
                                                 more safeguard areas


                                                     S2-Safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
                                                 technically and institutionally manageable

   Safeguards Classifications                     C S3-No safeguard issues


                                                  -  Sf-Financial intermediary projects, social development
                                                 funds, community driven development or similar projects which
                                                 require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to
                                                 address safeguard issues.


                                                     tbd-To Be Determined

   F. Disclosure Requirements             .     . .

-Environrmental    Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:

   Date of receipt by Bank                                          Feb 28, 2002

   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  Mar 31, 2002

   Date of submission to InfoShop                                   Mar 31, 2002

   For category A projects, date of
   distributing the Executive Summary of                            Apr 15,2002
   the EA to the Executive Directors

 _Re's'ettl'ement Action Plan/Framework:      -      .:                            --
 T
 I Date of receipt by Bank                                                            l

   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                    l

   Date of submission to InfoShop               |

  |lndigenous Peopies Development Plan/Framrework:
   l                                                                      -      -
                                                                                 .       -


  |Date of receipt by Bank                                                           I

   Date of "in-country" disclosure


   Date of submission to InfoShop

[  Pest Management Plan:                                                                      - --

   Date of receipt by Bank                      l                                     l
!IDate
         of "in-country" disclosure              _                                      _

!
   Date of submission            to InfoShop
 ]
   Dam Safety Assessment Plan:

 lDate of receipt by Bank


l Date of "in-country" disclosure


   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           I_
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
   why.



 Signed & Submitted by:


    Task Team Leader                                                                             ((U             ate:   /J//'+            /
               .                                                  S;§~~~~~~~idi
                                                                          Jammeh


     Safeguards Specialist(s)in the Task                                                                      Date:i______Date
 Team                                                              Naima H               Sr. Social
               l                                                  ~~~~~~~~~~~~Scientist


                 I.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


F
1Approved by:


     Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                               I>a                                       Date:       '4

                                                                   Charolot-e Bing Km


     Project Sector Manager:                                C                                                 Date:      /
                                                                   Jos            aash-Dwomoh

            in_teprpoepojc,heBnkdosnoitndtopejdiethInaleterinatonothepa
 *By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed

