                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC166
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NIGERIA                                              Project ID: P072644
Project: Rural Access and Mobility Project (RAMP)             Task Team Leader: George A. Banjo
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 15, 2005                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 14, 2005                                  IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR                                          Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                               development (P); Decentralization (S);
                                                              Administrative and civil service reform (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The overall project development objective is to assist participating states and local government councils
sustainably improve access and mobility in their rural areas and thereby contribute to the improvement
of their rural livelihood through: (i) ensuring project sustainability by strengthening the capacity of rural
stakeholders (government, communities and private sector) to identify, design and implement
interventions that contribute to improving rural livelihood in a manner that empowers rural dwellers; (ii)
rehabilitation and maintenance of rural transport infrastructures to facilitate improved farm to market
linkages and contribute to overall rural development efforts; (iii) diversifying the options available to
rural dwellers to meet their movement needs through increased and enhanced provision of rural transport
services using conventional and intermediate means of transport; (iv) promotion of non-farm employment
and income generating activities that are demand driven and implemented by rural dwellers especially
those related to the provision of small scale rural infrastructures which contribute to reducing the time
and efforts associated with traveling; and (v) strengthening the capacity for the coordination and
management of policy implementation at the federal level thereby facilitating resource mobilization and
the wide-spread adoption of good practice examples.



Components:

The project presently has six components: (i) Capacity building and institutional reforms; (ii) rehabilitation and
maintenance of road transport infrastructure; (iii) Rural mobility improvements; (iv) promotion of non-farm
employment and income generating activities; (v) project coordination unit; and (vi) preparation of future
phases.




I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed Rural Access and Mobility Project is planned as the first phase of a possible series of
assistance to address the chronic constraints posed on rural development in Nigeria by the inadequacies
in the level of transport access and mobility available to rural dwellers through implementation of the
national rural transport policy. A number of states would be competitively selected (draft selection
criteria has been agreed with the MARD), based on willingness to go ahead with up-front appropriate
road sector management and financing reforms. The number of states allowed to participate initially is
proposed as six. Provision is however made for the design of follow on projects in the expectation that

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS



more states will want to replicate the project' approach. Each participating state will be expected to make
an upfront commitment to the financing of their road network to the required extent based on need.

Across all the components, the gender and social impact of proposed interventions will be given specific
attention to ensure that the project responds to the needs of the most vulnerable. In addition, as part of the
social analysis, HIV/AIDS impacts will be determined and mitigation actions incorporated into project
interventions.


The project is presently seen as having six components as follows:

Component 1: Capacity building and institutional reforms

In the six participating states, activities will be focused on strengthening the capacity of rural
stakeholders to identify, design and implement interventions that contribute to improvements in their
livelihood. It will involve (a) reform of public sector agencies responsible for management of rural
transport infrastructure, provision of training and introduction of modern road planning and management
systems (creation of State Highway Authorities would be encouraged); (b) development of legal and
institutional arrangements that better empower the local government and communities to participate in
the management and provision of rural transport infrastructure and services; and (iii) facilitating the
creation of community driven approaches to the identification of needed interventions.

Component 2: Rehabilitation and maintenance of road transport infrastructure

Planned activities under this component will lead to the establishment of sustainable and permanent road
maintenance funding arrangements, preferably through state based and user controlled road funds;
strategic investments in the rehabilitation and maintenance of critical links of the state rural road system
which would ensure access from the agricultural production zones to markets, improved access to social
and economic services, and linkage of the local government and community road networks to the higher
level road network Interventions would predominantly concern local government and state roads. More
specifically, planned road works, within existing right of way, will include road repairs (to pavements,
culverts and other drainage structures and bridges), periodic maintenance works, and spot improvements
to improve servicability of particular road sections. These works will be on RTIs of the states, local
government councils and communities. However, occasionally spot intervention might be required and
justified on the (rural) federal road network in a state.

Component 3: Rural mobility improvements

The objective of this component is the development of strategy and implementation of enhanced
provision and use of public transport services including intermediate means of transport. It will involve
the private sector and community based organizations and involve demonstration projects on the
promotion of animal traction, two wheel vehicles and other.

Component 4: Promotion of non-farm employment and income generating activities

This component is aimed at optimizing the benefits of project activities to the rural dwellers especially
the poor and vulnerable. It includes measures for the promotion of labor intensive work methods thereby
creating jobs, training of local contractors using this approach thus promoting rural enterprise, and
providing advise and support to local stakeholders wanting to establish SME to provide various services
within the rural transport sector thus improving their livelihood.

                                                        3
                                                                                                         ISDS




Component 5: Project Coordination Unit

The project will be coordinated at the federal level through a Coordination Unit (the Rural Travel and
Transport Unit in DRD has been so designated). This coordination unit will also be in charge of
monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the project and draw findings to prepare the scaling up
of the institutional design for the whole country. It will receive Technical assistance to this purpose.

Component 6: Preparation of Future Phases.

The principal activities under this component are: (i) preparation of rural transport development plans for
six more states; (ii) gender and social assessment for the six states for which rural transport development
plans have been prepared; (iii) creation and operationalization of a national database on rural travel and
transport; (iv) consultancy to undertake a progress review of the implementation of the national rural
travel and transport policy; (v) consultancies and technical assistance for linking implementation of the
NRTTPS to the road sector as a whole and thus facilitating the adoption of lessons of experience from
RAMP into transport sector policy and implementation activities; and (vi) technical assistance to
facillitate wider transport sector reform in response to progress in dialogue in this regard at the federal
level.




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will take place within six participating states, one from each of the six geo-political groupings to
which Nigeria is commonly divided for convenience of administration. The states will be selected on the
basis of criteria to be agreed focused on their readiness to undertake needed reforms in their approach to
road sector management and financing and ability to timely identify needed interventions. The interventions
will principally be in the rural areas either on roads passing through these areas or those servicing their intra
local government or community area movement needs. Planned road improvements will be within existing
right of way of such roads. Until interventions are identified during project preparation, it is not posible to
be specific as to the characteristics of the project areas. However, it is known that some states have areas
prone to soil erosion, arid climate and riverine in nature and appropriate measures will need to be taken to
ensure that design of interventions in such states are responsive to the needs of such environments. Manuals
to be developed during project preparation for use in design of roads and other interventions will directly
provide for each different climatic zone building on lessons from the design of LEEMP. It is not expected
that any proposed intervention will be in an area with critical natural habitats or any other culturally or
socially sensitive areas. A detail gender and social assessment will be undertaken of proposed project
interventions including development of manuals of procedures for dealing with social dimensions of the
project. Assuming that each state will have a population of between 2 to 3 million, the population to be
affected by the project will be between 12 and 18 million.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The issues will be determined during project preparation. They will in nature be significantly
influenced by the geographic location of the participating states and local government areas. Generally,
these may relate to proneness of some areas to erosion, and the possible effect of deforestation. However, it
is expected that all major works will be within existing road right of ways. It is planned to prepare an

                                                       4
                                                                                                           ISDS



environmental assessment of the project including mitigation measures as part of project preparation. It is
planned that during project preparation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and
participating states will be assisted to strengthen their institutional capacity to discharge their due diligence
responsibilities with regard to environmental and social issues. The key stakeholders expected to be
involved in dialogue on environmental issues are the state, local governments and communities in the
project areas. The Federal Ministry of Environment will also need to be involved as the agency responsible
for approving EA Reports within the country.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes      No       TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes      No       TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes      No       TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes      No       TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes      No       TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes      No       TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes      No       TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes      No       TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes      No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No major safeguards issues or impacts are expected to be associated with the proposed project. Some
   environmental impacts are foreseen in those geographic areas of participating states and local
   governments prone to soil erosion and deforestation. Approriate technical designs and construction
   methods will be adopted to deal with such cases. It is to be noted that since the proposed works will be
   largely small scale in nature, any erosion and deforestation impacts will be similarly small scale in nature.
   No resettlement is expected to be trigerred by foreseeable project interventions.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None is foreseen but this will be confirmed during preparation as speific poroject interveventions are
   known.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None is expected.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
NA

                                                       5
                                                                                                         ISDS



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
During preparation, the Borrower will be assisted to stregthen their institutional capacity to deal with
   safeguards issues through the establishment of safeguards units, where they do not exist, and measures
   to ensure their effectiveness including review/development of appropriate manuals of procedures
   acceptable to IDA. An environmental assessment of the project will be prepared including mitigation
   measures, cleared and disclosed prior to project appriasal.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the communitiues and individuals directly affected by the project through
   interventions in their locality. Others are NGOs and civic organizations with operations and interests in
   the project whose activities may be impacted upon by the project (principally by providing opportunities
   for them to participate in project activities). The state and local government officials in the transport
   sector are also seen as stakeholders as they will be impacted by planned reforms. During project
   preparation, as part of the planned gender and social assessment, a detailed stakeholder analysis will be
   carried. Secondly, the preparation of the transport development plans will be done participatorily with
   stakeholder involvement. The Federal Ministry of Environment requires that projects such as RAMP be
   subjected to their public disclosure process and this provision will be complied with consistent with Bank
   guidelines.



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

                                                   6
                                                                                                  ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            1/17/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        1/24/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         4/30/2005
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive      Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    George A. Banjo                                    07/17/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    Nina Chee/Person/World Bank                        07/17/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                                   07/17/03
Sector Manager/Director              Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard                        07/17/03

