24831
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
'Ih.   I IL  .
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/10/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: OECS COUNTRIES                           Project ID: P070658
Project: OECS/BARBADOS CATASTROPHE RISK           Task Team Leader: John Daniel Pollner
MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE REFORM
PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 15, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 3.00
Bank Approval: March 2, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m): 2.00
Managing Unit: LCSFF                              Sector: Non-compulsory pensions; insurance; and
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  savings (100%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Natural disaster management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
(a) To put in place comprehensive country and sub-regional risk management ex ante funding
strategies to reduce fiscal, economic and financial instability in the wake of natural disasters,
which occur due to resource dislocations and budgetary outlays traditionally required for
reconstruction of uninsured and uninsurable public and private assets.
(b) To strengthen the domestic insurance industries and their arrangements with the international
reinsurance and credit markets, to augment the capacity of domestic insurance markets to manage
and transfer large risk exposures, while building up the requisite reserves to pre-fund and insure
against future natural disasters.
The above objectives which incorporate more optimal usage of risk management
strategies coupled with vulnerability reduction measures, should generate a process of more
sustainable economic growth, and a reduction in financial and economic volatility generated from
periodic natural disasters mostly due to hurricane activity but also from the potential earthquake
and volcanic events in the sub-region.
I.A.3. Project Description:
A. Insurance Regulatory Strengzthening: a. Insurance Regulatory Strengthening: This component will
involve the upgrading of the sub-regional insurance law and harmonization of insurance practices and
legislation in the sub-region, and the issuance of new regulations on insurance companies' capital and
solvency requirements. Regulatory development will also include norms for ensuring the security of
reinsurers, balance sheet valuation methodologies, classification of admitted insurers, conditions for
license revokal, and inspection techniques. The institutional development aspect will promote the



2
ISDS
strengthening of the insurance supervisory authority (both on-site and off-site operations) and its
monitoring capacity for certifying that insurance company reserves adequately fund the retained risks on
actuarially based catastrophe liabilities. In this context the design and operationalization of a
sub-regionally coordinated supervisory function within the Project Agency will be developed to better
leverage technical capacity and ensure independence in issuing compliance directives. Additionally, a
methodology for a standardized risk rating system for the insurance sector will be developed to assess the
vulnerability of the industry and the capacity of the supervisors to detect fragility. This will also
contribute towards implementing more transparent pricing policies and promote loss prevention measures
through incentive-based price signals. With the development of the second component of catastrophe
risk pooling (below), the technical solvency standards based on hazard/vulnerability modeling will also
be absorbed as part of the supervisory function supported by the Project Agency, in order to implement
consistent loss reserving standards across the sub-region, while maintaining a network of technical
support to assure implementation of newly issued insurance regulations and actuarially sound industry
practices.
B. Development of Catastrophe Funding & Pooling Mechanisms: This component will finance technical
assistance to design catastrophe reserving and pooling mechanisms with risk transfer provisions. The
component will be developed/implemented in two steps:
Development of a market based scheme for protecting public assets and infrastructure, and to
build up catastrophe reserves at the sub-regional level and optimize subsequent reinsurance leverage.
This sub-component will involve the examination of pooled catastrophe reserving mechanisms to identify
the level of minimum required transfers of catastrophe risk premiums toward a pooled reserve fund,
which would allow build up of catastrophe risk retention and dampen potential volatility in reinsurance
premium. The component will examine the options for a government catastrophe reserve scheme funded
by such premium transfers as well as a private sector scheme increasing retained catastrophe reserves
(the latter linked to component A above). In the pooling structure, the option of utilizing contingent
credit support will be evaluated in terms of its cost effectiveness in funding upper level losses and in
stabilizing premium rates. Loss payment triggers utilizing parametric or index indicators potentially
linked to market bonds for disaster financing, will also be tested as part of the financial structure, as well
as other applicable capital market instruments available in the Eastern Caribbean region.
The main output of this sub-component will be the design and launch of a public assets insurance
pool to be leveraged using reinsurance and credit support for ex-ante coverage of critical buildings
(government offices, schools, hospitals) and critical infrastructure (e.g.: water, ports, roads, bridges) as
determined necessary for protection by the client Governments. This activity will test the effectiveness
of pooling government insured assets via the insurance sector and/or via a public risk capital fund using
risk transfer arrangements coupled with alternative risk financing mechanisms. The design will include
the options for liquidity coverage at the lowest loss levels via Bank contingent support as well as risk
financing with Bank support at the highest potential loss levels, including determining the cost
effectiveness of risk financing versus risk transfer & insurance arrangements, given the expected
premium requirements. The work will also include examination of cost effectiveness of a catastrophe
risk securitization scheme with credit enhancement features, for transferring catastrophe risks to the
capital markets. The sequential stages of the work will involve (i) the physical (structural and
topographical) risk mappping in each country including exposure to frequency and intensity of perils, (ii)
the inventorying, valuation and vulnerability of public assets and infrastructure, (iii) the derivation of an
actuarial based pricing model to determine insurance pricing of such risks, (iv) the financial structuring
of the pooled insurance fund including the financial instruments discussed above, (v) the
institutional/legal set up of the pooled fund, and (vi) the establishment of cost/benefit trade-offs among
the policy options available including price versus coverage advantages and protection against fiscal



3
ISDS
volatility.
C. Risk Management & Mitigation to Manage Low Income Communities' Exposures: This component
will conduct 2-4 studies on options for managing risks to cover future losses of 'uninsurable' lower
income communities. Associated coverage incentives based on actions taken for structural mitigation
measures and vulnerability reduction will constitute a key element of the study to develop risk ratings for
homes and buildings in lower income communities, and provide rewards for those undertaking pro-active
risk reduction actions. The component will examine the viability of designing a public insurance policy
delineating the specified limited covers provided by the government and setting up notional premium
accounts for low income policy holders. This arrangement could allow eventual monitoring of
community developments and permit the establishment of an transition policy for such properties, to be
transferred gradually to a cost-recovery based public insurance scheme, or to the private insurance
markets. The component will also examine the options for using housing finance programs
(micro-lending) to establish mitigation incentives and provide mechanisms for self insurance at
affordable cost for low income areas. The component will also examine how mitigation measure might
be incorporated in slum upgrading programs by taking advantage of vulnerability analyses and risk
exposure maps developed under the other components of the project.
Components:
A. Insurance Regulatory Strengthening
B. Catastrophe Funding Mechanisms
C. Options for Risk Management & Mitigation Options for Low Income Communities
The objective of the above components will be:
a. Implementation of a strengthened and uniform insurance regulatory framework and business
practice including adequate solvency funding and reserving for catastrophe liabilities commensurate with
domestically retained risk levels and exposure.
b. Implementation of national and regional risk management strategies to leverage pooled catastrophe
fund capital using the local and international insurance and credit markets, to ensure sustainable
pre-funded arrangements for coverage of physical assets against catastrophic risks (public and private
sectors and lower income communities).
c. Development of policy options including enforcement of building and zoning standards, and
vulnerability reduction measures to protect or insure low income communities commensurate with their
disaster risks and loss exposures.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be located at the Caribbean Development Bank in Barbados. Analysis will be undertaken in
each of the participating countries in order to assess the value and loss potential of assets to be covered
under the sub-regional insurance scheme. The pooling mechanism to be developed will be done by the
Project Unit at CDB in consultation with the Steering Committee consisting of participating governments,
CDB, ECCB and the World Bank.



4
ISDS
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: The project will not have an environmental impact as it is a technical assistance operation
designed to develop a sub-regional insurance mechanisms against catastrophic losses.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   C Yes * No     'C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      0 Yes 0 No     C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               C Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 3 Yes * No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes * No    3TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       C Yes 0 No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0t Yes 0 No   C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                0 Yes * No    C TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          O Yes * No     C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None. The project is strictly a T.A. operation intended to set up a financial institution/structure to fulfill an
insurance function. The component dealing with mechanisms for addressing low income sectors is a
study/research component.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No effects foreseen.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
None are applicable in this case.
Does not apply.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Given the multi-sectoral nature of the project, consultations across various groups have been made.
Besides the relevant government offices (Finance, Planning, Disaster Preparedness, Development Banks,
etc.), the project team has consulted with utilities companies, private business operators (commercial,



5
ISDS
manufacturing, trading businesses), the local insurance industry, and banana growers associations.
During on-going preparation, additional consultations are expected with other private sector groups
affected by natural disasters including international reinsureres, and with industries covering engineering
and construction, which have a stake in establishing standards and deploying technical skills in the
sub-region.
The Bank is working with the other donors in the Caribbean such as CDB to collaborate on
participation in this program. In the case of CDB that institution would act as the implementing agency
as well as to cofinance some of the core insurance and catastrophe risk management work for countries
or territories not eligible for Bank/IDA financing. In addition, other multilateral agencies such as the
OAS are being directly involved in deliberations on the project, given that they can provide valuable
knowledge support in designing and implementing programs for hazard mapping and loss reduction.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable



6
6                              ~~~~~~~~~~~ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. The project
mostly involves financial analyis for the purpose of establishing an insurance fund. The inputs are all
information based and the outputs involve a financial product. In this context, none of the safeguard
policies would apply.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             John Daniel Pollner                          Sept. 10, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                          Sept. 10, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Fernando Montes-Negret                       Sept. 10, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
$,t__        I_ FEEDBACK         j        |  SHOWCASE



