                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/08/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PAKISTAN                                              Project ID: P077306
Project: Pakistan TAx Administration Reforms Project           Task Team Leader: Mudassir Khan
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 14, 2003                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 30, 2004                                   IDA Amount ($m): 225.00
Managing Unit: SASFP                                           Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Tax policy and administration (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
An efficient and effective tax administration is a prerequisite if the tax system is to fulfill its revenue
producing potential. Thus, tax administration is a major tool in government's efforts for pursuing a sound
fiscal policy and achieving an optimum tax level.

The Tax Administration Reform Project (TARP) seeks to support the reforms initiated by the government
for improving tax administration . The overriding objective is to raise tax revenue through improved
compliance with tax laws and broadening of the tax base; improving effectiveness, responsiveness and
efficiency of tax administration through institutional and procedural reforms; improving collection through
transparent and high quality tax services; and strengthening audit and enforcement procedures.

This Project follows the successful completion of an IDF Grant which was extended to the Government in
2000 to facilitate development of implementation plans for institutional reform of the Central Board of
Revenue (CBR). TARP supports continuation and effective implementation of the reforms initiated to
enhance the capability of the tax system. Specifically, project objectives include:

1.      Improving efficiency and effectiveness of revenue operations: Creating a new CBR that is
autonomous, transparent, efficient and organized around functional lines, that encourages self assessment
as well as a fair and equitable process of tax administration and appeals. This will include modernizing tax
operations for faster and reliable processing of tax returns, increased capacity of record keeping and
management of data through effective integration of business processes with information systems. In
addition, this will include improvements in staff productivity and morale through adoption of best practice
policies for recruitment, training, performance evaluation and compensation.

2.      Improving collection through transparent and high quality tax services: Promoting voluntary
compliance with tax and custom laws through an intensive taxpayer education and facilitation program,
re-engineering of CBR's business processes and reorienting its operational culture towards a transparent,
service-oriented organization. This will include building effective-working relationships with taxpayers and
minimizing contact between taxpayers and tax officials to reduce discretion on part of tax officials as well
as opportunities for corruption.

3.      Improving trade facilitation through modern and internationally acceptable customs procedures:
Introducing simplified, modern and risk based import and export clearance and related procedures.
Bringing this system in line with internationally acceptable standards for improving trade facilitation.

                                                        2
                                                                                                           ISDS




4.       Strengthening audit and enforcement: Ensuring compliance through a risk based audit system as
well as fair and effective enforcement mechanisms that directly respond to changes in the environment
using information technology and a new intelligence and risk management system.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed Project will support the Government revamp the tax administration system. It would support
initiative to redress major shortcomings in tax administration through investment in human resource and
information technology, modernizing collection and audit procedures, fostering voluntary compliance, and
strengthening the institutional framework for tax enforcement.

The Government is committed to fundamental reform of institutions, incentives and accountability to
breakout from a vicious cycle of high rates, predatory administration, tax evasion and low revenues to a
virtuous cycle of lower rates, equitable tax structures, fair administration, voluntary compliance and higher
revenue. CBR reform is an important pillar of Government's broader strategy for reforming public sector
institutions. Similar reforms have also been initiated at the State Bank of Pakistan, Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan, WAPDA, and the Office of the Auditor General. In addition, the
Government with Bank assistance is in process of preparing a wide-ranging public sector capacity building
program which aims to enhance the skill base of its key ministries, agencies and regulatory bodies in an
effort to introduce broad based civil service reforms.

As its commitment, the Cabinet approved the reform strategy for CBR which allowed it to prepare a
comprehensive reform program. In addition, the Government established a Cabinet Committee for Federal
Revenues headed by the Finance Minister which not only gives CBR autonomy to implement the reform
program but to institute mechanisms which would sustain the reforms once they have been implemented.

The proposed Project is designed around a comprehensive reform strategy and includes the following seven
components: (i) Management and Institutional Development; (ii) Improving Revenue Operations; (iii)
Strengthening Revenue Services; (iv) Creating a Tax Compliant Culture; (v) Adopting Responsive IT
Systems; (vi) Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development; and (vii) Project Management and
Implementation.

1.       Management and Institutional Development

The CBR's human and institutional development strategy will support and enhance the broader tax reform
strategy by driving:

·        Strategic changes within CBR's organizational structure;
·        Transformation of the organization's culture & ethos;
·        Development of sound people-management policies and procedures.

         1.1 Organization and Policy

         1.1.1    Autonomy: Managerial and financial autonomy of CBR would be ensured through
changes in law as well as its organizational structure. This would allow the management team to function
independently and effectively in (i) formulating its own budget and administrative policies, (ii) controlling
its expenses, (iii) deciding upon its own structure for monetary rewards and allowances, (iv) formulating
and enforcing its own operational rules, and (v) adopting its own recruitment and development policy.

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS




CBR has already been given a certain level of operational and financial autonomy has already been given to
the CBR under the framework of the Cabinet Committee on Federal Revenues (CCFR) which was
established in 2002 and is headed by the Finance Minister. However, weaknesses in the functioning of
CCFR and in implementation of its decisions necessitate additional measures. In this respect CBR's
autonomy would be strengthened through subordinate legislation.

         1.1.2    Policy Support: As an example, the shift to the self assessment regime requires
improvement in audit capacity and risk management. Similarly, reengineered systems, processes and
functions will require associated infrastructure.A number of tax policy corrections have been made with
Fund and Bank advice in the recent past. Often these changes were not implemented effectively due to
weakness in tax administration. Thus there is need to develop an institutional framework that is flexible
enough to adapt and implement new policies. Under the project, CBR would be provided assistance to
build its capacity for adequately addressing tax policy matters including complexity, inelasticity and
broadening of the tax base. This is essential as changes in tax policy can not be implemented without an
effective, efficient tax administration that operates in a transparent manner. As an example, the shift to a
simplified self assessment regime requires improvement in risk management and audit capability of CBR.

         1.1.3    Modernizing Organizational Structure: CBR presently has an inappropriate organizational
structure where all department and support function heads (around 20) report directly to the Chairman.
Such a structure is inherently inefficient and leads to delays in decision making. The structure also makes
processes cumbersome and difficult to coordinate.

A key element of reform in relation to future organization structure of CBR will be to significantly reduce
the number of persons reporting directly to the Chairman. Based on international experience, it is proposed
to reduce the number of units reporting to the Chairman to seven. This would enhance his managerial role
and introduce a decision-making process that involves the entire executive team.

In addition, responsibility and decision making will be allocated to the lowest competent level. Given the
right staff and the right management skill, CBR managers will have their teams deliver the required quality
of work.

         (a) Top level structure: The basis for segmentation at the top level of the structure determines the
direction and ethos of the organization as a whole. Careful consideration will therefore be given to the
allocation of responsibilities to the Members on the Executive Team and a clear cut delineation of
responsibilities. In future the CBR is proposed to be structured around the following functions:
·        Customs
·        Direct Tax
·        Sales Tax
·        Revenue Services
·        Management Services
·        Policy & Reform
·        Internal Audit

         (b) Regional hubs: CBR will set up regional hubs for the revenue and management services along
functional areas to provide support for line administration across all taxes. This would ensure quality of
the policies and procedures developed by the Central office.

         (c) Sales & direct taxes: In the short term, the Sales and Direct Tax wings remain separate. The

                                                        4
                                                                                                             ISDS


longer term intention is that the two streams will merge into one stream organized by type of taxpayer.
This is a natural development of the Karachi LTU model where the initial co-location of Sales and Direct
Tax staff under one manager leads to true integration of the two wings. The experience gained in the
Karachi LTU will facilitate the transition.

          (d) Customs: Customs operations are significantly different from direct and sales taxation
operations. As a result, customs will remain a separate wing for the foreseeable future. Initially, there will
be little change beyond the re-engineered procedures and systems arising from the reform process. In the
longer term, however, as many of the activities of the support functions' as possible will be merged into the
Revenue Services stream.

          (e) Information technology: PRAL is the wholly owned software and systems development
subsidiary of the CBR. IT workers, and systems developers in particular have an inflated value in the
labor market. To retain high caliber staff, it is necessary to compete with private sector employers. By
keeping PRAL as a separate entity, it is possible to pay competitive salaries without upsetting the internal
salary structure of the CBR. PRAL will therefore be retained in its present form with a mandate to service
CBR's systems development needs as a priority, but with the right to carry out work on a commercial basis
for third party clients.

          (f) Training establishments: The present Customs, Sales and Direct Tax training establishments
will have a semi-independent relationship with the CBR similar to that of PRAL. The training
requirements will be specified by Revenue Operations or Revenue Services specialists, and the training
establishments will provide the facilities and staff to deliver the training programs. Like PRAL, the
training establishments will be encouraged to offer their facilities and services to third party clients, but
with a clear mandate to service the CBR's requirements as the first priority.

          1.2     Human Resource Management

The need to increase staff effectiveness has been well documented in several recent reports. There are a
number of impediments to improving staff performance, and a major part of CBR's strategy is focused on
improving management of human resources. CBR's strategy with respect to the productivity of its
workforce will ensure that the HR function is developed, staffed and equipped to provide the necessary
support, training and guidance to line managers and staff. The function will be represented at senior level
and will be mandated to research, develop and monitor up-to-date HR management policies and procedures
appropriate to CBR's goals and objectives.

Addressing the effectiveness of the workforce includes the following activities:

          1.2.1   Policies & Procedures: At present, CBR's reward system is that of the public sector with
little scope for individual or team incentives (cash or non-cash rewards). Pay rates which are low by
market standards and a management cadre which is ill equipped to identify and recognize good performers,
lead to low morale and a workforce which is not highly motivated or likely to respond enthusiastically to
change.

A poor reward system also leaves employees very susceptible to the temptation of corruption when the
opportunity arises. The CBR's role in assessing and collecting revenues from the public means that many
employees are placed in positions where their integrity and honesty is severely tested.

Improvements in HR policies and procedures including the reward system will be performance based and

                                                        5
                                                                                                             ISDS


implemented through an HR tool ­ `performance management system'. Line managers will be trained in
administration of the new incentive system to ensure that its application is not flawed or abused. An
effective and respected differential reward system is an essential component of CBR's reform strategy.
CBR will therefore work towards obtaining a significant degree of autonomy from government control of
its performance appraisal, pay and benefits system. To an extent this has already been initiated where more
than a 150 staff were selected through an internal job posting system to work in key reform areas. In
addition to the salary, these staff have been given a bonus structure that is based on performance.

         1.2.2    Training & Development: As well as ongoing operational tax training of new recruits,
CBR will ensure that existing staff receive training in the new systems and procedures. For example, CBR
managers will be trained in the change management skills, which will enable them to manage their teams
more effectively. This would include allocation of proper workloads, setting of appropriate performance
targets, and monitoring or tutoring staff to ensure that they meet their targets. Training given to staff will
be developed in conjunction with improvements in performance management and the new reward system to
ensure that all the incentives within the organization create an environment in which the training impact is
maximized by being demand driven and results-oriented.

         1.2.3    Recruitment: Training of existing staff will be combined with effective recruitment
systems to ensure that the right candidates are selected to fill vacancies that arise. CBR will introduce a
new age structure to be able to attract suitably qualified candidates and will have more control over
selection of staff. Recruiting officers in the CBR will have reliable ways of setting the candidate
specifications and recruitment procedures to get the right person into the right job.

         1.2.4    Right-sizing: CBR is considerably overstaffed, particularly at the lower organizational
levels. As a first step to addressing this issue, an HR audit will be conducted by the Member HRM and the
administrative wings of the CBR to evaluate staff competencies. Those employees that meet the
requirements, or, are suitable to be trained, will be retained in service. Those not meeting the criteria and
surplus to requirements will either be placed at the disposal of GOP or given some form of compensation
for early/ voluntary retirement. In future, work will be allocated on the basis of skills, job responsibilities
and performance. The rightsizing process will be coordinated with:

·        The availability of reliable data on which to base selection for redundancy;
·        The availability of specifications for the re-engineered jobs on which to base the allocation of staff
to these posts; and,
·        The rate of progress of the Reform Program.

The Bank can provide financing for a voluntary retrenchment scheme (VRS) under this project
sub-component, if such financial support is required by the government. However, the Bank will need to
undertake a comprehensive VRS assessment.

         1.2.5    Change Management: One of the most significant challenges to implementation of reforms
is `people management'. CBR's management style is determined largely by the constraints of public sector
procedure. Managers receive little or no formal training in modern management tools and as a result are ill
equipped to manage or motivate their staff in a positive manner.

As CBR has to respond ever more frequently and rapidly to changes in its operating environment, the
bureaucratic management style is highly detrimental. CBR's organizational culture, staff and management
capacity must be supportive for the reforms to be successful. CBR will educate its management cadre
through a series of workshops and seminars, in modern management principles and techniques, and

                                                        6
                                                                                                            ISDS


empower its managers to exercise these techniques to improve productivity and responsiveness of its
workforce.

         1.3     Internal Audit

         Under the new organizational structure, CBR would set up and operationalize an Internal Audit
department at the Head Office and in selected field locations. The primary role of the Internal Audit would
be to ensure that CBR policies and procedures are implemented effectively. The project would finance the
set-up costs as well as specialized training of the Audit staff.

         1.4     Internal Affairs

         Notwithstanding the proposed reorganization, automation and other efforts to reduce interaction
between tax officials and taxpayers, opportunities for misconduct can not be ruled out. Experience so far
has shown that the deterrents present - under the Civil Servants Act, 1973 and the Removal from Service
Ordinance, 2000, which give the Government and its agencies power to dismiss officials from service on
account of misconduct, inefficiency or non performance, are rarely used. During the last eighteen months,
CBR management has, however, taken strict action against 182 corrupt/ non-performing staff, including 44
dismissals. To institutionalize the accountability process, CBR would develop a `Code of Conduct' for its
staff which would clearly specify unacceptable behavior as well as penalties for deviation. Adherence to
the Code would be strictly enforced by the Board.

2.       Improving Revenue Operations

CBR will reorganize itself to meet the management and functional requirements and challenges of a modern
tax administration system. The long term vision of CBR provides for a functionally integrated tax
administration system; moving to such a structure will avoid the present duplication of functions such as
audit, collection and enforcement across departments. Managing direct and sales taxes separately makes it
more expensive to comply and more difficult for taxpayers who have multiple tax dealings to comply. The
integration will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily obtain all the
information required to assess their tax liabilities. However, recognizing the challenges of the change
process during the transition period, CBR will maintain the separation of function by tax type in the initial
reform period with the aim of gradually reducing this over time while carefully considering the legal,
political, geographical and revenue implications.

In order for CBR to make this major reform program a success, it will ensure that its organizational
structure supports the procedural and operational changes, which arise from the reforms. The following
are some of the main sub components that will be addressed by the proposed project.

         2.1     Direct Tax

Direct tax administration is generally regarded to be the area of CBR performance with the greatest need of
reform. The structure is a deep and highly bureaucratic one that expands to hundreds of base level offices,
each of which has a high degree of independence. The operating techniques are outdated and ineffective
and the use of technology is quite limited.

The administration of direct tax remains problematic for a large number of reasons. The direct tax
organization structure consists of five distinct levels and is both costly and ineffective. Tax officials have
too much to do and therefore cannot accomplish their assigned tasks with completeness and quality.

                                                        7
                                                                                                          ISDS


Taxpayers are constantly inconvenienced with the necessity to meet with tax officials and "negotiate"
various documents, assessments and payments. Taxpayers have a direct linkage by the system to one tax
official who can abuse the relationship with little risk of reprisal. Compensation is so low as to fail to
provide a reasonable standard of living for tax officials and their families. Office space, equipment and
services are inadequate and there is little use of technology. Training of tax officials is inadequate.
Taxpayers file a large number of complaints and appeals, the outcome of which is very frequently a partial
or total reversal of the prior decision made.

The cumulative result of the above conditions is that the final direct tax determinations are frequently weak,
negotiated, and in many cases arbitrary determinations, which do not in any substantive way reflect the true
tax liability of a taxpayer under the law. This substantially reduces the amount of tax that is ultimately
assessed and collected. In addition, the total base of taxpayers registered and paying taxes falls far short of
the number that are obligated to file and pay income taxes under the tax law.

The project will support government's planned reform of direct tax by; flattening the organization
structure, improving the identification and registration process, specializing the handling of large and
medium taxpayers affairs, establishing a tax-payer self-declaration approach, maintaining a taxpayer
database containing all assessment and payment data, establishing capability to quickly detect taxpayer
non-filing and non-payment.

The future organization structure for administration of direct tax will also be based upon a functional
approach. Several functional members will provide functional program planning, policies, direction,
training and evaluation from the central office of the CBR. Tax administration activities will eventually be
collocated into twelve regional tax offices (RTOs), with extended operations for taxpayer facilitation
purposes into 60-75 taxpayer facilitation centers (TFCs). There will also be three large taxpayer offices
(LTUs). There is already a good start with the creation of Karachi LTU that is serving around 300
gazetted taxpayers. Around 50 officials from both the Income Tax and Sales Tax Departments have been
brought together, organized and collocated on a functional basis. Eventually the LTUs are expected to
cater to more than 600 large taxpayers. In addition, a Medium Taxpayer Unit (MTU) has been setup in
Lahore. Based on its experience, CBR plans to established another 5 in the next year. These MTUs will
become part of the 12 regional tax offices that will co-locate Sales tax and Income tax, providing for
greater sharing of information, resources and removing duplication of certain common functions.

In order to achieve the objectives stated above, this subcomponent will support a series of reform initiatives
including: (1) legal authority, (2) organization and management, (3) business processes and procedures, (4)
human resources (including training and recruitment), (5) facilities and infrastructure, and (6) information
technology.

         2.2      Sales Tax and Central Excise

The Federal Sales Tax Act, 1990, enables the federal government to impose ST based upon the value added
at each stage of selling of the goods. Internationally, this form of taxation is known as Value Added Tax
(VAT). At present there are three positive rates: the rate applied to most goods is 15 % Several raw
materials, mainly chemicals, edible oils and plastics, are taxed at 20 %., zero % for certain categories and
20 % for some categories. Goods sold other than by a retailer to unregistered purchasers have a further 3
% tax imposed on them. Exemption is provided for a number of goods including most basic foodstuffs,
drugs, computer hardware and software, selected agricultural equipment, commercial ships and aircraft.
Exports, sales to diplomats, and supplies in the Export Processing Zone are all zero-rated. The ST does not
apply to transactions within the federally administered tribal zones (FATA) and provincially administered

                                                        8
                                                                                                           ISDS


tribal zones (PATA) An Act of parliament cannot be enforced in these districts without agreement of the
Provincial Assembly and Governor. Agreement to enforce the Federal Sales Tax Act has not been
obtained. . The constitution empowers the Federal Government to levy excise duties other than on liquor,
opium or narcotics.

The most pressing issue with ST and excise duties that this component will address is the limited number of
ST registrants and their poor compliance. There are 150,000 units registered for ST out of a total potential
of between 800,000 to 1.5 million.

This component will also review the number of goods and services that currently receive an exemption. To
bring ST in Pakistan into line with general international practice and share the burden of ST equitably, the
scope of goods and services liable to ST must be increased. ST will also be developed to allow for tax
input credits for office equipment, office supplies, building materials, electricity consumed and other items
used to support taxable activities. The input tax claims and ST refunds system will be reviewed and
streamlined.

         2.3      Customs

The long-term objectives of the customs reform component are to modernize import and export clearance
procedures, and related procedures that impact upon trade facilitation, in accordance with internationally
accepted principles and methods. The building blocks of the CBR's reform strategy in customs are based
upon the following principles, guidelines and procedures. The application of the principle of customs
controls will allow the CBR to:

·        focus on high-risk areas and therefore ensure more effective use of available resources;
·        increase ability to detect offences and non-compliant traders and travelers;
·        offer compliant traders and travelers greater facilitation; and,
·        expedite trade and travel.

Risk management has been universally adopted as a key principle in customs procedural reform. According
to the General Annex of the Revised Kyoto Convention, "Customs controls should be carried out on a
selective basis using risk management The Chapter defines "risk management" as "the systematic
application of management procedures and practices which provide Customs with the necessary
information to address movements and consignments which present a risk" techniques to the greatest
extent possible".
Customs will move progressively away from "blanket" controls and detailed procedures that impact on all
or most importers and exporters, to interventions that are highly targeted towards identified risk shipments,
traders and goods.

Customs reforms will also introduce self-assessment and provide the speediest clearances to so called gold
card members; those importers that have proved and maintained their dependability. Face-to-face contact
will be limited and CBR plans to strictly limit access by customs agents to secure accommodation.

3.       Strengthening Revenue Services

         3.1      Audit

At present, there are different audit schemes for different taxes, and the development of audit programs
varies both in quantity and quality. In certain cases, individual employees have developed advanced control

                                                         9
                                                                                                             ISDS


programs and audit case selection systems. Rewards are based upon fulfillment of the goal set for
collection rather than the number and quality of audits.

Some of the problems plaguing the audit function include; lack of cost effectiveness, non differentiation of
the various forms of control, audit experiences not extracted and distributed throughout CBR, the auditing
process characterized by a bargaining process between the auditor / collector and the taxpayer, and the
selection of cases for audit not carried out according to a structured risk assessment ­ carried out
randomly.

The project will support the establishment of a Tax Audit Function as a separate functional stream. It will
also develop an automated approach to audit-case selection based upon consideration of the risks of under
reporting and underpayment of taxes and case distribution among auditors with specialized functions. The
audit function will be strengthened through independent quality reviews.

         3.2     Collection and Enforcement

The establishment of an effective collection and enforcement function is a critical element of any tax
administration reform. Accordingly, CBR will establish a Collections and Enforcement Function at the
head office which will be responsible for providing direction, developing policies and procedures and
providing support to regional operations. The Function will be responsible for identifying non-filers and
taking appropriate action. It will also assist in updating registration records. To summarize, the Function
will be responsible for the following activities:

·        Enforcement / Collection;
·        Monitoring of filing and payments including withholding taxes;
·        Demand outstanding returns;
·        Recovery of outstanding taxes;
·        Imposing interest and penalties;
·        Conducting internal/external surveys; and,
·        Collecting data on taxpayer assets, to aid eventual enforced collection.

An integral part of the Collections and Enforcement Function will be development of a computer system
and tax database that will facilitate the collection of taxes. This will issue notices, calculate interest and
penalties, and identify non-filers.

Unlawful practices at the taxpayer level, are addressed under 'collection and enforcement' in the section
`creating a tax complaint culture'.

         3.3     Appeals and Dispute Resolution

This function is generally characterized by a mutual distrust between taxpayers and the CBR. Delaying
tactics on the part of some taxpayers, as well as poor quality or incomplete audit reports have resulted in
delays in the judicial system (cases can take up to 2 years or more) and a large number of pending cases.
Without improved audit details, the expeditious disposal of adjudication / appeals cases is severely
hindered.

Furthermore, there is a lack of knowledge among CBR staff regarding newly decided cases and precedence
cases. This results in a number of tax decisions not upheld by the appeal bodies. As such, the large
number of annulled or modified tax decisions lessens the efficiency and the credibility of the CBR.

                                                         10
                                                                                                           ISDS




The proposed project will support the reform efforts to improve this function. In order to build a
relationship of mutual trust, the CBR is continuing to develop appeals and adjudication systems and
processes that are fair, expeditious and transparent. There will be a single avenue of appeal for all kinds of
taxes. This will be comprised of an initial administrative (quasi-judicial) level, which, in turn will be
followed by a judicial phase.

CBR Member Legal will be responsible for developing this national appeals program and its associated
procedures, and staff at the local level will be responsible for implementing them. The national appeals and
adjudication program will be uniformly administered across the different tax disciplines, and will preserve
and enhance the taxpayers' rights to appeal, ensuring the appeal system is transparent and more "user
friendly".

3.4      National Intelligence and Risk Management

At present there is inadequate focus on intelligence and risk management and there is limited operational
capacity. This function however, becomes highly critical with the introduction of Universal Self
Assessment and involves much more than simple data collection. It is also important to identify while the

CBR under the project will create a corporate National Intelligence Division (NID) with a co-located Risk
Management Unit (RMU). Its capability will span all operational areas of Direct and Indirect taxes and
Customs, and will form a new functional area under Member Revenue Services.

RMU will analyze and report on the overall taxpayer environment (strategic analysis), and individual
taxpayer performance and level of risk (planning analysis). Its primary responsibility will be to ensure that
statistically and analytically sound information is available to audit and enforcement. NID will primarily
be responsible for identifying and preparing cases for investigation where serious evasion of tax or
prohibition is suspected.

The would require specialized training as well as systems capability for staff to perform these functions
effectively.

3.5      Customs and Tax Frauds

Customs and tax frauds pose a serious economic, industrial and social threat to Pakistan. CBR under the
project will introduce measures that would protect against these threats.

Investigation is an inherent component of all the tax systems administered by the CBR but is fragmented
between Customs and the Tax divisions. In some cases investigation staff are also the intelligence officers
and are required to investigate both internal and external situations with consequent conflicts of interest and
conflicting priorities. The first step is setting up the Customs and Tax Fraud Division (CTFD). It follows
that any staff recruited must have similar personal qualities and receive even more extensive technical
training. The staff will work in teams with team members specializing in the different taxation disciplines.
CTFD will be required to build liaisons with other national and international organizations as part of its
operating strategy. The building of trust and the breaking down of barriers is a slow and painful process
but one that must be completed for CTFD to reach its full potential and effectiveness.

Major tax evasion and smuggling are international crimes that require international solutions. CTFD will
be responsible to bring perpetrators of such offences into custody and for prosecution under the relevant

                                                         11
                                                                                                          ISDS


legislation. In this regard, CTFD must also win professional respect, trust and confidence of its
counterparts. Therefore the people selected for international liaison must be competent and should be
empowered to decide and act (albeit within a well defined area of responsibility) in the furtherance of
building an image of a professional and dedicated investigation force beyond corrupting. A whole program
of specialist training (e.g., covert surveillance, interviewing, search of premises, high speed driving,
defensive driving, arrest and constraint, and radio discipline etc.) will be carried out.

4.       Creating a Tax Compliant Culture

         4.1      Taxpayer Education and Facilitation

Tax facilitation and education is currently minimal and will need to be strengthened considerably if
universal self-assessment requiring the taxpayer to maintain transaction documentation is to be successful.
The tax education and facilitation function will include a strong and well coordinated communications
program promoting the development of greater compliance and a user friendly, supportive interface
between the CBR and corporate and individual taxpayers. It will also introduce a program outlining the
principles of a good tax administration system (transparent, fair, automated, simple and cost-effectiveness);
develop a quality assurance monitoring program; and introduce easy-to-comply-with forms and document
requirements that are compatible with a computerized operation.

The tax administration system will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily
obtain all the information required to assess their tax liabilities. This will be instigated through the
establishment of 60 to 75 Taxpayer Facilitation Centers (TFCs). A key objective of the TFCs will be to
promote tax facilitation through the promotion of self-assessment for tax liability.

The TE & F will research, plan, design, develop, implement and manage programs to elicit ideas, opinions
and feedback from the taxpayers, TE & F staff, and other stakeholders. It will establish an ongoing
monitoring and quality assurance program, involving the launch and facilitation of forums between
appropriate internal and external stakeholders.

         4.1.1    Communications Program: The quality of service that taxpayers can currently access
varies across Pakistan. The reform strategy will address this inequality and raise service standards across
all areas. A key component of this effort will be the application of modern basic communication
principles, ensuring that taxpayers have access to a flow of information that is:

·        Relevant ­ what the taxpayer needs;
·        Timely ­ when the taxpayer needs it;
·        Of high quality ­ correct and undisputable; and,
·        Simple ­ enabling the taxpayer quick and efficient access.

Explanatory literature will also be developed and updated regularly. The literature (publications, brochures
and booklets) will cover dissemination of laws, rules, procedures and changes from time to time
particularly with reference to the universal self-assessment and record keeping requirements.

The publication of a monthly or quarterly newsletter as part of the communication strategy, in
collaboration with other components, will be evaluated and implemented in the medium-term reform period.

         4.1.2    Internet Facilities: The information super highway, or the Internet, is an important driving
force behind the new work methodology, enabling improved communications both between CBR and the

                                                       12
                                                                                                            ISDS


taxpayers as well as within CBR. By making IT an integral part of the organization, CBR will
revolutionize the way it functions and manages its relationships with taxpayers by reducing the interaction
with taxpayers. Internet will be used for:

·        Internal and external information;
·        Training taxpayers and staff;
·        Internal and external communication;
·        Electronic filing;
·        Distribution of forms;
·        Providing a forum for discussion and complaints;
·        Registration and de-registration;
·        Publishing explanatory booklets for reading and printouts;
·        Processing of incoming tax forms as well as its outgoing correspondence. CBR will initiate
consultative interaction with stakeholders and              oversee development of computer software for
electronic submissions of returns and statements.

         4.1.3   Call Centers: Considering evolving demands, a call center will be established to facilitate
taxpayer contact through e-mail, letters, faxes and telephone calls. The numerous advantages of this will
be as follows:

·        CBR TE & F employees may be located in the Call Centre, which in turn, does not need to be
located in or near existing offices or in expensive l       ocations (indeed, centres are often located in
areas with an employment need);
·        Telecommunication will go through wires or will be transmitted;
·        The call center will be supported by a database with all the asked and answered questions. This
safeguards the high quality of answers;
·        Database questions and answers will be monitored by expert tax staff ensuring quality control of
answers;
·        Call Center staff will directly answer 80-90 % of the questions and remits - the remainder will be
relayed to back-up-experts;
·        Employees need not be tax experts; rather, they will have other qualities, such as computer literacy
(ability to handle database search-engines), a      service oriented approach and other people-centered
skills;
·        The call center will be flexible, connecting more staff during peak demand periods using modern
telephone techniques. The telephone system          will be a huge net connecting people and computers;
·        The cost for establishing the center will be reasonable, resulting in a cost per question that is very
low;
·        Expert knowledge can be readily accessed; and,
·        The staff will be allocated according to fluctuating demands of direct contacts ­ as phone calls ­
and indirect contacts.

The potential to successfully introduce this component of the TE & F function is high. At present, `hits' on
CBR's web-page show that a number of taxpayers are willing to use modern technology to an extent that
would not otherwise be possible were contact restricted to face-to-face consultations. Moreover, the call
center will answer both internal and external questions and queries. As such, it will also be used as a
communication tool to unify tax administration procedures and practices within the CBR itself.

         4.2     Taxpayer Identification and Registration

                                                        13
                                                                                                          ISDS


The ability to identify taxpayer's revenue activities is an essential element of a modern tax system and
begins with registration. CBR's intent is to have a highly accurate taxpayer registration system for all tax
purposes and for all taxpayers. This will: (a) facilitate exchange of data; (b) avoid duplicate and erroneous
registrations; and (c) establish a database of taxpayer information. Third party information will be
matched against information declared by each taxpayer to ensure full and correct reporting and payment of
taxes.

         4.3      Quality Assurance and Monitoring

In an environment where there is considerable distrust between the tax administration and taxpayer
population, and where the notion of taxpayer service receives little attention, the introduction of
self-assessment and voluntary compliance-schemes are major challenges. This will require a greater
commitment in the application of resources over the reform period, allocating sufficient personnel and
funding, and planning and management support to ensure the sufficient development of the TE & F.

In this regard, a quality assurance monitoring program is necessary both for the taxpayer and the CBR.
This will ensure that CBR's taxpayer education and facilitation function responds to taxpayer expectations
and motivates the use of increased resources.

·        The Quality assurance and monitoring program will be designed for developing:
·        Taxpayer Charters for customs, direct and sales tax that defines taxpayers' rights & obligations.
·        Service standards
·        Performance Measurement
·        Complaint Handling Schemes, and
·        Monitoring to ensure:
         o        Implementation of taxpayer services;
         o        Simplification of tax laws;
         o        User friendly, concise, lucid and simple forms, instructions and guidelines;
         o        Transparent and documented compliance procedures;
         o        Improvements arising substantially to reduce compliance time and cost; and
         o        Identifying irritants faced by the taxpayers and having them removed.

5.       Adopting Responsive IT Systems

The information technology strategy will help the CBR transform the way it functions and supports it's
reform objectives. The strategy will be driven by selected CBR officers from the tax administration and IT
departments, supported by tax specialists and other specialists covering areas such as audit, HR,
information communication technology (ICT) and taxpayer education.

Therefore the ICT strategy will be based on the following principles:

·        Determining a technology path that will support CBR's ICT needs of today and its future
objectives considering its users' skill level, and the need for a practical approach to bring technology to
users; and
·        Providing technology to enable CBR to achieve its revenue and reform targets by making
procedures and their application transparent and             providing easy access to timely and accurate
information for decision making.

The goal of the ICT strategy is to move from a highly manual to an automated environment in which

                                                      14
                                                                                                           ISDS


computers are used to facilitate decision making by various functional and technical teams/ authorities. To
support this, information will be made available at all strategic points within the organization to:

·        Improve management control to levels approximating those experienced in industrialized countries;
·        Increase transparency of tax administration;
·        Reduce interaction with taxpayers in day-to-day operations;
·        Manage information for broadening the tax-net, increasing revenues, and facilitating trade;
·        Identify and adopt international best-practices;
·        Allow for multi-directional communication under the electronic signatures ordinance, 2002.

Despite substantial past investments in information technology by CBR, desired results have not been
achieved because standard IT development methodology has not been followed. IT project management
has been inadequate with almost no preparation for a user interface, little management ownership and
isolated systems development. Moreover, the development of IT systems in the past has proceeded in an ad
hoc and unplanned manner so that most departments operate stand-alone modules that are not integrated
into the main system. There is also a general recognition that CBR's IT projects have been high cost, have
produced little and failed to boost performance significantly.

Learning from these previous mistakes, CBR's IT strategy includes a long-term harmonized information
management structure that provides complete, accurate, and up-to-date information, which is delivered in a
useful manner and at a reasonable cost. The ICT strategy moves away from manual systems to
independent PC LANs and enterprise-wide, network-based clients. This model of computing is centered
around open, high-performance workstations, servers, and networks. It will move processing work to end
users' desktops while maintaining shared resources, thus reducing the load on centralized resources. The
hardware independent model would also allow applications to inter-operate across different hardware
platforms. Finally, the server technology will supply a more flexible architecture that enables cost-effective
distributed computing. The structure will provide the foundation for swift, effective and efficient execution
of all tax administration tasks.

This will require that the entire process and work culture is re-engineered. In doing so, a realistic schedule
for IT deployment and upgrading skill level of affected staff will be essential. Experience indicates that
organizational capacity in terms of human resource plays a critical role in successfully deploying a new
business strategy using information technology.

6.       Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development

CBR's workforce tolerates working conditions which hinders their efficiency considerably. To address
this, CBR will improve the physical working environment for its employees. As re-engineering and
computerization of working processes (and the reduced number of tax offices) leads to reductions in the
number of staff required, the per-capita cost of providing better working conditions becomes more
manageable. Better conditions will then generate further improvements in productivity.

7.       Program Management and Implementation

This component would finance a structure for implementing the project, including: a Project Management
Unit (PMU) which would provide overall coordination as well as take responsibly for managing the
incremental changes necessary to effect implementation of each component and related activities of the
Project. The PMU would also be responsible for reporting on Project implementation and manage all
disbursement, procurement and financial management activities under the project and according to Bank

                                                        15
                                                                                                          ISDS


Guidelines.

An integral part of the PMU responsibilities will be establishing the monitoring and evaluation component
of the proposed project. The PMU has established performance indicators detailed in the Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) to monitor impact of the project and measure its success. The key areas that
will be monitored include; the ratio of revenue collected to GDP, taxpayer satisfaction surveys, audit
enforcement, labor efficient processes, the use of IT and the improved organizational structure. In each of
these areas the PMT will prepare a baseline scenario with objective and subjective performance targets.


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
N.A.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Its a tax administration reform project and there are no safeguard issues

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable

                                                        16
                                                                                                           ISDS




II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Not applicable

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
This project does not trigger any of the safeguard policies, however, keeping in view the social impact of
any of the project activities on lives of the people, stakeholder consultations have been ongoing. The
stakeholders include the following:
(i) Staff of CBR, (ii) Government and agencies and autonomous bodies, (iii) accounting firms and bodies,
(iv) tax lawyers, (v) trade associations, (vi) Federal and Provincial Chambers of Commerce, (vii) Private
Sector businesses, (viii) individual taxpayers, and (ix) civil society at large. A series of consultations were
held with these groups in different parts of the country to inform them about project design and its
objectives and recieve feedback. Regular consultations are also built-in as part of project design for
dissimenating information and assessing the impact.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                           Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                                Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                         Expected         Actual

                                                      17
                                                                                                       ISDS




Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. There are no
safeguard issues.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mudassir Khan
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Zia Aljalaly/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Frederick Edmund Brusberg
Sector Manager/Director               Joseph Del Mar Pernia

