ISDS
THEWORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorid Froo of Poverty
InfoShop
'Me  'ord Wiank
Report No AC32
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updatedl: 04/22/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PAKISTAN                                 Project ID: P010556
Project: Highways Rehabilitation                  Task Team Leader: Navaid A. Qureshi
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 24, 2003       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 23, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 154.70
Managing Unit: SASEI                              Sector: Central government administration (90%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Roads and highways (10%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Public expenditure; financial management
and procurement (P); Infrastructure services for
private sector development (P); Administrative and
civil service reform (S); Other public sector
governance (S); Export development and
competitiveness (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is the sustainable delivery of a productive and efficient National
Highway System, contributing to lower transportation costs.
The Government of Pakistan is implementing a National Highway Improvement Program (NHIP) to
increase the efficiency of the National Highway Network, through phased improvement of approx. 2700
km of highways. It has already initiated 642 km of highiway improvement (Group Tl works) during FY02,
financed from its own resources. The proposed Highiway Rehabilitation Project (HRP) will finance a
distinct five year segment of NHIP works (Group I), while also supporting essential reforms in the sector
and the strengthening of the National Highway Authority (NHA).
I.A.3 Project Description:
The project has the following components:
(I)    Network Conservation Component - this includes the following physical works:
(a)    Rehabilitation and Improvement of about 534 km of highiway (including structures) along the
N-5 and M-9 that requires major reconstruction work,
(b)    Resurfacing and Pavement Strengtheninig of about 336 km of the higilway along the N-5 that
essentially requires asphalt overlays to extend its service life, and
(c)    Project management assistance for Contract Administration and Construction Supervision.



2
ISDS
(IT)   Policy Support and Institutional Development ComponeMhis- includes technical
assistance, training, equipment support and incremental operating costs: (a) to help implement improved
sub-sectoral policies (MTBF - to improve targeting of public sector resources; RMF - to provide stable
and secure funding for main1tenance), and (b) to strengthen NHA institutional capacity, improve
performance and efficiency (business process re-engineering and corporate strenghtening; improved road
asset management; enhanced environmental management and resettlement practices).
(III)  Resettlement & Land Acquisition - related to component (I)
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The N5 Highway stretches across the Karachi-Lahore-Rawalpindi-Peshawar-Torkham corridor for over
1,760 km. The Karachi-Hyclerabad Super Highway (M9) provides an alternative route to the N5 from
Karachi to Hyderabad at the southern end of the north-south corridor. The northern part of the corridor
passing through the Punjab and NWFP provinces, falls within the Potohar Plateau and is characterised by
heavily eroded topography and low hill ranges. The southern corridor extending through the Sindli
province consists of stretches of level alluvial plain and is fringed by the Cholistan and Thar deserts. The
corridor runs parallel to the Indus River and its five main tributaries and is also drained by an extensive
contiguous irrigation system In general, the areas traversed by the project corridor are poorly vegetated,
falling under tropical thorn forest and sand dune desert. Much of this region has been cleared for
cultivation, and even in the five protected areas identified along the project corridor, biological diversity
is very low.
The corridor's highway sections pass through a region that collectively sustains almost 92% of the
country's population. Apart from the cities and towns located in the vicinity of the project corridor
where economic diversity is relatively high, the rural communities here are essentially involved in
agriculture or associated occupations. Encroachments and squatter settlements within the right of way
(RoW) are common on almost all sections of the project corridor, with about 228 structures (involving an
estimated 300 PAPs) falling within the corridor's proposed construction limits. The squatter settlements
located along the project corridor are primarily concentrated in areas where rural settlements and towns
are located fairly close to the highway. These settlements are solely commercial in nature.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments At the time of PCD clearance in 1998, the project was classified as an environmental category
A' project given the potentially large-scale degree of resettlement involved. However, in view of the current
reduced scope of the HRP and its limited potential environmental impacts, SASES has reclassified the
project to category 'B'.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No



3
ISDS
Involuntary Resettlement (OP'/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Issues Apart from the construction of one bypass in Matiari, Sindh, the project's
construction works will be confined within the NHA's existing RoW. Environmental issues associated
with the project include managing the procurement of borrow material and topsoil conservation,
including the clean-up and restoration of disturbed areas; appropriately locating temporary construction
camps, asphalt plants, and waste disposal sites, and managing dust, noise and other environmental
impacts of operating these facilities; traffic management and safety during construction and operation;
avoiding obstruction of highway drainage systems during construction and operation; and enhancing and
maintaining avenue tree plantation along the proposed highway sections.
Social Issues. The key social issues associated with this project concern resettling approximately 300
squatters and vulnerable encroachers presently operating businesses within the proposed construction
limit of the project corridor; minimizing the project's impact on cultural sites or structures and
community-owned assets during construction and operation; and ensuring pedestrian and traffic safety
during construction and operation.
The bypass at Matiari on the Hyderabad-Hala section in Sindh is the only segment where 4 ha of land
needs to be acquired to extend the RoW. The land acquistion process for this piece of land has been
initiated by NHA with the identification of the land, and consultation with the single land owner
involved. The process will be, reviewed during Appraisal to ensure complaince with the proposed
Resettlement Policy Framework. Under Phase 1, there are 28 structures that fall within the proposed
construction limit, ie, 16 on the Hyderabad-Hala section and 12 on the Hala-Moro section. All 28 are
commercial units; their removal will affect the business income of a total of 36 project-affected persons
(PAPs). An initial estimation based on preliminary surveys of the project corridor indicates that during
Phase 11, approximately 200 structures falling within the proposed construction limit will need to be
relocated. The exact number of PAPs whose livelihood will be affected during Phase Il is currently
being documented by the NHA. The project's RSP contracts will not entail any resettlement during
either Phase I or 11, since all squatters' settlements lie outside the proposed construction limit. Under
Phase 1, there are no building structures of religious or cultural value that fall within the proposed
construction limit. Field surveys carried out in seven of the proposed sections indicate that construction
works will not disrupt any public infrastructure under Phase 1.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N.A.
II.D.1 c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



4
ISDS
Potential long-term impacts include changes in land use patterns and economic activity in and around the
project corridor as a result oi ribbon development and increased traffic inflow. Since the N5 and M9 are
primary arteries already carrying the bulk of the country's north-south traffic, it is difficult to attribute
additional traffic to the improvement of the highway sections included in the project. In fact, better
highway conditions will improve the speed and flow of traffic along the corridor, leading to lowering of
emissions and improvement in air quality in the short term, in comparison to a no-project option. Noise
generated by vehicular traffic during highway operation is likely to affect sensitive receptors located
within about 50 m of the highway. In the medium term, highway safety conditions will improve as a
result of (i) the proposed road improvement works as well as specific safety improvements included as
part of the project civil works, based on detailed road safety audits undertaken during the design stage
(e.g. junction improvements, pedestrian crossings, service lanes to separate slow moving traffic near
major urban areas, additional road signage and pavement markings, etc.); (ii) improved NHA road asset
management practices and inicreased institutional accountability to external stakeholders being promoted
through the project; (iii) introduction of regular highway patrols and more effective enforcement of
traffic rules along the High\Nay N-5 by the newly inducted National Highway and Motorway Police,
under the Ministry of Communications; and (iv) community-level safety awareness campaigns along the
project corridor proposed under the project
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
There are two investment options available for improving the main north-south highway corridor in order
to meet the increasing transport demands of a growing economy. One option is to develop a new
highway/road system, while the other option is to improve the existing network. The second option is
more viable in view of economic considerations and is consistent with the NHA's present policy
objectives. The no-project option is not desirable as it would impede national economic growth,
contribute to environmental degradation, and lead to deteriorating road safety conditions. As far as
project design alternatives are concerned, demarcating an alternative route would require vast amounts of
land acquisition, disrupt rural communities, interfere with established natural and agro-ecosystems, and
result in further environment-al and social degradation.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues The Borrower has prepared and provided a sectoral
social and environment assessment (SEA), environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for Phase I
rehabilitation and maintenanice projects (RMP) and resurfacing and strengthening projects (RSP), and
environmental management plans (EMPs) for Phase I projects. The EMPs developed by the NHA will
help the organization address the adverse environmental and social impacts, enhance project benefits, and
introduce standards of good environmental and social practice for highway construction and operation
within the organization and iin the country.
Principal environmental mitigation measures proposed in the EMP include the following:
*      Location of borrow areas on land prone to low impact, eg, agriculturally unproductive land
*      Measures to prevent topsoil erosion eg, limiting the excavation of soil to specified depths, and
protecting embankments with vegetation barriers or stone pitching
*      Location of project f5acilities more than 500 m from inhabited or protected areas
*      Measures to manage the environmental impact of operating project facilities, including waste
disposal measures preventing soil and water resource contamination; cleanup and restoration of disturbed
areas such as asphalt plants, borrow areas, waste disposal sites, labor and construction camps, etc.
*      Tree plantation program to compensate for the anticipated loss of vegetation during construction
activities, and to help abate pollution caused by emissions, dust, and noise during highway operation
*      Provisions in the project's outline design to prevent the obstruction of the corridor's drainage



5
ISDS
system
*      Wall barriers to mitigate the impact of noise on sensitive receptors such as schools and hospitals
during construction and operation
*      Provisions for highway safety facilities to reduce the risks faced by pedestrians
*      Implementation of traffic management plans and road safety awareness campaigns among local
communities.
Implementation of Environmental and Social Compliance: The EMPs also define the responsibilities
of project proponent, contractors and other role players; identify training requirements at various levels;
define supervision and monitoring mechanisms and parameters; and specify the budgetary requirements
for implementation to ensure that all mitigation measures are effectively implemented. A high-level
NHA steering committee forned to oversee the project will have the ultimate responsibility for
environmental management aind compliance with the project's Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Senior
staff positions have been provided for supervising environmental and social assessments, and providing
inputs and guidance on environmental matters during the project's planning, design, contracting,
construction, and operation phases. An international supervision consultant to be appointed by the NHA
will assist the organization in supervising the construction contractors and ensuring that all contractual
obligations related to environmental and social compliance are met.
Resettlement Safeguard Issues: In accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy 4.12 on involuntary
resettlement, the resettlement of PAPs and the relocation of affected structures will be carried out under a
resettlement policy framework (RPF) prepared for the project. The RPF addresses the compensation of
property, structures, and livelihoods, and defines implementation responsibilities. Its main provisions are
listed below:
*      The loss of privately owned land or built-up property will be compensated on a replacement-cost
basis under the Land Acquisition Act, 1 894.
*      New 8 x 8 ft kiosks will be constructed to accommodate displaced squatters and vulnerable
encroachers who operate fixed structures that cannot be moved any further back from their current
location within the proposed construction limit.
a      Squatters and vulnerable encroachers whose structures are mobile will be provided only shifting
assistance.
*      The main highway construction sites will not be handed over to the contractors until the kiosks
have been constructed. However, if new kiosks are not provided at the time of shifting, eligible
squatters/vulnerable encroachers will be exempted from kiosk lease payments for a specified period; and
will be provided livelihood assistance the new kiosks are made available.
*      Labor employed by squatters/vulnerable encroachlers will be protected by making their
employers' livelihood assistance conditional on the employees being retained
a      Existing public utilities that may be affected within the proposed construction limit will be
relocated with the prior approval of the concerned agencies and utilities.
*      Community-owned utilities, eg, hand pumps and wells that may be affected within the proposed
construction limit will be relocated in consultation with local communities.
a      All culturally significant structures that may be affected within the proposed construction limit
will be relocated in consultation with the local community.
Under this framework, of the 28 businesses/structures falling within the proposed construction limit
under Phase I, nine business operators (including one vulnerable encroacher) will be provided new kiosks
within the RoW on a lease-payment basis; 16 business operators will be assisted in moving out of the
proposed construction limit and further back within the RoW; and a total of 25 businesses will be entitled



6
ISDS
to shifting assistance The remaining three structures are encroachments owned by non-vulnerable
business operators and will be removed.
Environmental and Social Monitoring. An environmental monitoring committee drawn from senior
NHA staff will monitor and clocument the progress of the project in accordance with the planned
schedule of activities; and liaise between the NHA, environmental protection agencies, and World Bank
in the context of compliance. The committee will be assisted by an environmental specialist provided by
the Supervision Consultant. In addition, during the implementations and operations stage, the NHA will
conclude agreements with the provincial forest departments to enhance-and manage the avenue
plantations proposed under the project. A plantation committee drawn from staff of the provincial forest
department concerned, and the NHA will supervise the plantation and maintenance of trees along the
project corridor.
The NHA's environmental monitoring committee, in consultation with the concerned EPAs, will engage
independent monitoring agencies including NGOs and/or local community-based organizations (CBOs)
operating along various project reaches to verify the efficacy and ensure the transparency of the
environmental and social compliance process carried out by the NHA. These NGOs/CBOs will be
engaged on the basis of well-defined criteria including their experience and resources. The NHA will
provide the necessary logistical support to NGOs/CBOs to facilitate them in the monitoring process. The
NGOs/CBOs engaged for inclependent monitoring will also report their findings on a monthly basis
directly to the NFIA, the World Bank, and concerned EPAs.
Resettlement Monitoring: A resettlement monitoring committee consisting of senior NHA staff will
monitor the land acquisition and resettlement process to evaluate compliance with the RPF adopted under
the project. The committee wvill be assisted by a resettlement specialist provided by the Supervision
Consultant. A grievance rediressal system managed by the NHA's deputy project coordinators (based at
each sub-project site) will maintain a community complaints-management register to record grievances
brought forward by affected communities, and to ensure that these are appropriately addressed. The
committee will track the progress of various resettlement monitoring indicators including impact
indicators (eg, the number of livelihoods affected), process indicators (eg, resettlement and compensation
budgets), and output indicators (eg, the number of PAPs successfully resettled or otherwise).
As in the case of environmen,tal and social monitoring, the NHA's resettlement monitoring committee
will engage independent monitoring agencies including NGOs and/or local community-based
organizations (CBOs) operating along various project reaches to verify the efficacy and ensure the
transparency of the resettlement process carried out by the NHA. This will include reconfirming the
identity of PAPs; explaining resettlement entitlements and the process to PAPs; ensuring that
resettlement and compensation is carried out according to the entitlement policy framework; and
facilitating dispute resolution, if any.
Environmental Training and Capacity Building. The project finances an Institutional Strengthening
Plan that will help build the capacity of the NHA. The plan will include the appointment of dedicated
environmental and social staFf with clearly defined qualifications, responsibilities, and authority. An
environmental training and technical assistance (TA) program will be carried out to build the capacity of
the NHA and key stakeholders to effectively implement this EMP, as well as to facilitate the improved
environmental management of future highway projects. Cost estimates of mitigation and other
environmental management measures have been included in the EMPs and incorporated into the project
budget.



7
ISDS
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder workshops were organized to discuss project-specific issues. The Association of Road Users
of Pakistan (ARUP) organized a series of regional discussions in 2000 and 2001 that have provided
valuable inputs for the project design. At the screening stage, stakeholder meetings were held in Sindh
and Punjab by the NHA's EtA consultants, involving government and NGO representatives, field
specialists, road contractors, and a cross-section of PAPs. Roadside consultations and scoping sessions
were carried out mainly with pedestrians, vehicle drivers, public transport passengers, roadside vendors
and shopkeepers, local inhabitants, government officials, and NGO representatives at various locations
along the project corridor.
Following tile finalization of the draft EA and EMP reports, NHA is currently in the process of
disseminating the key features of these documents among PAPs and local stakeholders, along Phase-I
sections of the project corridor.. The consultation process for the EAs will be concluded through a set of
public hearings that will be held in the federal capital and in each of the provinces where construction is
scheduled. Similar consutations and disclosure will be undertaken for Phase-Il
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            4/23/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             4/22/2003
Date of distributing the Exec, Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            4/23/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             4/22/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure



8
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoSlhop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Navaid A. Qureshi                             4/15/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Afshan H. KhawajalPerson/World Bank      4/1 7/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Anil H. Somani/Person/World Bank         4/17/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Zia Aljalaly/Person/World Bank           4/1 8/03
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                          4/18/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Vincent Gouarne                              4/18/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAICR9H   -    r EODAcK  _    SITE MAP  LPAO$CASi



