Page  1
 
 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) – Concept Stage 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC181 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 31, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P084551 
Project Name: PUNJAB ON FARM WATER 
MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Tekola Dejene 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 83 million 
Estimated Board Date: August 12, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument: SIL 
Sector: Irrigation and Drainage 
Theme: Water Resources Management 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:    Zia AlJalaly and Paul Martin 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The overall development objective is that new Water Users Associations (WUAs) improve irrigation water 
efficiency and management in tertiary level irrigation systems (watercourses) and on member farm fields, to 
increase agricultural productivity and farm incomes. The project interventions would: (a) improve the reliability, 
efficiency and equity of irrigation water distribution; (b) support agricultural productivity enhancement measures to 
complement and enhance the benefits of improved water management, and (c) enhance long-term sustainability of 
the irrigation system by fostering self-supporting and self-managing WUAs that will be the foundation for future 
higher tier farmer organizations.   
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The project is aimed at establishing and supporting WUAs at the 
chak 
level
 
to improve, operate and maintain 
watercourses, improve on-farm water management and carryout agricultural productivity enhancing practices. The 
WUAs will also form the foundation for the formation of Farmer Organizations (FOs) at higher tiers of the irrigation 
conveyance system as envisaged in the reform policy of the Government, although the project will not organize the 
higher tier organizations.  
 
The following components are envisaged in the proposed project:  
 
\01\02
Social mobilization and capacity building
 - establish and build the capacity of close to 7000 WUAs to 
implement watercourse improvement schemes, carry out O&M functions, participate in the 
introduction/dissemination of agronomic practices, agricultural and irrigation technologies and inputs.  
Page  2
 
 
\01\02
Improvements and development of irrigation facilities 
-
 
renovate about 6,000 watercourses comprising of 
2000 in fresh ground water areas and 4000 in saline ground water areas; construct minor irrigation schemes 
and water storage tanks in non-canal command areas and lift water from natural 
nallahs
 and low-lying 
water ponds to farmer fields; undertake pilot schemes in installation of community tubewells and 
construction of community water storage ponds at head of watercourses. 
\01\02
Agricultural productivity enhancement
 – disseminate irrigation technologies to achieve higher level of 
irrigation application efficiency and water productivity; demonstrate irrigation agronomy practices and 
resource conservation technologies such as rabi drill, bed shaper, bed planter, ridge planter, and widely 
introduce farm designing and precision land leveling (PLL).  
\01\02
Project management
. – support executing entities including District and Tehsil administrations and entities 
at the provincial level.  Baseline surveys, impact/outcome evaluation, technical assistance for 
implementation and supervision, financial management and audits, management information system and 
monitoring of environmental and social impacts and implementation of mitigation measures will be 
supported. 
  
The GoPunjab has estimated the total cost of the project to be US$111 million for four years, of which farmers share 
is estimated at US$19 million, GoPunjab US$9 million and IDA credit US$83 million. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be implemented province-wide, in canal command areas as well as in 
barani
 areas.  Sites and the 
specific interventions have not been identified.  These would be selected based on a screening process, which would 
include eligibility criteria related to poverty focus, willingness to form voluntary WUA and to assume watercourse 
improvement responsibility, concentration of small farmers in a given watercourse, location of watercourses within 
a distributary or minor giving priority to those that are at the tail reach, hydrological factors and areas where system 
rehabilitation improvement and quality of services needs are the highest.  The government would complete an  
Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment (IESA) before project appraisal and this would include a well 
articulate environmental and social management framework.  The framework will provide a road map with clear and 
measurable screening criteria, a transparent process and procedure, adequate technical and managerial capacity and 
financial resources, as well as timetable and monitoring system.       
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The Government of Punjab, through its On-farm Water Management Wing of Agriculture Department (AD) has 
been engaged in the implementation of similar projects for more than 25 years. Implementation responsibility of the 
proposed project will continue to rest in On-Farm Water Management Wing of the AD, while WUAs at the 
village/community level will execute the schemes.  OFWM establishments at the District Government level will 
oversee execution and will be the frontline institutions to work directly with farmers.  In addition to having years of 
experience in the implementation of similar projects the Government has devolved recently implementation 
responsibilities to District Governments and the technical and organizational support needed is much closer to the 
WUA than ever before.  Moreover, the project intends to strengthen the social mobilization and technical 
backstopping capacity of the District Governments by hiring and training staff and availing the necessary financial 
resources to build sustainable capacity within the associations.  High power committees will be established at the 
provincial and district level to ensure coordination and to make timely decisions for effective project 
implementation. 
 
Safeguard issues will be pursued at three levels.  First, the Punjab Environmental Protection Department will ensure 
that the environmental assessment carried out by the Government meets the Governments guidelines and directives 
and ensures that the project incorporates appropriate measures for mitigation of impacts.  Second, the On-Farm 
Water Management Wing of AD will ensure that all the mitigation measures identified are fully incorporated in the 
design of the schemes and  fully funded with monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in place. Third, the districts 
and WUA will ensure the implementation of mitigation plans developed under the social and environmental 
management framework.  
Page  3
 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[X] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50)
1
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [
X
] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [
X
] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
  Internal memo will be prepared and approval sought from the Country Director justifying non-notification to other 
riparian.  
Page  4
 
 
The Government of Punjab will prepare an IESA that assesses safeguard issues and come up 
with actions that will be incorporated in the project design to mitigate them.  The ISEA is 
expected to perform three main functions: (i) to assess the social and environmental fabric within 
which the project intervention will be implemented, and identify the key stakeholders and their 
interaction; (ii) to design the social and environmental provisions needed in the project to help 
achieve the project's development objectives, and (iii) to formulate the social and environmental 
framework for participatory implementation. 
 
The IESA, 
inter alia
, will: 
 
(a) 
identify key stakeholders, specially poor and vulnerable groups and through consultation with 
them formulate a participation framework to ensure that these groups benefit from the project; 
(b) 
identify and assess the social and environmental impacts of the project and where adverse impacts 
are identified, determine how they can be avoided, minimized or substantially mitigated; 
(c) 
identify capacity building measures that would enable effective participation and mitigation 
measures; 
(d) 
assess, compare and synthesize the lessons from various earlier and continuing initiatives in the 
sector; 
(e) 
ensure compliance with Government of Pakistan and Government of the Punjab Laws and 
Directives on social and environmental issues, as well as the Banks’ safeguards operation policies 
and directives;   
(f) 
indicate capital cost-sharing levels that are equitable and affordable (including capacity to pay, 
expected benefits, etc.). 
In each of the above actions the delivery mechanisms recommended will be such that people and institutions can 
manage them effectively. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
The Government of Punjab, through the consultant it has retained to carry out the IESA, intends to carry out a broad 
consultative process and the details of the methodologies used will be part of the assessment report.  The following 
consultations are planned and some are underway: (i) 
stakeholder consultations
 – large, small and tail-end farmers; 
Government agencies and Local Government staff; NGOs and civil society; (ii) 
focused group discussions
 – for 
topics that have to be discussed and examined in greater detail select group of participants including experts and 
professionals in the field; (iii) household survey/interview – sample farmers from various reaches of the 
watercourse, as well as from improved and unimproved watercourses and from fresh and saline ground water areas 
will be interviewed and household data collected. 
 
Although planes to meet disclosure requirements have not been drawn yet, the Government will be advised to make 
to draft EA reports available at a public place accessible to  project-affected groups and local NGOs.    
 
Page  5
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
Date set for Quality Enhancement Review is February 12, 2004. 
 
