Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (Initial) 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 31, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P084302 
Project Name: SINDH WATER SECTOR 
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Manuel Contijoch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 140.0 
Estimated Board Date: January 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument: APL 
Sector: Water, Irrigation, Agriculture 
Theme: Rural Services and Infrastructure 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source:  15.0 Borrower; 15.0 Farmers 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The Project Development Objective is that farmers in the project area improve water productivity through pursuit of 
a reform agenda and required investments leading to a better management system that links the canal commands 
areas, the distributary and the watercourse level. The project interventions would (a) define and implant an 
enforceable water rights system among users in the selected canal command areas; (b) devolve responsibility for 
water management including O&M to WUAs and FOs; (c) improve the reliability, efficiency and equity of water 
distribution, among the agricultural users, (d) modernize the existing irrigation and drainage networks and the on 
farm technology to improve water service delivery an use and (d) strengthen the institutional capacity of the 
irrigation institutions in Sindh accordingly to the existing Water Ordinance. 
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The proposed five year project will focus in  five canal command areas : Nara Canal, Ghotki Feeder, Left Bank 
Canals ( Akram Wah and Fulleli) where AWBs are already functioning and  in Desert Pat Feeder and Begari Canals 
which AWBs would be established in 2004. For the formulation of the Sindh On-farm Water Project an Integrated 
Social and Environmental Assessment (ISEA)  was prepared in 2003. SIDA is preparing the Holistic Irrigation and 
Drainage Plan in support of the Water Sector Improvement Project and several studies like the Master Drainage Plan 
have been made in this area which will be the basis for the project design and implementation framework. The 
project includes four mutually complementary components: 
 
A)  Social Mobilization and Capacity Building. This component will support the local capacity for integrated 
planning and water management in the Province. The establishment of water rights and allocation of water 
in the fourteen existing canals in Sindh. Transforming the present system of water distribution to a more 
transparent volumetric delivery accordingly with water entitlements and clear water allocation rules. This 
process will include the conjunctive use of surface and groundwater in line with the needs of the different 
users and the quantity of water available in the system. This component will also support the existing 
Page  2
 
 
capacity of social mobilization, formation of Area Water Boards (AWBs), Farmer Organizations (FOs) and 
women groups. Around 195 FOs have been formed and need consolidation and training. A similar number 
of FOs will have to be formed to manage the AWBs and the canal network in the recently notified canal 
areas.  The project will address the need to regulate the “direct outlets” than in some cases like the Nara 
Canal represents around 30% of the total volume of  water diverted to the farms. 
B) 
Civil Works. This component will support the modernization and improvement of the irrigation and 
drainage network, construction of structures for better metering the water, communication network, water 
distribution structures and operation and maintenance activities required for the sustainability of the system 
especially the improvements made through NDP. When needed and justified the project will introduce the 
modernization and improvement of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure in relation with agriculture 
diversification projects proposed and agreed with the FOs. 
C) 
Agriculture and Irrigation Technology. The project will promote delivery of water to the WUAs 
accordingly with Irrigation and Drainage Management Transfer (IDMT) contracts to regulate the water 
delivery an support the necessary infrastructure improvements to achieve a more timely and reliable water 
distribution. In this way the project will foster the introduction of modern irrigation practices and the 
installation of pressurized irrigation systems which will represent a major technological innovation for 
Pakistan agriculture. The project will also pursue coordination with the Sindh OFWMP in the execution of 
investments at the off farm  and on farm levels to establish the required articulation with agriculture 
productivity objectives defined by the FOs. 
D)  Management and Administration. The project will support the transition towards a more efficient system of 
water and irrigation management including the professionalization of service delivery through SIDA, the 
devolution of operation and maintenance to the AWBs, FOs and WUAs, and the revision of the role of the 
Irrigation Department in the Sindh Province. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be executed in  the following five canal command areas of Sindh Province : Nara Canal, Ghotki 
Feeder, Left Bank Canals ( Akram Wah and Fulleli) where AWBs are already functioning and  in Desert Pat Feeder 
and Begari Canals which AWBs would be established in 2004. 
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The Government of Sindh has issued the Sindh Water Management Ordinance in 2002, created SIDA and  notified  
five AWBs. Through the NDP project, 195 FOs have been established and they are responsible for the 
abiana
 
collection. 135 FOs have already signed IDMT agreements for the operation and maintenance of the irrigation and 
drainage networks and responsibilities have been transferred. The project will consolidate and expand the present 
institutional capacity of these structures and improve their performance in terms of benchmarking indicators. The 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Sindh, as in the case of the OFWMP will review and approve the 
implementation of the project, and any works carried out in a protected area will require prior clearance from the 
Sindh Wildlife Department. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[X ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [
X
] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The project will undertake mainly rehabilitation works and the impact on the environment and on rural livelihood’s 
expected  to be positive, the project is proposed to be classified has category ‘B’ 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
    ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [x ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
S2 Proposed. 
 
 Considering the recent ISEA developed in the same area of the project through the Sindh On-farm Water 
Management Project the same recommendations could be applied. The overall findings of the ISEA are that the 
project could lead to a more reliable, efficient and equitable water distribution with an overall improvement in the 
environmental and rural livelihoods in the project area. Nevertheless the ISEA flags the following issues: (i) the 
impact of soil and silt removal and disposal during rehabilitation activities, which may contaminate soils, 
community wells, and water ponds, and block the natural drainage patterns of the area; (ii) use of lined sections of 
watercourses for washing clothes; (iii) some tree clearing that may be required where irrigation canal need to be 
realigned; (iv) lack of participation of small, canal tail-end farmers and women in the irrigation decisions; and (v) 
sharecroppers obliged to work for canal improvement without being paid. 
 
This project will not finance or promote the use of pesticides or changes in the input composition at the farm level. 
Changes that would promote agriculture productivity including through better use of pesticides would be 
implemented through the Sindh On farm project for which an IPM strategy was agreed for the whole province.   
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
It is proposed that the project environment classification be a B. This is consistent with NDP and 
OFWMP ratings in Sindh Province. The project will take advantage of the numerous 
environmental and social studies already carried out for LBOD, NDP and Sindh OFWMP, 
synthesize the information available and identify possible gaps. In particular, under the Sindh On 
Farm Project an ISEA was conducted for the entire Province. 
 
Environmental Assessment
. Frameworks were developed under the ISEA OFWMP to mitigate 
against environmental and social issues and enhance the positive impacts of the project. These 
measures will also be applied in this project and  include: a) safe disposal or recycling of silt for 
agricultural purposes and construction of washing bays and cattle baths to avoid polluting water; 
b) setting specifications for the quality of borrow earth to avoid deterioration in the quality of 
existing soil; c) avoiding cutting of trees as far as possible and where essential, planting at least 
double the number of cut trees as replacement; d) enhancement of the skills and abilities of 
farmers, through training in new technologies, better management practices and in assessing and 
collecting water charges; e) empowering communities, including women, through improved 
participation opportunities in WCAs,  FOs and AWBs; f) incorporating mechanisms that 
recognize and pay for labor contributed by sharecroppers and tenants; f) strengthening the 
institutional capacity of WCAs, FOs, AWBs and SIDA; g) reducing conflicts and improving 
social relationship between farmers at the head and tail-end of canals; h) improve the overall 
performance of the irrigation system and the management of the direct outlets extractions, 
community organizations and NGOs. 
 
Projects in International Waterways
. Since the proposed project involves rehabilitation of 
irrigation channels, which receive water form the Indus river –an international waterway--, OP 
7.50 applies. However, the project essentially involves rehabilitation of existing irrigation 
facilities and does not involve works and activities that would exceed the original scheme, 
change its nature, or expand its scope and extent to make it appear different or a new scheme. 
The distribution of eater in the rivers that flow from India into Pakistan is covered by the Indus 
Waters Treaty signed by the two countries in 1960. While the countries have engaged in a 
number of conflicts and the tensions in the region have not fully subsided the treaty has remained 
intact and continues to be a source of stability in the region. As in the case of Sindh OFWMP the 
task team also reviewed  Article VII of the Indus Water Treaty of 1960 between Pakistan and 
India and concluded that: (i) a notification under paragraph (2) of the said Article VII  is not 
required, as the project will not affect the other riparians materially, and the exception to the 
external notification requirements of OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP &.50 is fully 
applicable. Accordingly a waiver from the notification requirement will be sought. 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
SIDA will run a wide consultation of the project objectives and activities through the AWB, FOs and WCAs in the 
project area, using the Social Mobilization Cells established under the NDP project. The documents prepared for the 
project will be disclosed to meet the disclosure requirements and will be available for consultation in a public place 
Page  5
 
 
accessible to project affected groups and local NGOs. The organization of focus discussions in areas of special 
concern will be organized and included in project design and implementation. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
Proposed September 2004
 
