iSDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWYorld Froc of Poverty
ixlin-f-a'hon
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/15/2002                               9A512
-b -U- a 
Section I - Basic Information                                      July 11, 2002
A. Basic Proiect Data
Country: PAKISTAN                              1 Project ID: P076872
fl½   ffl ATl  ,r  PIN-flr'f  A  III,         m1  ' -  T  i    A
rFoject: PT   (f#kiormerly IrtA II)             aI asK I Teaiii Leduer: Anthony Graeme Lee
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 29, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 15, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 105.00
Mana2inz Unit: SASEI                            Sector: General finance sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Standards and financial reporting (P)
Status: Lending                                l
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the Project for Strengthening Accountability and Reporting (PSTAR) is to increase the
accuracy, completeness, reliability, and timeliness of intra-year and year end govemment financial
reports in Pakistan at the national, provincial, and district levels and hence it directly supports the
government's commitment to improve public financial management, accountability, and transparency to
facilitate public oversight, and increase credihilitv in the international communitv
The G10  is currently unAet,aking a series o,f--.- meas-Aue  mincdg ..p nt.n. a WorldA Bank-fna nced-A
project for the Improvement of Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA) which will support the
introuuction of Government computerized accounting systems. Tne GPr is introducing devoiveu jocai
government with technical assistance from the Asian Development Bank, introducing medium term
budgetary frameworks with support from the UK's Department for International Development (DFID),
and being assisted in deepening the changes in Government financial management by the International
Monetary Fund. In addition to these and other actions being taken to strengthen financial management
reforms, Ministry of Finance officials have indicated the need to deepen these reforms to ensure that
sound financial management and strong internal controls quickly become established in all tiers of
Giovernment, and have requested the World Bank's sunnort to the Controller General of Accounts to
undertake a follow-on project for this purpose.
A major outcome of the project would be an upgraded government financial system with rigorous
internal controls and fully qualified staff, which would enable the Auditor General to conduct audits
following generally accepted accounting principles. The intent is to provide the government and the
people of Pakistan with credible financial data in a reliable, comprehensive and timely manner and
decision-makers and agency managers at the national, provincial, district, and tehsil levels with vital
financial performance information throughout the year.



2
ISDS
I.A.3. Project Description:
The nrnposed PSTAR proJect is a5-year project with a mid-term review enviaged in the 3rd year.
In summary, the five major project components are: i) strengthening Government financial
management pollicy andu capac:i.y, inldn  h rol and  -ec L. the- CA' -.e  inera - ontrols
and accounting skills requirements across the board, ii) expanding PIFRA sites to a total of 127 sites
completed, and building user and IT capacity, iii) modernizing and strengthening the Auditor
General's office, iv) strengthening legislative oversight, and v) strengthening communication and
change management to promote transparency and increase stakeholder awareness and ownership.
The details, and especially the costs shown below, are extrememly tentative at this stage.
*   Strengthening Government Financial Management Policy and Capacity - Up to $60m: This
component includes: i) enhancing Government capacity for establishing a medium-term
budgetary framework to prepare budgets on a rolling 3-year basis (unless this work is being
undertaken through other means); ii) strengthening the CGA's administrative and management
nenmprs cpnior stnffina faicilitipc eniiinment and Incyictir2l reurnces iii) hiiildina acruiinting
capacity by training and supporting DDOs, provincial AGs, DAOs (including provision of basic
infrIastr uct.Lure and loglistic When n11ceIsIsbary), andU ZineV Upa L.r.ent stLaLff i1n 'In LJIancial1I mnIanaaIgIemIent,
the New Accounting Model, and chart of accounts at national, provincial, district, and tehsil
levels and establishing eligibility criteria for the transfer to independent systems administration
by Provinces in 2006; and iv) building a highly skilled internal audit staff complement via
training and recruiting and developing a comprehensive set of internal controls, internal audit
work programs, and reporting regimes. Successful completion of these subcomponents will help
to achieve adequate financial management across the government, ensure easy incorporation of
local government financial data into Provincial and National accounts to meet devolution needs,
and achieve sufficient professional capacity to bring the entire accounting chain to acceptable
tec.hnica! onerationni and qualitv standards.
*   1,xandin.I PIFRI  A S-ystem.st 'mplementationa and Capacit- - UP to $ *60 'Ulm1: Th JJ1is component
includes: i) expanding the PIFRA system deployment to an additional 75 sites (making a total
127 sites); ii) extending the systems network to enable seiected DDOs to access and interface
with PIFRA systems; iii) developing an overall systems and data architecture to ensure
compatible information flows among national, provincial, district, and tehsil governments, iv)
conducting user training at national, provincial, district, and tehsil governments, and v) building
IT capacity through recruiting fixed-term technical professionals. Successful completion of these
subcomponents is instrumental to achieving full government financial accountability and
transparency.
*   Modernizing the Auditor General's Office - Up to $20m: This component focuses on
restructuring, upgrading   a r-tAoling t+h Auditor G-n-r,!'s of throuh. 1subomponents for:
i) supporting implementation of the Ordinance that defines the functions, powers, and terms and
conditions of service ol the Auditor General; ii) buiiding professional capacity in financial and
performance audits at the national, provincial, district levels; and iii) working, alongside PACs,
to take on the challenge of improving the value for money from public sector spending and
improving national accountability and governance.
*   Strengthening Legislative Oversight - Up to $5m - This component focuses on ensuring that
the public sector reform and accountability agenda is advanced with appropriate and timely
legislative action and support. Oversight would also support improving capacity of federal and
provincial PAC Secretariats and PAC members in addressing accountability issues more
effectively, including systems support as required.



3
WSD
*   StreniztheninitCommunication and Change Management - Up to $5m: - In tandem with the
modifications being made in staffing and systems across the accounting and auditing
orgtaniz7ations associited with tlhe PIFRA projec^ts, a communication and change management
component is warranted to consult with and inform key stakeholders both inside and outside the
government. Internally, cornmunica-tions will involve F1PX uscrs anlu civil servilce staffi ad
administrators at the national, provincial, district, tehsil, and union council levels. Externally,
the communications will address consumers of public services and the media in an effort to
increase public awareness and involvement. Media representatives will be trained and public
forums will be held to increase understanding and discussion of grass roots concems and ideas in
a transparent manner. This component will help to ensure that key actors are moving in the same
direction and attempt to avoid misunderstandings that lead to delays.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
This is a country-wide project, excluding AiXJr.
B. Chleck Environmental Classfifcation: C (Not Required)
Comments:
- afegua Policies T riggre______u____
Policy                                 Applicability
'Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    J 0Yes * No    CTBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        OYes * No     O TBD
[Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                0 Yes * No    C TBD
R:fptv of nnmcz (CI)P/RP A 71                                   Vp)  q B No M.  TCfRn
|Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  |                   Yes 0 No       T TBD
[involuntary Kesettlement (OP/B5P 4.12)                     1   Yes w No       I 1B1)I
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
| Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                              |     Yes * No  O TBD
I Proiects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         1 0 Yes * No    <>TBD
Projects in Intemational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)           OYes * No        TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend io prejudice tne final deermination of ine partries ciaims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. if information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None
l    It, Describe any potentia cumulative impacts due to appliatin of nm-nre th-n -ne Csfeguard plicyn nr
SL. -   fl..~  ts  an.  -J.. - nn I  ~...- InLLl~In  asL.  i  jj~  *mALIIlnl m i   kfn 
due to multiple project compone6it.
None



4
iSDS
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
!!.D1.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
N/A
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will be developed to help ensure that its development activities: i) take into account key
relevant social and institutional issues from a variety of perspectives; (ii) incorporate a participation
strntegv for involving, a wide rangre of ctakeholder- (iii'i develon institutional and dlecision-makinq
arrangements that are conducive to openness and accountability and sharing of information.
E. Safeguards Classif cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts fr1om multiple safeUguards. 'vVhVIenever an individual sai'eguardu policy is triggered th'e
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar nroiects which reqnire 2 safeganrd framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
[Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Manazement Plan:           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the EDh
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual            l
Date ot receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
nntP of qnhmiq-ion to InfoShhnn
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in=country" discrlosure 



5
iSDS
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Datp nof submiss,ion to InfoShon
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted bv       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Anthony Graeme Lee                           July 15, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Seivam                         July 1), L002
Sector Manager/Director:      Ian Mackintosh                               July 15, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAPCH                        S FEEite Ik f  FOW   CA5_ 



