                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                  Report No: AC110
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PAKISTAN                                              Project ID: P082977
Project: Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund II                  Task Team Leader: Qazi Azmat Isa
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 28, 2003                    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 4, 2003                                IDA Amount ($m): 238.00
Managing Unit: SASES                                           Sector: Micro- and SME finance (70%); Water
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)          supply (10%); Other social services (10%); Roads
Status: Lending                                                and highways (5%); Irrigation and drainage (5%)
                                                               Theme: Gender (P); Access to urban services for the
                                                               poor (P); Rural services and infrastructure (P); Civic
                                                               engagement, participation and community driven
                                                               development (S); Rural markets (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund Project II (PPAF II) is a follow-on of the Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation Fund Project. The development objective remains: to reduce the incidence of poverty in the
country through provision of resources and services to the poor and low income, particularly women. This
is to be achieved through an integrated approach including provision of microcredit, community
infrastructure, training and skill development and social sector interventions. The apex Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and its partner organizations (POs) will continue to play a key role in delivery of
these services to the poor.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The follow-on Project would provide funds to PPAF for further reducing the incidence of poverty in the
country. The size of the Project has been determined based on PPAF's experience during the first Project as
well as on conservative estimates of the absorptive capacity of PPAF's existing POs for the next four years
(see Annex 4). The funds will be channeled through POs and their communities as loans and grants to the
poor and low income. Services to the poor would include provision of micro-finance, community
infrastructure, skill development and education and health facilities. The main components of PPAF II
include:

Credit & Enterprise Development (IDA: US$158 million, Reflows: US$ 100 million)
Under the credit and enterprise component PPAF will continue to lend to POs for on-lending to individuals
or groups of individuals who meet the eligibility criteria of the PPAF. (detailed eligibility criteria for POs,
their clients and microcredit loans is provided under PPAF's Operational Manual). Under PPAF II,
PPAF is targeting to expand outreach and introduce second generation innovations for its existing
micro-credit clients, approximately one million new loans are planned for over half a million borrowers.
PPAF would disburse US$ 235 million for microcredit and an additional $23 million as costs of delivery to
POs. Of this US$ 100 million will come from credit reflows and the balance of US$158 million from IDA
over four years.The size of this component is based on a number of factors: (i) strategic plans developed by
the largest borrowers from PPAF (NRSP, Kashf etc); (ii) projected demand by smaller POs based on
trends over the last three years; (iii) an incremental increase in average loan size of Rs.1,000 each year; and
(iv) greater use of `reflows' for micro-credit operations. Actual disbursements, however, would be

                                                          2
                                                                                                                ISDS


dependent on performance and improvements required to be made in the areas identified by PPAF during
its assessment of POs. The bulk of the funds would go to on-lending for micro-finance; a small share
(US$2 million) would also go towards `enterprise development loans' that are targeted for an under-served
small enterprise niche market. Sectoral distribution of the loans is expected to be as follows: 35 percent for
livestock, 30 percent for agriculture and 35 percent for enterprise development. First time loans are likely
to range from Rs.5,000 to Rs.7,000 (approximately US$85 to US$120) and repeater loans between 10,000
- 20,000 (approximately US$170 to US$340).

                                   Expected Outreach under PPAF II

                                   FY04            FY05          FY06           FY07         Cumulative
Number of loans                     193,187          242,806      307,414         399,637     1,143,044
Number of new borrowers             115,912          121,403      138,336         159,855        535,506


Sector Development
Pakistan microfinance sector has matured and become far more transparent over the past four to five years.
Pakistan Microfinance Network (PMN) ­ set up by microfinance practitioners, has played a key role in
compiling sector data, setting standards and disseminating information. According to PMN estimates, as of
end 2002, there were approximately 250,000 active microfinance clients in Pakistan ­ 81 percent of whom
are being serviced by the NGO sector and 57 percent specifically by the RSPs. The number of potential
borrowers, on the other hand, is estimated at 5.1 million, thus indicating significant unmet demand and the
need for continued financial and capacity building support in the sector.

Performance under PPAF I
US$45 million was allocated to PPAF for microcredit under the first Project of which approximately
US$40.3 million has been disbursed and an additional US$14.9 million committed through legally bound
lines of credit. The portfolio is currently split between agriculture (38%), livestock (30%) and small
enterprise (32%). In the past three and a half years PPAF has effectively enhanced retail capacity in a
country where the poor have had very limited access to micro-credit. PPAF's clients have doubled every
year for the past three years and as of March 2003, POs had extended 187,000 loans from PPAF funding
to more than 180,000 borrowers, 41% of whom are women. The average loan size is US$153 - well below
the individual loan ceiling of US$500. PPAF has also managed to bring financial discipline into a sector
resulting in 100 percent repayments that have generated approximately US$17 million at PPAF which will
be used as reflows to fund the increased demand for credit. Initially, PPAF's portfolio had 90 percent of its
funding channelled to the RSPs, however, over a span of three and half years it has managed to effectively
enhance capacity of the other smaller retail institutions working as its partners as a result of which in
FY03, 41 percent of its funding was disbursed through these small and emerging NGOs.

PO Assessment
PPAF is currently financing microcredit programs of 30 POs, however, six of these account for a large size
of PPAF's total portfolio. To assess performance of PPAF's, POs including quality of their portfolio and
progress towards operational and financial sustainability, the appraisal mission carried out due diligence
through an independent firm of chartered accountants of the bigger POs (complete report included in
project files). The results of the assessment indicate that POs are broadly following prudent policies
relating to credit approvals, disbursements, recoveries, provisioning, and write-offs. In most cases these
policies are documented and followed by respective POs. Areas which need to be strengthened include: (i)
interest rate policy that cover costs; (ii) diversification and sectoral distribution of portfolio; (iii) adoption
of good MIS, and (iv) tightening of some internal controls.

                                                        3
                                                                                                            ISDS


Operational Subsidy
Though POs are encouraged to lend at rates that ultimately cover their directly attributable credit
administration funding costs, loan loss and cost of funds; and a minimum lending rate is imposed by PPAF
to ensure that on-lending is not below commercial rates, PPAF has provided a subsidy to POs in order to
build their capacity and increase their outreach. Under PPAF II also, a subsidy would be available to POs
which is approximately 10 percent of total lending and half in percentage terms of the subsidy provided
under PPAF I. Even though this subsidy has been reduced, it has not been eliminated and the rationale for
this is as follows: The financial sustainability picture of PPAF's POs depends on a number of factors. For
a start, financial sustainability depends significantly on the rate of expansion of new branches compared to
the rate of expansion of new clients in existing branches.Secondly, in a geographically diverse country like
Pakistan, it depends to a significant extent on the agro-ecological zone that the PO operates in. Third, it
depends on the extent of portfolio diversification. Fourth, it also varies according to the various products,
both financial and nonfinancial that are offered to the clients. And finally, it depends on the interest rates
charged by the PO to the borrower as well as the level of cost-efficiency of the PO. International
comparisons show that operating costs of major Pakistani microfinance providers are one of the lowest
(17%), and compare favorably with financially self sufficient MFIs in the Asia region (19%). However, in
order to achieve long run financial sustainability, PPAF POs would need to raise the volume and size of
microcredit loans as well as rationalize on-lending rates to raise effective yield on portfolio to fully cover
their credit delivery costs.

Community Infrastructure (IDA: US$58 million; Community Contribution: US$ 13 million)
The community infrastructure component will continue to support, in the form of grants on a cost sharing
basis, community physical infrastructure (CPI) sub-projects. Identification of sub-projects will be done by
poor communities and their selection will be transparent and based on sustainability as determined by the
ability of the communities to recover operations and maintenance costs. POs will assist communities in
organizing as groups and preparing, implementing and managing these schemes (detailed eligibility
criteria for POs, communities and sub-projects proposed by them is provided in PPAF's Operational
Manual). Under PPAF II a total of US$71 million is estimated for this component, of which US$65 million
will be used for sub-project civil works - 59 percent for conventional projects and 32 percent for new
initiatives while the remaining US$ 6 million will be available to fund capital and operational costs. Based
on past trends, it is expected that 40 percent of the conventional projects would be for drinking water
supply, 20 percent for irrigation, 18 percent for sanitation, 20 percent for link-roads and bridges and the
remaining 2 percent for flood protection works. Under the community infrastructure component, US$ 58
million will come from IDA over four years and the balance US$ 13 from communities as part of their 20
percent contribution towards capital costs of the sub-projects. The communities will also be required to
provide 100 percent of the costs of operation and maintenance of these sub-projects. As per its POs
implementation plans, PPAF expects to fund infrastructure projects that are expected to reach
approximately 3.8 million poor (approximately 541,000 households). Apart from conventional community
infrastructure projects, POs are also expected to undertake new initiatives aimed at integrated development,
dissemination of low-cost, appropriate and innovative technologies, such as micro-hydels, desalination,
windmill and solar pump projects, as well as towards reducing poverty in drought stricken/ prone areas
through implementation of drought mitigation & preparedness plans (DMPPs). These interventions would
involve provision of sustainable infrastructure facilities to the poor in a holistic and systematic manner. The
investment program under this component for Phase II was developed after careful analysis of; the costs
and demand of CPI projects in Phase I, the capacity of POs to implement CPI projects, and estimated price
escalations.

                           Expected CPI Projects under PPAF II
                                    FY04          FY05          FY06           FY07        Cumulative
Number of sub-projects

                                                         4
                                                                                                           ISDS




  Conventional                        1,750         1,750         1,750         1,750         7,000
  Integrated                             75            75            75            75           300
  Drought Mitigation                      1             1             1             1             4
  Innovative Technology                  26            39            39            26           130



Performance under PPAF I
Under the first Project, US$28 million were allocated to PPAF to complete approximately 2,500
sub-projects, over 5 years.These projects were designed to be completed while working closely with POs
and their poor communities. Of the total funds allocated for community infrastructure, US$13.9 million has
been disbursed and an additional US$13.0 million committed under financing agreements. PPAF is
currently working with 24 POs and has approved 6,564 projects for implementation in 75 districts of the
country. 3,223 project are currently in progress of which 2,730 have been completed. All projects have
been identified by the communities, are small in size and well within per capita limits. They are also being
operated and maintained by the community organizations satisfactorily. Within three and a half years of
operations, PPAF's infrastructure schemes have benefitted some 1.54 million men and women. In view of
the fact that a large percentage of the population still does not have access to basic infrastructure and that
implementation capacity and outreach of existing POs has been enhanced, PPAF aims to increase coverage
and make a tangible impact on poverty reduction.

Sustainability of CPI sub-projects
Sustainability of CPI sub-projects is assessed on the basis of operation and maintenance of these projects
by the communities. Investment in community infrastructure is through grants, on a cost sharing basis, and
therefore, support for this component will need to continue from PPAF or come from transfers from local
government. However, government cost per unit/type of infrastructure delivered has, to date, been at a
higher level (tertiary), whereas PPAF delivery has been at the micro level (intra-village and connectivity to
the tertiary). This is reflected in the low average cost per unit of PPAF schemes. While local government
may not come down to this delivery level in the near future, it is hoped that, in the long-run, as
Government's commitment to decentralization strengthens it would bring down services to the community
level. It is also anticipated that communities that experience the benefits of PPAF funded community
infrastructure demand better governance and better allocation of budget resources, and long-term
sustainability results from integration with more efficient fiscal transfers to local governments. A few of the
POs and COs have already established linkages with District Governments, where CO members are also
members of the Community Citizen Boards (CCBs) set up under the Local Government Ordinance. PPAF
is expected to strengthen its alliance with Local Governments by encouraging more of its POs to register
their COs as CCBs. This would leverage PPAF funding for community infrastructure.

Training & Skill Development (IDA: US$9 million)
Under the first Project, grants for operational support as well as for training were included under the
Capacity Building component. In order to differentiate between actual 'capacity building' and the element of
'operational subsidy', the two have been separated and included in different components under PPAF II.
This component would primarily cover the costs of training communities as well as staff of PPAF's
partners. It would also support expenses of PPAF-organized workshops/ seminars as well as costs of
setting up and operationalizing MIS in 20 POs.

                                     Expected Outreach under PPAF II

                                     FY04         FY05           FY06          FY07        Cumulative

                                                        5
                                                                                                           ISDS


Trainings conducted
  Communities                       31,221        36,789        45,023        56,511          169,544
  PO Staff*                          1,058         1,250         1,511         1,881             5,700
  PPAF Staff                            30            43            43             30              146

* includes staff trained under Strategic Planning Exercises

Communities: Vocational and technical training would be given to community members to enhance their
income generating skills and increase their understanding of market structures and marketing. Under the
first Project, PPAF funded 1,570 such trainings for community members which benefitted approximately
38,000 community members, 40 percent of whom were women. Approximately 108,000 new borrowers
and 61,000 repeat borrowers would be trained through this component under PPAF II. Exposure visits to
other communities for some 1,500 community members would also be supported to allow dissemination of
best practices. In addition, a limited number of exhibitions would be funded to introduce community made
products to the market.

POs: Training would be provided to some 5,450 junior level and 250 senior level staff in order to enhance
their capability to deliver services to the poor and assume leadership responsibilities at the local level.
PPAF has already funded 152 training sessions for more than 1,000 staff members.

To gain from the experience of other well-managed and successful service providers, PO staff (about 300)
would also be sent on exposure visits to other POs. This component would also support costs of the
Strategic Planning Exercises conducted with the POs as these have proved extremely useful for building
capacity, consolidating partnership with PPAF, harmonizing objectives and providing baseline material
which can be tracked in a systematic manner to assess the impact of PPAF's interventions.

Education & Health (IDA: US$5 million)
Access to education and health facilities are critical for improving standards of living and reducing poverty,
however, the poor do not have access to quality education and health services. These interventions were not
initially included as part of PPAF's mandate as NGO initiatives in these sectors were being funded under
the Participatory Development Program, (PDP) a component of the Social Action Program (SAP).
However, since SAP has wound up, PPAF intends to fill this gap and facilitate provision of quality
education and health services to the poor, especially women. Following approval from its Board of
Directors, PPAF organized a consultative workshop to solicit the views and opinions of its partners on the
possibility of adding education and health to its existing components - there was consensus that by
supporting interventions in social sectors, PPAF would be able to provide the poor with basic social needs
and thereby help them in a more holistic and integrated manner. PPAF has also held detailed discussions
with its management team as well as with practitioners of education and health to devise a suitable strategy
for its interventions in these sectors. Based on these consultations, PPAF is planning to support education
and health services at two levels: i) at the macro-level, PPAF aims to advocate increased budgetary
allocations for social sectors as well as mainstreaming of educational and health services provided at the
community level by civil society organizations with public sector services, and ii) at the meso-level, PPAF
plans to support its POs bring about a paradigm shift in providing quality access to health and education
services for the poor. For instance for quality education, PPAF intends supporting (i) modern management
practices in the sector including, teacher training, course planning, structured learning; (ii) class room
instruction and environment that encourages the child to think, ask questions, participate and discover; and
(iii) textbooks that are of interest to children.

Under this component, PPAF would provide US$5 million grant funding to its existing POs, either directly

                                                          6
                                                                                                              ISDS


or/and through funding other apex organizations. Funds in the form of grants will be provided for
operational and capital costs as well as for training, skill development and capacity building. PPAF will,
however, not fund land or vehicles and a beneficiary community would be required to contribute towards
the capital cost of the scheme by providing either land for construction of the building or an acceptable
structure. In keeping with its role as a wholesaler of funds, PPAF will make the health and education
program operative through its POs who have already qualified as partners of PPAF; subject to their
meeting the additional eligibility criteria for these services. These include amongst others: i) active
participation of communities; ii) equity and cost effectiveness of the intervention; iii) linkages and
mainstreaming with public sector programs; iv) conformity with environmental and safety standards; v)
community contributions towards upkeep of the facility; vi) comprehensive baseline to assess potential of
the facility; vii) mandatory training of teacher/health worker; viii) preference for using local human
resources; etc.

PPAF plans to create a new Education & Health Unit which would be headed by a senior professional and
include a couple of management executives, all of whom will be hired competitively from the market. The
Unit will solicit proposals from its existing POs for funding in these sectors and upon receipt of proposals
the Unit will carry out desk and field appraisals of eligible POs and shortlist qualified partners. Funding for
this component will be decided on each shortlisted POs past performance in the sector and their future
implementation plans. As with all its other programs PPAF will also closely monitor and evaluate outputs
and outcomes here as well.

Support for PPAF (IDA: US$8 million)
All operating costs under the first project are currently being met by PPAF, from interest income and
returns on the initial endowment received from Government. IDA support under this component relates to
costs for the new project and would include the following: i) approximately US$ 2 million for civil works
required for the costs of construction of PPAF's office in Islamabad (land for the building will be procured
through PPAF's own resources), currently PPAF is located in rented premises; ii) US $ 1 million for capital
costs to equip the new building, specially its training facilities, and its resource center; iii) US $ 3.3 million
for consultancies primarily for baseline socioeconomic data collection, post intervention impact
assessments, and technical assistance for improving data management and financial systems; and iv)
approximately US $ 1.7 to support incremental operating costs of PPAF related to the second project on a
declining basis with PPAF covering all these costs by the end of the second project.

PPAF's Equity (Government of Pakistan: US$10 million)
Under the first Project, the Government provided PPAF with US$10 million endowment to build its equity
and manage the US$90 million IDA Credit, which is invested in Government securities to support PPAF's
core institutional costs related to the first project. A second injection of equity of the same amount by the
Government is justified on the following grounds: i) the size of the follow-on project is nearly four times the
first and therefore PPAF would require support in meeting the incremental costs related to the much larger
second project - IDA is only supporting part of these costs on a declining basis; ii) the enhanced equity
would be tangible demonstration of Governments commitment to reaching out to a larger section of the
poor, and to its legal commitment to the World Bank to ensure PPAF's equity is not adversely affected
(Development Credit Agreement, Section 4.02); iii) it will help assure sustainability of PPAF's operations
in the future without further infusion of capital; and iv) the additional US$10 million would ensure that
PPAF remains a strong financial institution with healthy capital adequacy and debt/equity ratios.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

                                                        7
                                                                                                           ISDS


PPAF, the implementing agency for the Project, is based in Islamabad. The microcredit, infrastructure,
education and health components are, however, executed through PPAF's POs with field offices in different
parts of the country. As the location of each intervention varies, so do characteristics. All target the poor and
the disadvantaged.


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments: The Project is rated 'B'. Sub-projects are small in scale and maintenance by communities
guarantees effective use of natural resources.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
PPAF's conventional infrastructure projects are small in scale and operation and maintenance by
communities guarantees effective use of natural resources, thereby, ensuring environmentally benign
interventions. This was reaffirmed in an independent assessment of 356 PPAF funded infrastructure
projects, carried out in June 2002, in which over 90 percent of the projects received good or satisfactory
environmental rating. For microcredit, proper targeting and inclusion of women are more pressing issues.
The very fact that PPAF's average loan size is around US$140 and that more than 40 percent of its
borrowers are women shows the effectiveness of the targeting mechanisms.

In the follow-on project, new initiatives in the form of 'integrated development projects' will be undertaken.
These will increase the scale of PPAF funded projects due to multiple interventions in one community, and
potentially increase the risk of adverse environment and social development impacts. However, the kind of
integrated projects being suggested may infact be more environmentally sound as they would support and
complement individual infrastructure development sub-projects. For example, water supply and sanitation
will be supported by street-paving and side-drains, thus promoting environmentally friendly, healthy and
hygienic conditions in the community.

                                                        8
                                                                                                            ISDS


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Only the Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy is triggered and no significantly adverse impact are
envisaged.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
It is expected that PPAF's poverty reduction initiatives will continue to have a beneficial impact on the poor
and low-income, particularly women.Findings of independent studies as well as feedback from monitoring
visits also confirm that PPAF interventions are inclusive in nature and benefits are distributed equitably
among the communities and regions.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Safeguard Policies and their Effectiveness: PPAF's EMF is based on the Bank's Safeguard Policies. It
suggests policies and procedures for environmental management, and provides simple tools for early
screening of activities to ensure that they are subject to an adequate, but not unnecessarily burdensome,
level of environmental assessment and mitigation. To ensure compliance, the EMF forms part of the
Financing Agreement signed between PPAF and POs as well as of the sub-project Financing Agreement
signed between a PO and a community. To facilitate better comprehension the EMF has been translated
into the local language and PPAF and NGO staff trained on how to use it. Independent assessments have
reaffirmed that the EMF guidelines are being followed and that PPAF funded projects are not harming the
environment. However, with PPAF's larger mandate and expansion into new community infrastructure
areas, the existing EMF has been reassessed and revised by PPAF and the draft EMF cleared by the Bank
on the understanding that an environmental and social review will be undertaken during the next mission to
ensure (i) the adequacy and implementation of the EMF in PPAF I, and (ii) the adequacy of the revisions
made for PPAF II, and to suggest further modifications if necessary.

Monitoring & Documenting Compliance: Rigorous preliminary and desk appraisal prevents partnership
with NGOs not complying with safeguards. For POs, compliance with social and environmental safeguards
given in the eligibility criteria and the EMF checklist, is monitored during site visits every quarter. Findings
are documented in field visit reports, and any issues reported to the concerned PO. The field visit reports
are collated by PPAF after 6 months to see performance and compliance trends. Independent impact
assessment studies done on PPAF's microcredit and community infrastructure projects have also assessed
compliance with safeguards which is documented in the reports.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The PPAF Project was designed by the Bank in partnership with the Government, PPAF, NGOs/RSPs and
the private sector. The apex continues to solicit feedback from all stakeholders (POs as well as poor
communities) for improving its service delivery, including feedback on its environmental screening
procedures and impact assessments. PPAF has also carried out an extensive 360 degree feedback from its
POs which resulted in major shifts in its business processes and better facilitation and understanding by all
concerned.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or

                                                      9
                                                                                                           ISDS


on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[X] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/26/2003         5/30/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           5/26/2003         5/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            9/5/2003          9/17/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Qazi Azmat Isa                                        06.05.03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     David Marsden
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Paul Jonathan Martin
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                   Date

                                                10
                                                                    ISDS


Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam        06.03.03
Sector Manager/Director          Joseph Del Mar Pernia    06.05.03

