INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: [Initial Draft Prepared by Graeme Lee, subject to
amendment by SASES]                                   _
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                       Project ID: P083929
Project Name: Punjab Municipal Services  Task Team Leaders: Graeme Lee /
Improvement Project                     Shahnaz Arshad
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2004      Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 65.0
Estimated Board Date: November 2004     GEF amount ($m.): Nil
Managing Unit: SASEI                    PCF amount ($m.): Nil
Lending Instrument: SIL                 Other financing amounts ($m.) by source:
Sector: Sanitation, SWM, Water Supply,
General Transportation                  Nil
Theme: Municipal Finance, Municipal
Governance and Institution Building,    Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task
Decentralization, and Access to Urban  team: David Hanrahan
Services for the Poor
B. Project Objective
The project's development objectives are to improve the financial and institutional
capacity of local governments to deliver urban infrastructure services, by.
(i)   developing an efficient mechanism for allocating public resources for infrastructure
(ii)  capacity building at the level of the Provincial Government, City Districts (CDs),
TMAs and their constituents.
* at provincial level, create the capacity to manage a process of performance
improvementfor CDs/TMAs;
* at local level, improve their capacity for delivery of urban services, including
optimal utilization of managerial, staffing and financial resources and
enhanced capacity to mobilize own resources; and
(iii)  performance-related matching grants for infrastructure repair and renewal.
C. Project Description
The project is anticipated to build upon the work earlier undertaken to create the Punjab
Municipal Development Fund, accepting that as municipalities no longer have powers to
borrow matching grants would need to replace the use of loans. By making these grants



performance-related, many of the benefits of the Fund would be retained, as CDs/TMAs
shall need to gradually bring their financial status closer to being creditworthy in order
to obtain grants. Initially it is anticipated that improvements shall largely be achieved
through better 'housekeeping' measures including cost reductions and improved value
for money, as well as revenue enhancements through improved management of tariff
collections, etc . All TMAs interested in performance improvement would be eligible for
some limited TA to help them identify opportunities, plan for improvement in aspects of
priority to them with specified targets, and to achieve these targets. Further rounds of
TA grants would be provided to TMAs demonstrating the performance improvements
sought.
The project components are likely to be:
> Establishment of a Municipal Improvement Fund at the provincial level to
manage a program of performance-based grants;
>  Grants for incremental capacity building of CDs/TMAs in planning, financial
management, and supervision of works and contracted services, and for
supporting institutional reforms in service delivery, subject to satisfactory
performance improvements;
> Performance-based matching grants for infrastructure maintenance and repair;
> Creation of a database on local finances and performance, to facilitate
comparative analyses between CDs/TMAs and the exchange of best practices;
and
7 Provision of systems and training for TMA Nazims, officials and staff
D. Project location (if known)
The Provincial Government of Punjab, Pakistan, and Tehsil Municipal Authorities in the
Province.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity
Bank analysis of Pakistan 's Fiscal Decentralization identify a number of the key
shortcomings of the system that are likely to prevent local governments from performing
effectively. These include weaknesses in financial management systems; a high
dependence on non-predictable financial transfers from higher levels of government,
poor incentives to increase local revenue mobilization and reduce costs; and limited
localfinancial accountability given the extensive reliance on grant funds from higher
authorities. Moreover the tier of government responsible for provision of most basic
infrastructure services, Tehsil Municipal Authorities (TMAs), lack sufficiently skilled
manpower to undertake many tasks, and are as yet too fragmented to jointly tackle
common problems.
Resolution of most of these matters shall require commitment to improve performance by
TMAs, together with the active support of Provincial Government, which controls most



regulatory matters. Hence the proposed project would intervene at both levels,
addressing these topics by instituting performance improvements.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policy                             If Applicable, How Might It
Apply? [very concise summary]
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)        Through application of an agreed
Environmental / Social Framework
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                l
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)                      See above
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                            See above
Forests (OP 4.36)
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)                                l
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      l
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             l
Environmental Assessment Category:
CA CB C C C Fl O X TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:
Assessment of the project's environmental category and agreement of an Environmental
and Social Framework shall be undertaken during project preparation, and shall be
agreed together with a satisfactory independent monitoring system at project appraisal in
May 2004.
Safeguard Policies Classification:
C SI C S2 C S3 C SF C X TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:
See above
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard
issues and prepare to mitigate them?
Environmental and social safeguards - CDs/TMAs shall lack sufficient skills and
understanding of our safeguards to apply them without assistance. It is intended that
an environmental and socialframework shall be agreed with the Government of
Punjab during project preparation, and MF staff trained in its application.
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



Independent monitoring of the application shall be incorporated, possibly by
involving the Punjab EPA.
B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?
General requirements of the safeguards shall be explained to CDs/TMAs and the
public at large through a series of workshops planned to be held during the initial
stages ofproject preparation. Disclosure requirements shall be incorporated as a
mandatory item in any proposal submittedfor a performance-based grant relating to
relevant activities under the terms of the Environmental and Social Framework.
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding
safeguards during project preparation
TBA
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: (March 2004)



