Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated) 
Report No: AC110 
Section I - Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2003 
A. Basic Project Data 
(from PDS) 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
Country:
 PAKISTAN 
Project ID:
 P082977 
Project:
 Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund II 
Task Team Leader:
 Qazi Azmat Isa 
Authorized to Appraise Date:
 April 28, 2003 
IBRD Amount ($m):
 
Bank Approval:
 December 4, 2003 
IDA Amount ($m):
 238.00
 
Additional Financing: 100.00        
Managing Unit:
 SASES 
Lending Instrument:
 Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL) 
Status: 
Lending 
Sector:
 Micro- and SME finance (65
%); Water supply 
(15%); Irrigation and drainage (10%); Roads (5%); 
Other social services (5%) 
Theme: 
Civic engagement, participation and 
community driven development (P);  Rural services 
and infrastructure (P); Gender (P);  Access to urban 
services for the poor (P); Rural markets (S) 
Additional Financing - Sector:
 Housing Construction 
(60%); Water Supply (10%); Roads (10%); 
Vocational Training (10%); Other Social Services 
(10%) 
Additional Financing - Theme: 
Natural Disaster (P); 
Social Safety Nets (P);  Civic engagement, 
participation and community driven development (P
);  
Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other Human 
Development (P)
 
I.A.2.  Project Objectives (From PDS): 
The Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund Project II (PPAF II) is a follow-on of the Pakistan Poverty 
Alleviation Fund Project. The development objective remains:  to reduce the incidence of poverty in 
the country through provision of resources and services to the poor and low income, particularly 
women.  This is to be achieved through an integrated approach including provision of microcredit, 
community infrastructure, training and skill development and social sector interventions. The apex 
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and its partner organizations (POs) will continue to play a 
key role in delivery of these services to the poor. 
 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS): 
The follow-on Project would provide funds to PPAF for further reducing the incidence of poverty in 
the country. The size of the Project has been determined based on PPAF's experience during the first 
Project as well as on conservative estimates of the absorptive capacity of PPAF's existing POs for the 
next four years. The funds will be channeled through POs and their communities as loans and grants 
to the poor and low income. Services to the poor would include provision of micro-finance, 
community infrastructure, skill development and education and health facilities. The main 
components of PPAF II include: 
 
Credit & Enterprise Development   (IDA: US$158 million, Reflows: US$ 100 million) 
Page  2
Under the credit and enterprise component PPAF will continue to lend to POs for on-lending to 
individuals or groups of individuals who meet the eligibility criteria of the PPAF. Under PPAF II, 
PPAF is targeting to expand outreach and introduce second generation innovations for its existing 
micro-credit clients, approximately one million new loans are planned for over half a million 
borrowers. 
Sector Development 
Pakistan microfinance sector has matured and become far more transparent over the past four to five 
years.  Pakistan Microfinance Network (PMN) 
–
set up by microfinance practitioners, has played a 
key role in compiling sector data, setting standards and disseminating information. According to 
PMN estimates, as of end 2002, there were approximately 250,000 active microfinance clients in 
Pakistan – 81 percent of whom are being serviced by the NGO sector. The number of potential 
borrowers, on the other hand, is estimated at 5.1 million, thus indicating significant unmet demand 
and the need for continued financial and capacity building support in the sector.   
 
Performance under PPAF I 
PPAF has effectively enhanced retail capacity in a country where the poor have had very limited 
access to micro-credit. Especially of smaller retail institutions working as its partners as a result of 
which in FY03, 41 percent of its funding was disbursed through these small and emerging NGOs. 
PPAF's clients have doubled every year for the past three years and as of March 2003, POs had 
extended 187,000 loans from PPAF funding to more than 180,000 borrowers, 41% of whom are 
women. The average loan size is approximately US$150 - well below the individual loan ceiling of 
US$500. PPAF has also managed to bring financial discipline into a sector resulting in 100 percent 
repayments that PPAF will be using as reflows to fund the increased demand for credit.  
 
Community Infrastructure   (IDA: US$58 million; Community Contribution: US$ 13 million) 
The community infrastructure component will continue to support, in the form of grants on a cost 
sharing basis, community physical infrastructure (CPI) sub-projects. Identification of sub-projects 
will be done by poor communities and their selection will be transparent and based on sustainability 
as determined by the ability of the communities to recover operations and maintenance costs. POs 
will assist communities in organizing as groups and preparing, implementing and managing these 
schemes. Based on past trends, it is expected that 40 percent of the conventional projects would be for 
drinking water supply, 20 percent for irrigation, 18 percent for sanitation, 20 percent for link-roads 
and bridges and the remaining 2 percent for flood protection works. PPAF expects to fund 
infrastructure projects that are expected to reach approximately 3.8 million poor (approximately 
541,000 households). Apart from conventional community infrastructure projects, POs are also 
expected to undertake new initiatives aimed at integrated development, dissemination of low-cost, 
appropriate and innovative technologies, such as micro-hydels, desalination, windmill and solar pump 
projects, as well as towards reducing poverty in drought stricken/ prone areas through implementation 
of drought mitigation & preparedness plans (DMPPs). These interventions would involve provision 
of sustainable infrastructure facilities to the poor in a holistic and systematic manner.  
 
Performance under PPAF I 
PPAF is currently working with 24 POs and has approved 6,564 projects for implementation in 75 
districts of the country. 3,223 projects are currently in progress of which 2,730 have been completed. 
All projects have been identified by the communities, are small in size and well within per capita 
limits. They are also being operated and maintained by the community organizations satisfactorily. 
Within three and a half years of operations, PPAF's infrastructure schemes have benefited some 1.54 
million men and women. In view of the fact that a large percentage of the population still does not 
have access to basic infrastructure and that implementation capacity and outreach of existing POs has 
been enhanced, PPAF aims to increase coverage and make a tangible impact on poverty reduction.  
 
Page  3
Training & Skill Development   (IDA: US$9 million) 
This component would primarily cover the costs of training communities as well as staff of PPAF's 
partners. Vocational and technical training would be given to community members to enhance their 
income generating skills and increase their understanding of market structures and marketing. Under 
the first Project, PPAF funded 1,570 such trainings for community members which benefited 
approximately 38,000 community members, 40 percent of whom were women. Approximately 
108,000 new borrowers and 61,000 repeat borrowers would be trained through this component under 
PPAF II. Exposure visits to other communities for some 1,500 community members would also be 
supported to allow dissemination of best practices. In addition, a limited number of exhibitions would 
be funded to introduce community made products to the market. 
 
Education & Health   (IDA: US$5 million) 
Under this component, PPAF would provide funding to its existing POs for their health and education 
programs, subject to their meeting the additional eligibility criteria for these services. These include 
amongst others: i) active participation of communities; ii) equity and cost effectiveness of the 
intervention;  iii) linkages and mainstreaming with public sector programs; iv) conformity with 
environmental and safety standards; v) community contributions towards upkeep of the facility; vi) 
comprehensive baseline to assess potential of the facility; vii) mandatory training of teacher/health 
worker; viii) preference for using local human resources; etc. 
 
Support for PPAF   (IDA: US$8 million) 
All operating costs under the first project are currently being met by PPAF, from interest income and 
returns on the initial endowment received from Government. IDA support under this component 
relates to costs for the new project and would include capital costs, equipment, training facilities, and 
a
resource center. This support also includes costs of consultancies primarily for baseline 
socioeconomic data collection, post intervention impact assessments, and technical assistance for 
improving data management and financial systems. 
 
PPAF's Equity   (Government of Pakistan: US$10 million) 
Under the first Project, the Government provided PPAF with US$10 million endowment to build its 
equity and manage the US$90 million IDA Credit, which is invested in Government securities to 
support PPAF's core institutional costs related to the first project. A second injection of equity of the 
same amount by the Government is justified on the grounds that: i) the size of the follow-on project is 
nearly four times the first and therefore PPAF would require support in meeting the incremental costs 
related to the much larger second project; ii) it will help assure sustainability of PPAF’s operations in 
the future without further infusion of capital; and iii) the additional US$10 million would ensure that 
PPAF remains a strong and sustainable financial institution. 
 
Additional Financing for Rehabilitating Earthquake Affected Communities  
The earthquake that struck Pakistan on the morning of October 8, 2005 left widespread destruction in 
its wake, killing at least 73,000 people, injuring another 70,000, and leaving 2.5 million people 
displaced.  Vulnerable groups, mainly women and children living in inaccessible mountain areas with 
low levels of income and service provision, have borne the brunt of the quake’s impact.  AJK and 
eastern NWFP were dealt the most serious blow and have suffered extensive damage to economic 
assets and infrastructure, with social service delivery, commerce and communications either 
debilitated or destroyed.
 
PPAF has been quick to respond to the earthquake. It has embarked upon a two-pronged strategy, 
which focuses in the first instance on the provision of immediate relief and assistance to poor 
households and communities directly affected by the earthquake. More importantly, as part of its 
broader poverty alleviation mandate, it will endeavor to comprehensively address the long term needs 
of reviving social, physical and economic structures of affected communities through revitalized and 
Page  4
intensive social mobilization processes as well as asset building of vulnerable households through 
small scale infrastructure. Such infrastructural projects will primarily revolve around the provision of 
water, sanitation and link roads as well as low cost housing. The Government of Pakistan has 
requested the Bank for additional financing for the PPAF to assist with its reconstruction and 
rehabilitation effort. 
 
The additional financing of US$ 100 million would explicitly address the needs of restoration, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of earthquake affected villages and communities and is well within 
the existing scope of PPAF’s work. The program will be implemented through existing and new POs, 
as per PPAF’s eligibility criteria and implementation arrangements already in place; and will be 
within timelines of the existing project period. This funding would be used for the following 
purposes: 
 
(i) Low-cost seismologically appropriate housing -- $ 60 million
 
Under this component PPAF will provide households with financial assistance for the reconstruction 
of houses destroyed in earthquake hit villages of NWFP and AKJ. It will involve financial assistance 
for the reconstruction of 24,000 damaged houses @ US$ 2,500. It will deliberately target poor 
households without title to land and without access to institutional insurance coverage and long-term 
house building finance. The reconstruction process will involve: (A) preparation and dissemination of 
earthquake resistant designs involving low-cost, easily incorporated structural improvements in the 
traditionally built houses and using indigenous materials and technologies. The structural 
improvements will also be incorporated in the houses that have undergone partial damage; (B) once 
households are familiarized with  earthquake resistant building techniques, disbursements will be 
made to each affected and participating household according to a pre-agreed mode of disbursement; 
(C) disbursement of funds will be tied to various stages of construction and contingent upon 
adherence to the agreed designs and specifications, to the satisfaction of PPAF and the concerned PO. 
PPAF will ensure that its approach for the provision of housing    conforms to the overall government 
policy on housing reconstruction that is being developed based on the recommendations of the joint 
WB-ADB Earthquake Damage Assessment.  
 
(ii) Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Village Level Infrastructure -- $ 20 million 
Under this component PPAF will also carry out the rehabilitation of over a 1,000 infrastructure 
schemes that were providing water, sanitation and link roads to these communities. This component 
will also include construction of over 200 standardized, earthquake resistant, multi-purpose 
community buildings. During normal circumstances, these buildings will be used to house a school or 
a
health facility and/or any other community facility. In case of a future emergency, these buildings 
will serve as readily available shelters.  Works will be implemented following the normal CPI 
procedures of the PPAF. However, the entire cost of the works will be grant funded, (and the 20% 
community contribution requirement will be waived). Care will be taken not to duplicate existing or 
under implementation schemes pertaining to the World Bank funded, NWFP and AJK Community 
Infrastructure Projects (CIPs). PPAF in consultation with its POs will also explore the possibility of 
designing workfare programs as part of its infrastructure rehabilitation strategy.   
 
(iii) Livelihood Restoration & Revitalization of Communities -- $ 15 million 
The earthquake has had a devastating effect on institutional structures and the capacity of POs as well 
as village based community organizations. This component will address the immediate resource 
constraints for intensive revitalization of social mobilization processes, the back bone of effective 
community driven development. PO staff will be given training in Post Traumatic Stress Management 
to help them mobilize these broken communities. Extensive and large numbers of trainings will be 
conducted with community members to teach practical income earning skills such as Masonry, 
Carpentry and Plumbing as well as community management and conflict resolution skills. PPAF is 
Page  5
also building training modules that could create livelihood opportunities for the more vulnerable 
groups (such as the disabled and the elderly).  
 
(iv) Monitoring, Supervision and Technical Assistance -- $ 5 million
 
PPAF will hire and dedicate staff for systematic monitoring and supervision to ensure physical 
progress, design adherence and quality assurance. Technical assistance will be required to hire the 
services of national and/or international experts to create the designs for earthquake resistant 
structures, using indigenous materials and techniques. Different designs will be reviewed with the 
perspective of their cost effectiveness and social acceptability. A ‘Do it Yourself’ manual for 
earthquake resistant houses and community buildings will be prepared, giving designs, construction 
specifications and step-by-step construction-guidelines for houses/buildings suitable for different 
regions. Also included will be guidelines for location of buildings. 
 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social 
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, 
or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
PPAF, the implementing agency for the Project, is based in Islamabad. The microcredit, 
infrastructure, education and health components are, however, executed through PPAF's POs all of 
whom target the poor and the disadvantaged through their field offices in different parts of the 
country. Infrastructure projects are small and operation and maintenance by communities guarantees 
effective use of natural resources, and compliance with the EMF ensures environmentally benign 
interventions that do not impact harmfully on critical natural habitats. As the location of each 
intervention varies, so do characteristics; nonetheless, the main national characteristics which the 
project is trying to address and which are prevalent throughout with varying degrees of relevance 
include the following:    
 
Overall Poverty Levels 
Poverty in Pakistan has persisted at more or less the same level since the nineties. According to the 
World Bank’s Poverty Assessment Report, released in October, 2002, one third of the population in 
Pakistan can be classified as poor. The Pakistan Economic Survey 2002-2003 states that "Not only do 
the poor have low incomes; they also lack access to basic needs such as education, health, clean 
drinking water and proper sanitation. This undermines their capabilities, limits their opportunities, 
leads to their social exclusion and exposes them to exogenous shocks. Moreover, poverty is 
perpetuated as governance structures exclude the most vulnerable from the decision making process".  
 
As poverty is multidimensional encompassing economic, social and political needs, definitions 
abound - some focusing on income levels, some on basic needs, some on caloric intake, yet others on 
lack of opportunity. This makes it difficult to assess the extent and depth of poverty. The Government 
of Pakistan has recently adopted an official poverty line based on caloric norm of "2,350 calories per 
adult per day - 2,150 in rural areas and 2,450 in urban areas". This basic needs poverty line 
approximates per capita expenditure of Rs. 670 (US$12) per month in 1998-99 increasing to Rs. 748 
(US$13) per month in 2001. To facilitate comparison, a basic needs poverty assessment has been 
carried out based on the Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (HIES). 
 
Page  6
Poverty in Pakistan - Head Count Ratio
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
3
5
40
45
FY91
FY93
FY94
FY97
FY99
FY01
FY03
%
Pakistan
Rural
Urban
Source:  Economic Survey 2002-2003 
 
Higher Incidence of Rural Poverty 
Two-thirds of the poor reside in rural areas and their poverty is more deep and severe than urban 
poverty (
see graph above
). Although rural households earn their livelihood from a number of sources, 
most are linked directly or indirectly to agriculture, including the bulk of non-farm activity. Rural 
poverty levels rose during the later half of the decade due to the persistence of drought particularly in 
Sindh and Balochistan. 
 
Exclusion of Women 
"One of the finding of the Participatory Poverty Assessment carried out recently shows that women 
are among the poorest and most vulnerable communities in the country. Pakistan has one of the 
highest maternal mortality rates in the world. Women's access and control over productive resources 
are limited. Lack of skills, limited opportunities in the job market and social and cultural restrictions 
limit women's chances to compete for resources in public. However, the nature and degree of 
women's vulnerability varies across classes, regions and the rural/urban divide" (Draft PRSP, May 
2003).  
 
Inadequate Access to Services 
Access to services is grossly deficient and is one of the main causes why substantial poverty persists 
throughout Pakistan. This lack of access to both productive resources and social services has resulted 
in low indicators of well being and lack of employment opportunities. The situation is compounded in 
rural areas, where access is even more difficult due to the inadequacy or complete lack of basic 
infrastructure. Yet, it is in areas such as these that a large number of the poor live.  
 
Low Skill Levels 
Lack of education and vocational training are critical determinants of poverty - only 27 percent of a 
poor household is literate compared to 52 percent of a non-poor household. Moreover, poverty is 
usually higher where the head of the household is unskilled. Hence, communities not only require 
access to resources but also need support in terms of education and skill development. 
 
Limited Access to Credit 
Traditional financial institutions have shied away from supporting the poor due to high costs. As 
such, informal provision of credit (money lenders, traders, family and friends) is often the only 
method of access to credit for the rural and urban poor. However, as the effective annual rates of 
Page  7
interest in the informal sector range from 80% to 120% per annum, this source of credit proves very 
expensive for the poor and leaves little for savings or investment. Recognizing the need of the poor, 
the Government has tried to introduce several schemes through public financial institutions such as 
the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan (ADBP); however, these schemes have generally not 
reached the target market, having been hijacked by the influential due to their concessionary interest 
rates. While the Government's recent initiatives of Khushhali Bank and PPAF have proved more 
successful, a large segment of the market remains underserved.  
 
Limited Support to Pro-Poor Institutions 
Lack of resources has restricted outreach of civil society institutions that cater to the poor. Prior to the 
PPAF, many NGOs, with a few exceptions, were supported sporadically by relatively small amounts 
of bilateral aid which was invariably linked to specific agendas and subject to shift in emphasis from 
one sector to the other. PPAF's support has led to impressive growth in the sector demonstrating that 
civil society institutions are capable of increasing their outreach to the poor. However, in view of the 
scale of poverty, greater and continued support is still required. 
 
B. Check Environmental Classification: 
 
F
(Financial Intermediary Assessment) 
Comments:
 
The Project is rated 'B'. Sub-projects are small in scale and maintenance by communities 
guarantees effective use of natural resources. 
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS) 
(click on 
for a detailed description 
or
click on the policy number for a brief description) 
 
Policy 
Triggered 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01) 
Yes 
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04) 
No 
 
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36) 
No 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
No 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
No 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
No 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
No 
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37) 
No 
 
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50) 
No 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)* 
Yes
 
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management 
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not 
available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data. 
 
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
PPAF’s conventional infrastructure projects are small in scale and operation and maintenance by 
communities guarantees effective use of natural resources, thereby, ensuring environmentally benign 
interventions. This was reaffirmed in an independent assessment of 356 PPAF funded infrastructure 
projects, carried out in June 2002, in which over 90 percent of the projects received good or 
satisfactory environmental rating. For microcredit, proper targeting and inclusion of women are more 
pressing issues. The very fact that PPAF's average loan size is around US$140 and that more than 40 
percent of its borrowers are women shows the effectiveness of the targeting mechanisms. 
 
Page  8
In the follow-on project, new initiatives in the form of 'integrated development projects' will be 
undertaken. These will increase the scale of PPAF funded projects due to multiple interventions in 
one community, and potentially increase the risk of adverse environment and social development 
impacts. However, the kind of integrated projects being suggested may infact be more 
environmentally sound as they would support and complement individual infrastructure development 
sub-projects. For example, water supply and sanitation will be supported by street-paving and side-
drains, thus promoting environmentally friendly, healthy and hygienic conditions in the community.  
 
Additional Financing: 
The proposed project will be carried out in AJK, an area over which India 
and Pakistan have been in dispute since 1947. By financing the proposed Credit, IDA does not intend 
to make any judgment as to the legal or other status of any disputed territories or to prejudice the 
final determination of the parties’ claims. 
 
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard 
policy or due to multiple project component.  
No significantly adverse impacts are envisaged.  
 
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area. 
It is expected that PPAF's poverty reduction initiatives will continue to have a beneficial impact on 
the poor and low-income, particularly women. Findings of independent studies as well as feedback 
from monitoring visits also confirm that PPAF interventions are inclusive in nature and benefits are 
distributed equitably among the communities and regions. 
 
The additional funding for the earthquake will greatly benefit affected rural communities in 
reconstructing their houses and other infrastructure facilities that have been destroyed. Furthermore, 
these villages will take a big step forward in terms of reorganizing and reestablishing themselves as 
vibrant and cohesive communities. They will also be able to acquire a wide range of income 
generating skills.  
 
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required) 
Not applicable  
 
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues 
Safeguard Policies and their Effectiveness: 
PPAF's EMF is based on the Bank’s Safeguard Policies. 
It suggests policies and procedures for environmental management, and provides simple tools for 
early screening of activities to ensure that they are subject to an adequate, but not unnecessarily 
burdensome, level of environmental assessment and mitigation. To ensure compliance, the EMF 
forms part of the Financing Agreement signed between PPAF and POs as well as of the sub-project 
Financing Agreement signed between a PO and a community. To facilitate better comprehension the 
EMF has been translated into the local language and PPAF and NGO staff trained on how to use it. 
Independent assessments have reaffirmed that the EMF guidelines are being followed and that PPAF 
funded projects are not harming the environment. However, with PPAF's larger mandate and 
expansion into new community infrastructure areas, the existing EMF has been reassessed and 
revised by PPAF and the draft EMF cleared by the Bank on the understanding that an environmental 
and social review will be undertaken during the next mission to ensure (i) the adequacy and 
implementation of the EMF in PPAF I, and (ii) the adequacy of the revisions made for PPAF II, and 
to suggest further modifications if necessary.   
 
Monitoring & Documenting Compliance:
 Rigorous preliminary and desk appraisal prevents 
partnership with NGOs not complying with safeguards. For POs, compliance with social and 
Page  9
environmental safeguards given in the eligibility criteria and the EMF checklist is monitored during 
site visits every quarter. Findings are documented in field visit reports, and any issues reported to the 
concerned PO. The field visit reports are collated by PPAF after 6 months to see performance and 
compliance trends. Independent impact assessment studies done on PPAF's microcredit and 
community infrastructure projects have also assessed compliance with safeguards which is 
documented in the reports.  
 
Earthquake Related Work: 
The scope of the EMF will be expanded to cover the internal environment 
of houses and community buildings, with a view to their structural stability, proper ventilation, 
lighting and insulation. This revised EMF will be used for activities funded under the additional 
financing. Monitoring to ensure compliance will primarily be done through the PPAF field outposts 
in the districts which have recently been established. 
 
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The PPAF Project was designed in partnership with the Government, PPAF
’s Board, management 
and staff, NGOs/RSPs and the private sector. And PPAF continues to solicit feedback from all 
stakeholders (POs as well as poor communities) for improving its service delivery, including 
feedback on its environmental screening procedures and impact assessments. PPAF has also carried 
out an extensive 360 degree feedback from its POs which resulted in major shifts in its business 
processes and better facilitation and understanding by all concerned.  
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select in SAP).
 Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or 
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is 
triggered the provisions of that policy apply. 
 
[
]
S1. – Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and 
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas  
[
]
S2. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are 
technically and institutionally manageable 
[
]
S3. – No safeguard issues 
[X] 
SF. – Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development 
or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to 
address safeguard issues.  
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
5/26/2003 
5/30/2003 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
5/26/2003 
5/30/2003 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
9/5/2003 
9/17/2003 
 
 
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive 
Directors 
(For category A projects) 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Page  10
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan: 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.  
 
Signed and submitted by 
 
Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Qazi Azmat Isa 
06.05.03 
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: 
Paul Jonathan Martin 
 
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: 
 
Project Safeguards Specialists 3: 
 
 
 
Approved by:
Name
Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
 
Sector Manager/Director 
Joseph Del Mar Pernia 
06.05.03 
 
