ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Free ol Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/22/2002                                24721
Section I - Basic Information                                    August 22, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PAKISTAN                                Project ID: P071095
Project: SfNDH ON FARM WATER MANAGEMENT          Task Team Leader: Usman Qamar
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 31, 2003      IBRD Amount (Sm):
Bank Approval: November 20, 2003                IDA Amount ($m): 49.00
Managing Unit: SASRD                             Sector: Irrigation & drainage (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Water resource management (P); Rural
Status: Lending                                 policies and institutions (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The overall development objective is to help reduce rural poverty and increase farm incomes
through improved agricultural productivity. This objective would be achieved by: (a) improving
water management, including the reliability, efficiency and equity of irrigation water distribution;
(b) supporting agricultural productivity enhancement measures to complement and enhance the
benefits of improved water management; (c) enhancing long-term financial sustainability of the
irrigation system by fostering self-sustaining farmer organizations (FOs) at the watercourse and
distributary canal levels, which is a key element of the decentralized and financially sustainable
institutional apparatus, GOSindh is endeavoring to establish; and (d) forging partnerships between
public and private sectors to enhance the quality of, and capacity for implementing, rural
development interventions.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed four-year project would focus on three canal commands where institutional reforms are in
progress and AWBs are being established. However, irrigation infrastructure improvement at the tertiary
level (watercourse improvements) would be carried out outside the AWBs, as well. An integrated social
and environmental assessment (ISEA) is under preparation. The ISEA findings and recommendations
would shape the overall project implementation framework, including criteria for targeting poorer areas,
information dissemination and demand promotion; sub-project identification and screening; social
mobilization; environmental and social assessment; implementation arrangements; and monitoring and
evaluation. The project includes five complementary components:
A.     Social Mobilization and Capacity Building. This component involves developing sustainable
farmer organizations (FOs) who can effectively operate and maintain the irrigation and drainage system,
through social mobilization and capacity building. Altogether about 4,000 WUAs and 100 canal level
FOs would be established in the three AWBs. The FOs would be transferred the responsibility for



2
ISDS
equitable water distribution (amongst head and tail farmers), collection of water charges and O&M of the
irrigation system at and below the distributary canal level. The WUAs and FOs would be involved in
planning, designing, and implementing irrigation improvement works under the project, as well as in
providing agricultural support services.
B.     High Payoff Improvements of Irrigation Facilities:
i) C/ak/deh level improvements,including (a) improvement of about 4,000 watercourses,
comprising, earthen improvements, lining, installation of pucca nuccas (concrete turnouts) culverts,
community structures (e.g. washing bays for women), cattle crossings and buffalo baths; (b) construction
of approximately 200 water storage tanks in the barani areas of Sindh; and (3) precision leveling.
Priority would be given to relatively poorer areas (e.g. the tail-end of the irrigation system). Prioritization
criteria would be developed as part of the ISEA.
ii) Improvement of distributary canals, including about 100 distributary/minor canals (30% of
total distributaries in the 3 AWBs, serving a total area of about 570,000 ha), managed by FOs. The
rehabilitation works would generally be of a low cost nature, not exceeding Rs 800 per ha of area
commanded.
iii) Improvement/rehabilitation of branch canals,targeting about 25 branch canals supplying water
to the distributary canals on which FOs are established. In general, the cost of the works would not
exceed Rs 400 per ha of the area served by these canals.
C.     Productivity Enhancement Program, comprising demonstration centers to disseminate a full
range of improved water      management and irrigation agronomy practices/techniques; training of
FOs/WUAs; and demonstration of new technology (land leveling, zero tillage, sprinkler and drip
systems, etc.), infornation systems, market/marketing, etc.
D.     Monitoring and Evaluation, including baseline surveys, establishment of a GIS database, and
periodic independent assessments of project outcomes/impact.
E.     Project management support, including technical assistance for project launch, quality
assurance, financial management, development of a project management information system, training,
monitoring and impact evaluation, and a regional or strategic social and environmental assessment of the
entire Sindh province to facilitate preparation of future interventions in the irrigation and drainage
sectors.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Sindh, with a geographical area of 14.09 million hectares, extends to the Arabian Sea in the southwest (the head of
the Lower Indus Basin), and to the border with India in the southeast. The climate of the province is arid and hot.
Rainfall is generally low (averaging less than 260 mm a year) and the temperature is high (average summer
maximum is over 37o C), with high evaporation. Estimates indicate that rainfall contributes only 2 to 3 percent of the
total water supply during rabi (the mid-October to mid-April cropping season); of the other sources, canal water,
groundwater and sub-irrigation contribute 73 to 78 percent, 5 to7 percent, and 15 to 17 percent, respectively. The
total cultivated area (fallow plus net area sown) of the province in 1997-98 was estimated at 5.68 million hectares,
with 2.56 million hectares classified as irrigated. With groundwater in most of Sindh being brackish and unsuitable
for crop irrigation, over 95 percent of the irrigated areas rely on surface water resources. Over 93% of the farms are
small (less than 7 ha) and represent 64% of the total farm area. Large farms (greater than 7 ha) are only 7% in



3
ISDS
number but represent 36% of the farn area. The skewed nature of landholdings sometimes tends to make large
holdings unproductive and productivity falls off through fallowing and other inefficient agricultural practices.
Sindhi society is intricately structured into a hierarchical fornation of considerable complexity and antiquity in a
patrimonial domain. It is a pyramid of depressed incomes with widespread rural poverty at the base (landless
peasants or haris) and high levels of wealth at the narrow apex (landlords or waderas). The decision-making process
generally involves just the apical players, while farmers and herders have only some modest participation. Further
complexity is added with elements of state authority interacting with traditional society for the regulation of justice
and revenue. There is a meshing and manipulation of state authority and traditional hierarchy at every level. Bonded
labor is another unfortunate and illegal aspect of tradition in Sindh, whereby indebted farmers undertake begdr
(forced labor), which does not suffice to work off their debts.
While farning activities are largely performed by the men, female participation in agricultural activities such as
planting seedlings, cotton picking, and weeding is quite extensive. In areas and households where there are either no
men or have migrated to the cities to find work, women are left to handle the agricultural role of men. Thus, women
in the agricultural sector are largely 'invisible' due to the fact that they do not own land (property rights) and have
low visibility.
The Hindus castes such as Bhils, Kolis, Mengwar and Ods residing in Sindh have a distinct identity and culture, are
generally landless and are classified as scheduled castes by the Government of Sindh. The Bhil men and women
engage in day labor on farms and on construction sites, while the Kolis prefer to work on farms only. The Ods are
generally nomadic, working also as mud masons.
There are a number of protected areas including game reserves, wildlife sanctuaries and wetland sites that fall in the
irrigated areas in Sindh, and could potentially become a part of the project area. Prominent among these are the
Nara Game Reserve and Takkar Wildlife Sanctuary in District Khairpur. The wetland sites generally cover areas of
less than 5,000 hectares each, and are typically generated by accumulation of seepage from canals. Species of
concern include migratory birds that use these areas as winter refuge on the migratory route, and marsh crocodiles.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                    Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                          0 Yes C No      C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                             O Yes O No      * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                     O Yes * No      C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                       * Yes O No      Q TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                         O Yes 0 No      C, TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                             0 Yes 0 No      * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                      O Yes * No      O TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                       O Yes * No      O TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes 0 No      0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)               0 Yes * No      0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1 a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.



4
ISDS
C Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, describe steps to
be taken to obtain necessary data.
1.     Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
The project triggers three safeguard policies, Environmental Assessment, Pest Management, and Projects in
International Waterways with the status of two on Natural Habitats and Indigenous Peoples to be decided by the
Integrated Social & Environmental Assessment (ISEA). Physical interventions of the project are limited to
rehabilitation of the existing canals and watercourses. The environmental and social risks of the project with respect
to forests, natural habitats, involuntary resettlement and cultural properties are generally low, and the likelihood of
impacts in these areas due to project activities is also low. The communities and implementation organizations can
be trained to adopt simple management measures to avoid adverse impacts in these areas.
Environmental and Social Assessment: The overall impacts of the project on the environment and rural
livelihoods are expected to be positive. However, the project has been rated Category B, as certain negative
environmental and social issues may arise because of the project, these include:s (i) ihazards and risk involvedmpact
of due toring soil and silt removal during construction rehabilitation activities, which may result in contamination of
community wells and, water ponds, water channels which are used for drinking water, surface drinking water
resources, and blockage of natural drainage; (ii) the spatial and sectoral context of the systems (upstream soil erosion
and downstream siltation) (iii) inefficient use of water in the command (ill-defined water distribution system
'warabandi'irrigation distribution systems may and damaged main and field canals lead to low productivity of
water and distributional inequities); (iiv) pollution of soils and ground water due to increasing fertilizer and
pesticide use and declining use of organic manure and /compost; /green manure; and (vii) contamination of ground
water including poor hygiene and possible contamination of drinking water and associated public health concerns.
(ivii) hHealth issues related to issues due to contamination of drinking water resources; (ivii) reduced access of
drinking water may be reduced to the poor and various marginalizsed communities (poor women and men) who
presently draw water from the irrigation chennelwatercourses;. (viii) waterWater collection points in the new design
may increased travel time for women due to reduction or relocation of water collection points used by women; (vi)
inequitable dDistribution of increased additional farm income to low income groups, tail enders and vulnerable
groups; and is not equitable (viiix)genderix) gender impacts due to increse in work load due to physical changes in
canal bathing and drinking water points (x) participation of landless, women, and communities issue in WUAs and
Farmers OrganizationFOs. Current laws allow only land owners to participate.
An Integrated Social & Environmental Assessment (ISEA) will be carried out by GOS under which frameworks will
be prepared to mitigate possible adverse impacts on protected areas and natural habitats, access to water by women
and landless, potential induced impacts of increased pesticide use, and potential impact on public health due to
contamination of ground water with pesticides and fertilizer residues. The frameworks will also incorporate measures
to enhance positive impacts of the project including equitable distribution of additional incomes associated with
improvements in agricultural productivity, equitable distribution of water at the tail ends of watercourses, reduction
in seepage losses through lining of water courses to reduce salinity, enhancing the skills and abilities of farmer
leaders and FOs through training in new technologies, enhancement of farmer's capacity in sustainable agriculture
and water management practices including assessment and collection of abiana, empowemment of communities due
to improved participation opportunties in WUAs and FOs, reduction in conflict and improved social relationship
between farmers at the head and tail of the canals and watercourses, and improved networking between communty
organizations, AWBs, and NGOs.
Forestry. This policy is not triggered as the project does not involve any forest sector activities and project
interventions would not have significant impact upon forested areas.
Natural Habitats: It is not presently apparent if any protected areas falls within the project area. The ISEA
therefore, will inform the project if the policy is applicable and identify the location and characteristics of such
natural habitats and define site-specific studies and management measures required to assess induced impacts on
natural habitats adjacent to or in proximity of the irrigated areas covered by the project. The ISEA would also define
steps in accordance with the safeguard policy to address any potential adverse impacts.
Safety of Dams. The project does not involve construction of any storage reservoirs or dams and therefore OP 4.37
is not triggered.



5
ISDS
Pest Management: Total amount of pesticides used in Pakistan is high, placing it among the top ten pesticide using
countries in the world. While the intensity of pesticide use is still relatively low, studies have shown that soil and
shallow ground water aquifers in Punjab were contaminated with pesticide residues as early as 1991. Pesticide
residues have similarly been detected in food items. There are a number of documented cases of occupational and
accidental exposure to pesticides. While the import, production and use of pesticides is subject to a number of
regulatory controls, there is considerable room for improvement in pesticide use and pest management practices.
The issues identified due to increase in pesticide use and pest management due to project activities in the project area
are: (a) potential induced impact of increased pesticide use in the area due to command area rehabilitation (b)
increase in pesticides residue in drinking water resources that may have health impacts; and (c) secondary impact of
pesticide residue on women cotton pickers and vegetable farmers. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock
with support from FAO has recently launched a National Integrated Pest Management Program (PMP). The Sindh
Department of Agriculture is an active participant in the program, and has trained over 500 farmers in IPM through
20 Farmer Field Schools set up for this purpose. While this constitutes a good beginning in introduction of IPM
practices in the province, considerable follow up effort and resources will be required for the program to have a
province-wide effect. GOS is carrying out an ISEA that includes preparation of a PMP as required under OP 4.09.
Involuntary Resettlement: The project involves the rehabilitation of the existing canals and watercourses, and
construction of any new canals or watercourses is not anticipated. Acquisition of private land and physical
displacement is, therefore, not envisaged, with the exception of cases where re-alignment of watercourses may be
required. Evidence of such voluntary land acquisition and compensation will be documented to ensure fairness and
transparency in the land acquisition process. Based on the experience in similar projects implemented elsewhere in
the country, it is expected that the WUAs/FOs will resolve such land acquisition issues with internal consensus.
Schemes that involve involuntary resettlement will not be undertaken. This would be covenanted. The policy is
therefore not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples: While the indigenous peoples are not the target beneficiaries of the project, they are likely to
benefit from improved availability of employment opportunities and higher incomes resulting from the project.
However, high levels of contracted employment in construction and rehabilitation of canals, could expose them and
other construction workers to health risks and deny them access to their traditional water collection points along the
watercourses. These and other issues related to indigenous peoples will be identified through the ISEA process,
which would inform the project if the safeguard policy on indigenous peoples is applicable. The ISEA in any case
will be designing mechanisms to better ensure participation of women, the landless poor and indigenous peoples in
the project.
Cultural Property: There is no evidence of any mature civilizations along the main canals including Nara and
Fuleli, although surface scatters from temporary habitats and camping grounds have been found at sites in proximity
of canal command areas. None of these sites is included among the archaeological sites and monuments protected by
the Antiquities Act of 1975, or declared 'protected heritage' under the Sindh Cultural Heritage (Preservation) Act of
1994. The ISEA will, nonetheless, include procedures to be followed in the event of chance finds if any during
construction and rehabilitation works and requirements under the federal and provincial laws for dealing with such
finds.
Projects in Disputed Areas. The project would not finance any investment in any disputed area. This policy is
therefore not triggered.
Projects in International Waterways. The distribution of water in the rivers that flow from India into Pakistan is
covered by the Indus Water Treaty signed by the two countries in 1960. While the countries have engaged in a
number of conflicts and the tensions in the region have not subsided, the treaty has remained intact and continues to
be a source of stability in the region. The risk of reductions or variations in river water flows into Pakistan from India
on account of noncompliance with the treaty is, therefore, low. However, OP 7.50 is triggered and Pakistan (or the
Bank) would notify India about the project in accordance with OP 7.50 (advice has been sought from LEGAL).
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.



6
ISDS
The hierarchical structures of Sindhi society represent a set of challenges and opportunities. The primary challenge is
that benefits rarely trickle down to the base of the pyramid, and state-sponsored poverty alleviation strategies tend to
have limited impacts on the poorest of the poor. The opportunities lie in the rapid application of new strategies which
can transform productivity. Mechanisms for ensuring that farmer organizations supported by the project are more
equitable structures will be incorporated into the ISEA and the EMP to reduce such risks. Such mechanisms are not
envisaged to be radical steps; rather, they will take the lead from ongoing structural transformations and continuities
resulting from recently elected leadership of local government or any land and water reforms introduced by the
government. The emphasis will be on ensuring a more humane transition through enlightened practices that aim at
giving a voice to small and landless farmers while at the same time avoiding conflict situations with established
hierarchy.
Recognizing the importance of women in food production and in the provision of water for domestic use has
increased in the past decades, and research findings have emphasized the role played by women in water
management. Studies have shown that the failure to recognize gender issues affects the agricultural productivity of
irrigated crops negatively, and that women's lack of independent access to, and control of, land and water threatens
household food security. There is, however, a general lack of research on specific roles, tasks, and functions women
have in irrigated agriculture. The ISEA will analyze the role of women in irrigated agriculture, treating women as a
heterogeneous group. Their involvement in irrigated agriculture as well as their needs and responsibilities will be
treated as separate from the needs and responsibilities of their male counterparts.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The potential long term impacts due to future activities in the project area are expected to be positive due
to more efficient use of water and increased capacity of local communities.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The ISEA will examine various policy, institutional and technical alternatives, including a no project scenario.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The GoS will conduct an integrated social and environmental assessment (ISEA) that will be subjected to a public
review and approval process regulated by the Sindh Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA). The SEPA has
demonstrated capacity in managing the environmental assessment process in the province. While SEPA has modern
laboratory facilities available in Karachi, the capacity of the organization to monitor ground water quality for
pesticide contaminants will have to be enhanced.
The Department of Agriculture, represented by the DGAEWM, will have the overall responsibility for ensuring that
the environmental and social criteria of the project are met. The DGAEWM will operate through SIDA, AEBs,
NGOs, WUAs and FOs. The DGAEWM will ensure that adequate skills and capacities to manage the environmental
and social impacts as envisaged in the ISEA are available in the implementing organizations. Areas in which the
implementing organizations will have to develop human resources, skills and attitudes include conflict management,
gender sensitivity, and poverty analysis.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Procedures for public consultation specified in the World Bank EA Guidelines and the Pakistan Environmental
Protection Agency guidelines will be followed for preparation of the ISEA. Stakeholder'sStakeholder identification
and consultation plans will be prepared. Stakeholders to be consulted will include SIDA, AWBs, NGOs, existing
WUAs and FOs, concerned GOS agencies such as the forest and wildlife departments, and local governments.
Primary stakeholders to be consulted will include landowners, tenants, landless laborers, women, and participating
institutions such as local community-based organizations and NGOs active in the project area.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.



7
ISDS
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



8
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             2/28/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             2/28/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Usman Qamar
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Qazi Azmat Isa
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Vaqar Zakaria
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                       8/13/2002
Sector Manager/Director:     Constance A. Bernard                        8/02/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
,-AlH_   . F-EEWiACIK  2 SrrE MAP  I SHOWCASE__ _



