                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                Report No: AC143
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/01/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PANAMA                                               Project ID: P064918
                                                              Global Supplemental ID: P083045
Project: SECOND RURAL POVERTY AND                             Task Team Leader: Mark A. Austin
NATURAL RESOURCES
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 15, 2003               IBRD Amount ($m): 37.50
Bank Approval: July 22, 2004                                  IDA Amount ($m):
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 6.00
Managing Unit: LCSER                                          Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            sector (35%); Sub-national government
Status: Lending                                               administration (35%); General water, sanitation and
                                                              flood protection sector (30%)
                                                              Theme: Other rural development (P); Other
                                                              environment and natural resources management (P);
                                                              Decentralization (P); Indigenous peoples (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project aims to reduce rural poverty and improve natural resource conservation and management by
increasing investment for sustainable development and improving local governance in poor rural areas. It
would contribute to three priorities for the country's social and economic development: rural poverty
reduction; local government strengthening; and natural resource management, biodiversity conservation,
and environmental protection. In particular, it would have a positive impact on employment and income
generation, as well as social capital formation for local development. It would improve delivery of
municipal services and the provision of social and economic infrastructure, and would strengthen local
revenue mobilization (through local taxes and user fees) and the fiscal transfer system. It would also
support sustainable management of natural resources in strategic areas such as the Panama
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor (PAMBC); and would improve the operation of Panama's National
Protected Area System.

The project would increase the coverage and depth of two ongoing projects, the Panama Rural Poverty
and Natural Resources (RPNR) Project and Panama Mesoamerican Biological Corridor (PAMBC)
Project. The proposed Second Rural Poverty Project would be a fully blended IBRD and Global
Environment Facility (GEF) operation.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
(see annex 6 for detailed project description)

Components:



Institutional strengthening at the national level to support local government system and NRM
Capacity building of local actors
Funding for local investment and resource management financing

                                                        2
                                                                                                        ISDS



Project management and coordination

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Geography and Target Population. The target population is the rural poor in the poorest municipalities,
or inhabitants of poor communities in 31 selected rural municipalities of Panama (all 17 RPNR
municipalities plus 14 additional). These communities are principally in the Provinces of Herrera,
Veraguas and Los Santos. The 31 municipalities have more than 15 percent (428,335 people) of the
country's population and 28 percent (21,123 km2) of its territory. The proposed project areas has 89,236
families in 248 corregimientos. They include 16 of the 23 non-indigenous municipalities that rank below
the average rural HDI (0.576); one indigenous peoples municipality that participated in the RPNR; and
14 municipalities with special characteristics related to local government development and growth
potential for poverty alleviation.

In addition, the Project would support ANAM's draft proposal for a parallel GEF project consists of
support to a number of areas, which would be closely linked to similar kinds of support provided under
the proposed project: (1) ANAM setting up co-management mechanisms within areas overlapping
between protected areas and indigenous Comarcas (Ngobe-Bugle Comarca and prospective Naso-Teribe
and Bri-Bri Comarcas). It will also support the creation of local environmental advisory committees (
comisiones consultivas distritales) in each of the municipalities within the Ngobe-Bugle Comarca and
environmental advisory committees for each indigenous comarca within the project area (Ngobe Bugle,
Kuna Yala and prospective Naso-Teribe and Bri-Bri Comarcas) and promote the declaration of the La
Amistad, Palo Seco, San Pondsak, Bastimentos and Volcan Barù protected areas and the neighboring and
overlapping indigenous Comarcas as a Biosphere Reserve and World Heritage Site;. (2) ANAM will
support local development projects geared to improve local livelihoods via environmentally-friendly and
traditionally practiced activities and non-timber forest products among indigenous peoples. It will
encourage and support through subprojects the adoption of environmentally friendly practices in
agriculture and cattle ranching activities among the migrating settler's communities; and (3) In order to
secure biodiversity conservation, ANAM will foster the incorporation of locally declared protected areas
into the Panama National Protected Areas System (SINAP), including strengthening the communities`
capacity to manage those areas sustainably, monitoring of biological diversity, mapping of forest cover
and socio-economic appraisals and rapid ecological assessments in ecologically valuable lands.

The Project will not be in proximity to any cultural or socially sensitive areas. The environmental
assessment will survey protected areas that would be in close proximity to the project site. The project,
as described below, is expected to be environmentally beneficial to local authorities and communities.

The proposed Project would have an impact on rural communities and local and central government
agencies. At the community level some expected impacts are: (1) increase in income and social welfare
as poor rural families are supplied with more opportunities for employment, access to income generating
productive activities and basic services (health, nutrition, education, potable water, transportation,
electricity, etc.), (2) empowerment of communities to make their own decisions and choices through their
local organizations and governments, which, in turn, will improve the possibilities to sustain the
increasing standard of living, (3) improved environmental sustainability of natural resources, agriculture
activities, natural resource management, and environmental protection, (4) greater access to government
services, (5) increased accountability of municipal authorities to communities, (6) increased community
involvement in municipal management, and (7) increased community organization.

                                                       3
                                                                                                          ISDS



At the local government level, some expected benefits are: (1) increased financial capacity and local
revenue generation, (2) increased capacity to identify and respond to rural communities local service
demand, (3) improved resource allocation efficiency, (4) improved local governance and capacity at
facilitating public, private, and civil society cooperation at the local level, (5) improved administrative
capacity for service delivery, (6) improved municipal planning, (7) increased natural resource
management, conservation, and environmental protection capacity, and (8) increased human capital
formation in local organizations and institutions.

At the central government level, the project would seek to improve the capacity of national institutions to
support municipal development and respond to local service demand. These entities, among others,
include ANAM's Protected Areas, Land Use Planning; the Ministry of Health's (MINSA), health, water
supply and sanitation; and National Association of Municipalities.

The Project will specifically finance investments in sustainable production in protected areas and buffer
zones; investments for recovery of degraded areas; participatory evaluations in critical areas; studies and
investments for integrated solid waste management in project municipalities; development of
reforestation plans for protected and unprotected lands within the project area; and management plans for
protected and unprotect lands within the project. The Project would also train municipal authorities in
the management of natural resources and the preparation of land use plans and environmental priorities
within the Municipal Development Plans (MDPs); as well as establish, through ANAM's support,
municipal environmental units in each of the municipalities. When these are in close proximity,
municipalities would share the time of a municipal environmental specialist.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: An environmental assessment will be finalized by March 2003. The EA will be based upon the
findings of the ongoing RPNR Project and a detailed project cycle to be followed by the targeted
municipalities during the implementation of subprojects.


Start-up date April 2003
First Draft EA May 2003
Final Draft EA June 2003

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No      TBD

                                                       4
                                                                                                        ISDS




Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The Project is proposed as a Category B as the Project's impacts are moderate but site-specific and
reversible.
The project proposes a decentralization strategy of certain responsibilities, including those that are
environmental, which has the potential of both positive and negative benefits. If funds are not
apropriately assigned to the municipalities to carryout these activities properly, the project could have
negative environmental impacts. This is a risk that the project will address during the preparation of the
EA and accordingly the project team will incorporate the findings in the design of the project. In
addition, mitigation measures can be designed to offset any potential environmental impact. The
borrower is preparing TORs for an EA, which will be reviewed and approved by the Bank. The EA's
expected to start in April 2003. The first draft will be ready in May 2003, with the final draft expected in
June, following consultation and disclosure of the results.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are expected. A cumulative impact assessment will be considered under the
environmental assessment to confirm it and mitigation measures will be built into the project design to
avoid any potential impact if any exists. Project funds are designed to strengthen municipalities to carry
out subprojects that fall under a comprehensive municipal development plan (which would incorporate
land use management) and a municipal investment plan framework. In the case of investments to protect
watersheds or other environmental ecosystems that may be cross-municipal, the proposed project would
support, and require, cross municipal organization through the legal bodies of "mancomunidades" for the
development of watershed-scale management plans. This would avoid serious technical and
environmental problems. In addition, a cumulative assessment would be incorporated in the design of
subproject preparation so as to not underestimate the project's environmental effects. Small water
control systems, for example, may have the potential to alter basin-scale hydrology.

The project will also involve environmental and social specialists able to apply guidance to the project,
based on local and regional characteristics, so as to accomplish the Bank's goal of alleviating poverty.
Targeted environmental or social supervision missions will be carried out given the goals and objectives
of the project, especially when evaluating the impact of investments.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
There would be no long term impacts anticipated in future activities in the project area.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental and social assessments would be carried out during project preparation. Specific
safeguard policies and mechanisms would be defined in the project's operation manual.

                                                     5
                                                                                                        ISDS



II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
While designing the proposed project, a number of workshops were held with communities, municipal,
and community board stakeholders. Additional consultations are planned to learn more from the RPNR
and PAMBC experiences and validate the design of the proposed project. Ensuring two-way
communication with different stakeholders would be a primary focus during the project implementation
phase.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              3/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/7/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           5/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        5/26/2003
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/4/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/7/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           5/26/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

                                                 6
                                                                                     ISDS




Signed and submitted by           Name                                    Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mark A. Austin
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Douglas J. Graham/Person/World Bank     05/05/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Judith M. Lisansky/Person/World Bank    05/05/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3: M. Gabriela Boyer/Person/World Bank     05/05/03


Approved by:                     Name                                     Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero                         May 5, 2003
Sector Manager/Director           John Redwood                            May 5, 2003

