24829
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/12/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PAPUA NEW GUINEA                       Project ID: P059066
Project: Highlands Highway Rehabilitation Project  Task Team Leader: Hatim M. Hajj
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 15, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m): 30.00
Bank Approval: June 24, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASTR                             Sector: Roads & highways (80%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (20%)
Status: Lending                                 Theme: Public expenditure, financial mngmt &
procurement (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The key objectives of the project are to: (1) improve the reliability, safety and service quality and reduce
total operating costs of transport on the Highlands Highway; (2) establish effective institutional
arrangements for sustainability of maintenance and improvement of the highlands highway; and (3) arrest
the diffusion of HIV/ AIDS in the area of influence of the Highlands Highway
I.A.3. Project Description:
1. Road Construction and Maintenance. This component consists of the construction works to repair road
damage (including the critical sections) and improve traffic safety and maintenance of the Highlands Highway
between Lae and Mendi.
2. Bridge Construction. This covers the construction works at all bridges along the Highlands Highway, includinl
those to be financed by the AusAID for the widening of about 26 one-lane bridges to two-lanes. The bridge work
to be financed under the proposed World Bank loan includes the raising of the Yalu Bridge; widening to two lanes
of 5 one-lane bridges in east Highlands province, the Feonuku Bridge, the Koronigl and Garniger Bridges; and
construction of new bridges at the Gusap and Bora Rivers.
3. HIV/AIDS Program. The GoPNG agreed to add this component to the project in March 2002. This componen
is not yet well defined and is expected to be developed during October/November 2002. It is expected to consist of
requiring contractors (including their subcontractors and those making deliveries to the contractor) to be involved ir
the road and bridge works under the HHRP to take effective actions to reduce the possibility of their staff and work
force in contacting or spreading HIV/AIDS; a program to address the providers of transport services along the
Highway (such as trucking companies); and a program directed towards the communities along the Highway to
reduce the incidence of infection and strengthen the efforts for dealing with preventive measures such as education



2
ISDS
and care of the infected people and their affected families.
4. Implementation Support. This component covers the consulting services required for the design and
supervision of the civil works required for the HHRP. The terms of reference for these services are available.
5. Support of the Highlands Highway Authority or Highlands Highway Management Unit.
This component consists of establishing a Highlands Highway Authority and running it for about four
years as well as developing and implementing financial and project management systems; appointment of key
personnel and training of staff in financial management, project management, performance-based contracting,
contract administration, management and supervision; and quality assurance and control.
6. Routine and Emergency Maintenance during Construction. This applies to civil works contract sections
whose implementation is delayed because of land acquisition problems to maintain a reasonable level of service to
road users and communities and businesses.
7. Land Acquisition and Resettlement. This component consists of: (1) purchase of needed land not yet
owned; (2) land purchase costs where the payments have not been made; (3) compensation costs; (4) land
purchase of extra land for 40 meter wide corridor along the highway; (5) relocation costs for people currently
settled on the road corridor; and (6) cost of crops and structures for any of the above.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Highlands Highway extends approximately 600 Km from Lae in Morobe Province to Mendi in Southern
Highlands Province. The Highway provides access to nearly 1800 Km of feeder roads serving an area
inhabited by about one third (1.7 million) of the country's population. The area served by the Highway
encompasses the five provinces of Morobe, Eastern Highlands, Simbu, Western Highlands and Southern
Highlands. A section of the Ramu-Madang Highway between Watarais and Ramu Sugar is also
included in the scope of the environmental work for this project. The study area covers a physically and
culturally diverse environment. The settlement and population distribution in most areas along the
Highway is varied with relatively dispersed to concentrated settlement patterns. The settlement
structures are a mixture of modem and traditional materials, with more modem settlements found along
the Highway within the Morobe area.
The Highlands Highway passes through areas of intensively utilized land. There is only one area
that adjoins the Highway that has conservation value, namely the Siwi-Utame Wildlife
Management Area (WMA). All works along this section of the Highway will be confined to the existing
road
corridor and the construction Contractor will be required to comply with management rules of the
WMA. If the rehabilitation works are undertaken entirely within the road corridor, there would be
no direct impacts on the Wildlife Management Area.
The Highway traverses fairly flat areas from Lae to Kassam Pass and hilly areas the rest of the way. The
Highway is subject to earthquakes, land slides and floods. Entire bridges have on occasion been destroyed
by flood waters and land slides in the upper catchment. Poor drainage and poor river bank protection has
resulted in erosion, that directly affects some sections of the Highway, especially in the Markham Valley. In
some cases this has caused sections of the road surface breaking away.



3
ISDS
There is little, if any, redundancy in connectivity between the major economic centers. Since most of
PNG's major exports are directly dependent on the Highlands Highway, disruptions to transport flows
along the Highway affect the nation's economy. The only alternative for passengers and freight is air
service, which is unaffordable for the majority of the population and uneconomic for most freight.
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The proposed project has small impact on the environment and requires little amounts of land
acquisition and resettlement. Consequently, the project is classified as Category B for the purposes of the
requirements of OP 4.01. The categorization is consistent with guidance provided in GP 4.01 Annex C and
is consistent with previous Bank-supported road rehabilitation projects.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      O Yes * No    G TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               0 Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                0 Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes * No    C' TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes O No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11) j                                 Yes * No   C TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          C Yes * No    C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No   CG TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project involves rehabilitation of an existing road within the existing right-of-way. There is basically no
new construction (except for few new bridges) and no significant re-routing of the road alignment. Impacts
will be associated with construction works and will be manageable with good construction practices. The
climate, geology and topography of the area along the Highway raise significant environmental hazards and
risks in relation to the Highway.These risks result from earthquakes, volcanoes, excessive rainfalls and
floods, steep slopes. Small scale involuntary resettlement and land acquisition will occur as a result of
activities of the project. Approximately 400 PAPs. No large scale or irreversible social impacts.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are no such effects expected in this project.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.



4
ISDS
None. The project focuses on rehabilitation activities of the Highlands Highway.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Three alternatives were considered in the selection of rehabilitation strategy for the Highlands Highway.
Options I (development of an alternative route to the Highlands Highway via Madang) and 2 (alternative
route for critical sections of the Highlands Highway, especially the 50 Km section in Simbu province) were
rejected because of their high cost and expected low traffic volumes as well as the need to rehabilitate and
maintain the existing Highlands Highway to provide acceptable service to neighboring communities and
businesses. These options are expected to entail more environmental adverse effects and land acquisition
and resettlement of people than Option 3. This option is the preferred one and consists of localized
improvements to specific short length problem areas along the Highway.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
(i) OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The project includes an Environmental Impact Assessment, an
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan, a Social Impact Assessment and a Social Action Plan
for the HHRP.
(ii) OD 4.30 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project includes a Land Mobilization Report which
includes a Land Mobilization Action Plan establishing mechanisms and procedures for acquiring land
and determining crop and improvement compensation requirements and a Resettlement Action Plan
establishing procedures to be followed with regard to resettlement and compensation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the residents of villages along the Highlands Highway, and this also includes PAPs.
A social impact assessment (SIA) was undertaken by SMEC Consultants to determine the potential
impacts of the HHRP on the lives of the people living along the route alignment. The SIA included
consultations and discussions with residents of 44 villages along the route of the proposed activities.
The main issues to emerge from the SIA were: (a) land and vegetation compensation; (b) land and water
degradation from construction work; (c) resettlement of PAPs; (d) safety and security; (e) health, in
particular, the negative impact of the spread of HIV/AIDS; (e) impacts of migration from the hinterland
towards the Highway; (f) impacts on traditional practices, e.g. rerouting water courses and impacts on
traditional bathing community relations; and (h) training related to community relations.
The SIA revealed that rehabilitation of the Highlands Highway was regarded as urgent by all
stakeholders and that the demand and support for the highway rehabilitation project by local community
members and government representatives of the area was high, with discussions mainly involving
perceived benefits from the road.
Acquisition of land, resettlement of any affected persons, and payment of appropriate compensation in
accordance with the LMAP must be completed before the contract with the selected contractor can be
signed for any construction package. This will: (a) minimize compensation demands by people who did
not make claims at negotiations or by farmers who have encroached on the acquired land with new
plantations; and (b) help reduce delays and monetary claims by contractors due to land problems.



5
ISDS
Formal and informal interviews were also conducted with various government officers, commodity
groups, police officers, members of the DoWT's Land Acquisition Unit (LAU), human relations and
training sections and other infrastructure development programs and donors, in particular AusAID and
ADB, both of which are very active in the transport sector in PNG and also involved with the Highlands
Highway road projects. LAU has been performing a de facto community relations function over the
years of its existence. These interviews showed the need to develop community relations, inclusive of
socio-environmental and gender awareness as an element of project design and to support the DoWT to
develop, implement and sustain a community relations unit, possibly within the LAU as it has the most
reason to interact with the public on a long term basis. The capacity of LAU in community relations
needs to be developed through training. As an alternative to strengthening LAU, use could be made of
volunteers in community relations in a manner similar to what is being done under the Bank-financed
Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project. One of these options will be selected before project
appraisal.
DoWT staff, especially supervising staff and LAU staff need to be trained in community relations and
general awareness regarding community consultation, socio-environmental and gender issues. The Lae
Institute of Technology could be approached to set up such a training program. Further it is
recommended that a focussed training workshop be held to provide training to community members,
some of whom, may become community relations liaison volunteers. People to be trained include select
community members, key community members working as members of construction crews, construction
crews, construction supervisors, local administration staff, local DoWT technical staff and local DoWT
managerial staff.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              7/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            12/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/7/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              7/1/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           12/3/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/7/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual



6
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Hatim M. Hajj                               08/28/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Glenn S. Morgan                        08/29/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Bruce M. Harris                        08/29/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          08/30/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Jitendra N. Bajpai                          08/30/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
;3~WcL         . FEEDBACK         ,iiz 5HOCASE ,



