Report No. 23894
Report No: I065256 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/26/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PERU    Project ID: P065256
Project: NATIONAL RURAL WATER SUPPLY, SANITATION AND HEALTH PROJECT       Task
Team Leader: Alexander E. Bakalian
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 25, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 50.00
Bank Approval: June 25, 2002     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSFW     Sector: WR - Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the National Rural Water Supply, Sanitation
and Health Project (PRONASAR) is to increase the sustainable use of new
and rehabilitated water supply and sanitation facilities in rural areas
and small towns while emphasizing improvement in hygiene practices and
training in operation and maintenance.
More specific objectives:
(a) implementing demand-responsive and sustainable basic water and/or
sanitation services for approximately 1.3 million people in rural
communities, prioritizing the areas inhabited by indigenous peoples,
through the construction and/or rehabilitation of water points, piped
systems, and sanitation facilities;
(b) strengthening local communities' capacity to manage services, by (i)
supporting an effective community participation process during the entire
project cycle; (ii) introducing sound financial and economic principles to
value water and sanitation services; and (iii) forming and training
community-based water committees (JASSs);
(c) strengthening municipal district level capacity to plan and oversee
water and sanitation services to rural communities in a sustainable and
cost effective way, including the use of private sector participation;
(d) strengthening central government capacity (the Rural Water Department
in the Vice Ministry of Water and Sanitation) to develop sector policies,
legislation, and information databases for planning and oversight,
especially those related to the provision of water and sanitation services
to the poor in rural areas and small towns.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1: Rural Water Supply, Sanitation, Training and Hygiene
Education
Sub-Component 1A: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Existing Systems. This
sub-component will finance the physical infrastructure required for the



rehabilitation and expansion of piped water supply systems for about
525,000 people in approximately 2,600 communities. In addition to water
supply infrastructure, this sub-component will also finance on-site
sanitation systems.
Sub-Component 1B: Construction of New Systems. Construction of new water
supply systems and on-site sanitation infrastructure for about 125,000
people in approximately 600 communities. Water supply options include
piped networks with house connections and/or multi-family taps as well as
improved point sources (capped springs, wells with hand pumps) and
non-conventional technologies (e.g. rainwater catchment systems).
Sub-Component 1C: Technical Assistance to Municipalities and Communities
(Existing and New Systems). Under this window, the project would finance
regional operators (RO) and social operators (SO) to strengthen existing
JASS with additional training in accounting, system repair as well as
additional hygiene education for communities. RO's and SO's would also
provide technical assistance to district municipalities to enable them to
provide long-term technical and administrative support to JASS under their
jurisdiction. This component is estimated to reach about 625,000 people in
some 2500 communities.
Component 2. Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Towns
Under this component the project would provide both (i) technical
assistance to district municipalities interested in delegating service
provision to private operators or autonomous entities (cooperatives,
municipal companies etc.); and (ii) water supply system investment finance
for district municipalities that have signed delegation contracts.
Component 2 has been designed as a pilot and is expected to reach about 25
district municipalities. Eligible investments would include water supply
system rehabilitation and expansion, operational improvements, household
latrines and other appropriate sanitation solutions.
Component 3: Capacity Building
Sub-Component 3A: Institutional Strengthening of DGSR. Under this
sub-component, consultants would be hired to strengthen DGSR in its role
as sector leader (e.g. by preparing policy studies) and to train DGSR
staff to assume their assigned functions.
Sub-Component 3B: Training and Accreditation of NGO's, etc. Under this
window, the project will finance the training, orientation and
accreditation of the project's implementing agencies (including RO's,
NGO's, contractors, artisans, etc.).
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation and Supervision.
This component will finance the activities of the project management unit
(PMU), including equipment & software, contractual staff, external audits,
the set-up and maintenance of financial management and project M&E
(monitoring & evaluation) systems, as well as special consultancies.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
-2 -



environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Throughout rural Peru, but particularly in the highlands and the Amazon
regions. Because this is a demand driven project the team will try to keep
a balance as to insure that the bulk of beneficiaries are the indigenous
peoples of rural Peru. This goal is to some extent ensured by the fact
that FONCODES mandate is to work with the extreme poor, the very poor and
the poor, and in rural areas of the highlands and the Amazon there is a
correlation between these poverty categories and the presence of
indigenous peoples and communities.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project's investments are expected to benefit more than 3000
communities with small water supply systems and sanitation facilities
(mainly latrines). Technically appropriate and low cost alternatives will
be adopted. For these types of activities, category B for environmental
rating is appropriate. No major environmental impacts are expected (see
below).
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    Yes
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project triggers OP4.01 but the impacts are not expected to be
significant, irreversible or unprecedented. Most negative environmental
impacts will be mitigated by proper screening, design and construction
practices. The project also triggers OP4.20 since the project's
beneficiary population consists largely of the Peruvian rural communities
who are predominantly descendents of the local indigenous groups.
Depending upon the areas selected, the construction of new water systems
could affect archeological sites. The requirements of OPN 11.03 will be
met, including proper identification of sites by archeological experts and
adoption, if required, of measures to protect any chance finds.
- 3 -



II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
The capacity building component of the project would include cumulative
environmental assessment of subprojects within a watershed or
micro-watershed
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The environmental screening procedures will ensure proper siting and
design alternative are chosen. During preparation it was agreed that since
the project beneficiaries are in majority indigenous people, the whole
project is designed to be an indigenous people development plan (IPDP).
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
OP 4.01
The environmental management approach has four aspects:
a) application of environmental screening criteria for water and
sanitation sub-projects proposed for project financing. Criteria,
procedures and responsibility assignments are included in FONCODES'
Guidelines for Environmental Assessment. The screening includes siting,
execution, operation and maintenance considerations. The results of the
screening are then fed into a matrix and mitigation measures are developed
for each indicated impact; costs and responsibilities are assigned. A
follow-up matrix is prepared to monitor the execution of each individual
mitigation measure. An annual audit of 5 to 10% of subprojects will be
undertaken by an independent consultant to assess the adequacy of
implementation of mitigation measures;
b) Institutional capacity building activities will provided to
environmental engineers and environmental specialists to do field reviews,
as required by FONCODES environmental guidelines, as well as central staff
responsible for the review of the subprojects.
c) strengthening the capacity of beneficiary communities to protect their
local environment. These approaches will be incorporated into training and
community development activities that will be carried out prior to an in
parallel with physical investment measures. A certain percentage of
subproject funds will go toward watershed protection; and
d) developing appropriate monitoring indicators, and an environmental
monitoring scheme to ensure that the mitigation measures developed in the
environmental screening process are being properly implemented, that no
unintended negative impacts are occurring, and that operation and
maintenance are adequate. The indicators would include environmental and
public health parameters.
OD 4.2
Regarding OD 4.20 a social assessment and a consultation process have been
carried out among the Quechua and Airamara people as part of project
preparation (see relevant sections in the PAD). The project cycle defines
a social strategy which is participatory throughout its cycle
(pre-investment, investment and post investment) and includes capacity
- 4 -



building and community strengthening.
During project implementation a dissemination strategy with adequate
cultural materials and relevant indigenous languages will be implemented
through the municipalities as part of the project cycle to ensure that
indigenous communities learned about the project and feel free to be
involved and to participate.
OPN 11.03
Regarding OPN 11.03 its main provisions are included in the GuUa de
Evaluaci6n de Impacto Ambiental published by FONCODES for the use of
community implementing agents.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
As part of the EA process, the consultant contacted public and private
entities, and in October, 2001 a workshop was held for NGOs and other
public institutions. The (regional) implementing agencies (NGOs or Firms)
will work in tandem with the District Municipality to engage the
communities in the design of WSS systems that beneficiaries want and are
willing to pay for. The project sustainability relies on the meaningful
participation of the beneficiaries. Considerable technical and financial
resources will be invested on the participatory processes involving
communities, local leaders, municipalities, local health and education
agents, and NGOs.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/28/2002        1/31/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 4/12/2002         10/30/2001
Date of submission to InfoShop   4/15/2002       4/23/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
-5-



Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Alexander E. Bakalian    04/24/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Kirsten Oleson   04/24/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Alonso Zarzar    04/24/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Juan David Quintero      04/26/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Danny M. Leipziger; Abel Mejia   04/26/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



