Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 2, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P082625 
Project Name: Vilcanota Valley 
Rehabilitation Program 
Task Team Leader: Roberto Chavez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20, 
2003 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 5 
Estimated Board Date: January 21, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) 
Sector: Solid waste management 
(45%);Sub-national government 
administration (45%);Flood protection 
(10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the 
poor (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (P);Civic engagement, 
participation and community driven 
development (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (P);Other urban 
development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Horacio Terraza and Alonso Zarzar 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
1 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
To alleviate poverty through the sustainable preservation and development of the human, social, 
natural, cultural, and historical assets of the Vilcanota river basin.   The objectives will be 
attained through: (i) launching an ongoing consultation campaign among all stakeholders to 
establish a shared vision of Machu Picchu (HSMP) and the Sacred Valley in 2011, and to devise 
a strategy for the sustainable management of the Vilcanota valley (ii) piloting off-grid services 
for  indigenous communities and tourist facilities, supporting the operation and improvement  of 
critical sewerage and solid waste management;  and, (iii) applying and enforcing the SHMP 
master plan adopted by the National Institute for Natural Resources (INRENA), through capacity 
building, technical assistance and key investments. 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
(i) 
Establish vision and strategy for the sustainable preservation and development of 
the Vilcanota valley:  
launch (a) a broad and ongoing consultation process among all 
stakeholders to arrive at a shared vision of the SHMP and the Sacred Valley to the year 2011; 
and, (b) develop a strategy for the sustainable preservation and exploitation of the valley’s 
unique assets;  
(ii)  
Enhance tourist management
;  develop and disseminate (a) the improved tourist 
guidelines and content for the sustainable use of the HSMP and the Sacred Valley, aiming at 
tourists visiting the site for a various reasons like: historical, cultural, ecological and trekking ; 
(b) develop similar guidelines and content for Peruvian schoolchildren and adult tourist sector 
workers (guides, porters, agencies); (c) construction of pilot of interpretation/visitors service 
center and  sanitary and solid waste recycling units along the Inca Trail;  
(iii)   
Provide urban services to the poor in the valley:  
(a) design of a simple addressed-
based geographic information system for project planning, monitoring and evaluation, as well as 
for local fee collection and revenue generation;  (b) start-up and operate an existing waste water 
treatment plant and build local capacity in Machu Picchu Pueblo ; (c) undertake detailed 
engineering and construction of a pilot or prototype interpretation / visitors service center and of 
sanitary and solid waste recycling units along the Inca Trail;  (d) pilot off-grid, green 
technologies-generated electricity for delivery of services for rural communities; and, (e) finance 
a study for the comprehensive management of solid waste in the Vilcanota Valley; and  
(iv)  
Relocate about 100 vulnerable families: 
(a) undertake a participatory action plan to 
resettle 60 vulnerable families living in Machu Picchu Pueblo and 40 peasant families living 
within the eastern boundary of the Sanctuary; (b) elaborate detailed engineering for resettlement; 
and c) build new settlement in Piscaycuccho or nearest adequate location. 
 
D.  Project location (if known)
 
The project is located in the Vilcanota Valley, in the region of Cusco, Peru 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
Institutional capacity of the borrower in the areas we are dealing with is good to excellent.  
Coordination problems among agencies remain, but there is a true willingness by key institutions 
to work together on the proposed project. The main institutions involved are  CODESCO, the 
Peru UNESCO Commission, the Institute of Culture (INC) and National Institute for Natural 
Resources (INRENA);  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
 
[ x ] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
[ x ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
[ x ] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
 
[   ] 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
[ x ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Given the relatively small scale of the works to be implemented under the project,  no significant 
environmental impacts are anticipated.  The works include start-up of an existing waste water 
treatment plant , pilot off-grid electricity delivery services for remote consumers and of sanitary 
services and waste recycling facilities along the Inca Trail, as well as the and the construction of 
pilot/prototype interpretation/ visitors service center and a small resettlement community. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ x] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them?   
 
The project is preparing an Environmental Framework Report which (i) proposes screening 
criteria and procedures for ensuring compliance with Bank safeguards policies for each of the 
small scale works to be undertaken during  project implementation; (ii) outlines the  main 
environmental and social issues that would have to be discussed in each of the Environmental 
Impact  Assessment (EIA) reports; and (iii)outlines the procedures for review and clearance of 
safeguard policies.  
                                                
 
 
Page  4
 
 
 
At the same time a comprehensive revision and adaptation to Bank requirements of the existing 
EIA for the construction of the sewerage treatment system is being carried out. This specific 
full EIA is expected to be finished before appraisal.    
 
In addition,  the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will also be ready prior to appraisal of the 
project.  
 
An environmental and a social specialist have been included as part of team being in charge of 
the supervision of the above  mentioned activities. Project implementation will include a 
Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) . The TORs for the REA are under preparation . 
    
Terms of reference and timing for the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) will be 
discussed with a view to having the IPDP ready prior to appraisal.   The IDDP will be prepared 
to address the implementation of the pilot-off grid services component. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed?    
 
Stakeholder consultations were begun by Bank staff during ID 
mission.  Consultations on a shared vision of Machu Picchu in the 
year 2011 will be launched during project preparation, and 
consultation, stakeholder participation, and community action 
planning will be observed through out the life of the project.   
 
Regarding disclosure requirements, the full EIA for the sewerage 
system,  the Environmental Framework Report for small works 
and the RAP, and the IPDP,  will be disclosed at the World Bank 
Infoshop, the  internet site ayudaurbana.com (were most project-
related materials have been posted since the ID mission) and the 
local environmental authority publication. Each additional future 
EIA, if needed, will similarly be made available to the public as 
indicated above.   
 
Page  5
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
• 
The above described strategy in terms of how to address the safeguard application has 
been agreed, i.e.:  
(i) 
full EIA adapted to World Bank requirements for the existing waste water facility 
prior to appraisal,  
(ii) 
Environmental Framework Report for small works to be identified during project 
implementation prior to appraisal. 
(iii) 
The elaboration of a Regional Environmental Assessment during project 
Implementation  
(iv) 
Two resettlement Action Plans prior to appraisal. 
(v) 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan prior to appraisal 
 
• 
The project triggers the following  safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01);  
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) due to the location of the project; Involuntary Resettlement 
(OP 4.12), Indigenous Peoples (OD  4.20) and Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
• 
Environmental and social specialists have be included as part of the team 
    
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  To be determined
 
