ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Freo of Poverty 9
- InfoShop                                                              24320
,,.fIlop .l                                                          June 14, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/14/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PHILIPPINES                              Project ID: P077012
Project: Kalahi - CIDSS                          Task Team Leader: Cyprian F. Fisiy
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 17, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: September 19, 2002                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASES                              Sector: SY - Other Social Protection
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the proposed five-year project is to empower communities through enhanced
participation in barangay governance and involvement in the design, implementation, and
management of development activities that reduce poverty.
This objective establishes a strong link between improved local governance and poverty
reduction. This goal is pursued through three interlinked activities:
1. Empowerment of communities based on facilitated participatory planning, implementation,
and management of local development activities. Through this, communities will enhance
their capacity to engage with government at different levels to access, influence, and
manage resources to meet community priorities.
2. Improvement of local governance: this is pursued by strengthening formal and informal
institutions to become more inclusive, accountable, and effective.
3. Provision of grants for community investment programs: by matching needs with limited
resources through consultation regarding priority activities, communities and Local
Govemment Units (LGUs) will be engaged in a demand driven process of problem solving.
The limited project grant resources is expected to trigger better local resource mobilization,
effective community ownership of investments, and induce the type of behavioral change
required for long term sustainability of such investments.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The core elements of the proiect are (i) a fast svstem of direct cash transfers from the Snecial



2
ISDS
a tiered system of technical and social facilitators recruited from the private sector, NGOs, and
the villages themselves to support participatory planning, implementation, and management of
community level development activities; (iii) open project menus; (iv) technical review of
subproject proposals by LGU but no veto or decision making powers; (v) support for barangay
management of procurement, financial management, and project implementation; and (vi) full
transparency through a program of disclosure and independent civil society monitoring.
1. Project components
The project components include:
a. Community Block Grants to the barangays which will be used for community investment
activities.
b. Implementation Support to facilitate barangay planning, implementation and maintenance of
productive assets and investments and to upscale and coordinate activities at the LGU and national
levels. This component covers two key activities (i) Social Mobilization of communities and
stakeholders to achieve the goals of the project; and (ii) Capacity Building of LGUs and local
communities to support the operations and maintenance of investments.
c. Monitoring and evaluation comprising internal progress monitoring, independent external
implementation monitoring and evaluation, civil society monitoring, and related impact studies on
local governance and poverty in KALAHI-supported areas.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The KALAHI-CIDSS projectis national in scope (with the exclusion of the areas covered by the
ARMM Peace and Development Social Fund), an7dill cover one-fourth of all municipalities in
provinces where the incidence of poverty is above national average of 33.7%. Based on the most
recent poverty data, this represents an initial estimate of 5,378 barangays in 193 municipalities in
40 provinces.
Further poverty mapping exercises at the municipal level in the 40 provinces are being conducted to
establish a master poverty list. The final selection of participating municipalities will be determined
through a stakeholder consultation process, involving the Project Management Office, representatives of
the provincial government and municipalities, and civil society. The ranking and selection of the
potentially eligible municipalities will further take into account self-selection of municipalities through
their expressed commitment to comply with specific project principles and requirements. Allocations to
the selected municipalities will be adjusted relative to the population size.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments Environmental issues refer primarily to impacts caused by small scale infrastructure
construction. The impacts caused by any particular sub-project will be limited, and will be covered
by the standard operating procedures in project manuals. The project has designed a negative list of
prohibited investments that includes activities with adverse environmental impacts. The project will use an
environmental screening procedure that identifies prohibited projects and components (e.g. community roads
into protected areas).



3
ISDS
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No   0 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      O Yes * No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               O Yes * No    G TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                U Yes * No    C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  O Yes * No    C TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes ONo    O TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 C Yes * No   O TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           O Yes * No   0 TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will use an environmental screening procedure to assess negative impacts from
proposed sub-projects (See Section B above). Land acquisition for sub-projects will be
undertaken in accordance with an agreed Resettlement Policy Framework. Both the
environmental screening procedure and the provisions of the Resettlement Policy Framework
will be incorporated into the Project Implementation Manual. The concerns of indigenous
peoples are addressed through the design of the project itself, which comprises mechanisms
that is summarized in an Indigenous Peoples Strategy .
Enviommental impacts: The project has designed a negative list of prohibited investments that
includes activities with adverse environmental impacts. Mitigation of negative impacts from
sub-projects that are not on the negative list will be addressed through standard operating
procedures, which are built into project manuals and training programs.
Land acquisition: The project will comprise sub-projects that provide small scale infrastructure
to beneficiary barangays, and which will only require limited land acquisition, if any. Land for
sub-projects will be furnished either as voluntary donations, as government land free of claims,
or acquired after payment of compensation at replacement value in accordance with a
Resettlement Policy Framework agreed between the client and the Bank. No involuntary
resettlement is anticipated. Since the project is demand driven, and subproject proposals are
developed through a participatory planning process at the community level and finally selected
through an inter-barangay meeting, the land acquisition impacts cannot be assessed in advance.
The agreed Resettlement Policy Framework draw on experience from comparable Bank funded
projects in the Philippines, including arrangements to verify the voluntary nature of land
donations. The Policy Framework will be translated into local languages, and its provisions will
be integrated into the Project Implementation Manuals.
Indigenous peoples: In 1997, the Philippine Congress passed Republic Act 8371 entitled



4
ISDS
Indigenous People's Rights Act, which uses the term 'indigenous peoples' as the collective
label for non-Christian and non-Muslim ethnic groups in the Philippines. The proposed project
will use this definition to determine the social groups to which OD 4.20 would apply, with the
qualification that it would not apply to non-indigenous ethnic minorities such as Chinese,
Indian, and American. The design for the proposed project defines the main elements of a
strategy, which will ensure that indigenous peoples are included, and that their concerns are
addressed in compliance with the requirements of OD 4.20. Key elements of the Indigenous
Peoples Strategy comprise (i) provisions regarding targeting of municipalities with indigenous
groups, (ii) a facilitated participatory community level planning process for sub-projects which
will include all groups in the community, (iii) scope for indigenous communities to select
activities that specifically address their concems based on an open menu for sub-project
selection, (iv) a grievance redress mechanism that provides an indigenous minority within a
particular barangay or municipality with an avenue for complaints if bypassed or marginalized,
(iv) independent monitoring by civil society (NGOs and the press) which will provide another
mechanism to cases where indigenous groups have been bypassed or marginalized, and (v) an
institutional mapping to clarify the institutional contexts, constraints and lessons learned
regarding involvement of communities including indigenous groups in the planning of local
development activities. T
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
NA
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
NA
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The borrower has developed an environmental screening procedure, a Resettlement Policy
Framework, and an Indigenous Peoples Strategy during project preparation. The provisons of
these mitigation frameworks are being incorporated into the project implementation manuals,
and training on these will be provided to project staff from the implementing agency plus
contracted facilitators.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders are the target barangays, who will be consulted through the
participatory planning process for sub-project proposals. The open menu for sub-project
identification provides communities with an option to choose or avoid civil works that may
require access to land. Project facilitation in support of the participatory planning process will
emphasize inclusion of all sub-groups in the community, including indigenous groups. To
participate in the project, municipalities will sign an MOU, which require them to contribute
land or compensate land acquired for civil works for sub-projects, and to support the
participatory planning process at the community level. The project monitoring arrangements
which include internal, beneficiary, independent extemal, and civil society monitoring, will



5
ISDS
enable an assessment of compliance with the safeguard provisions (e.g. involvement of
indigenous groups in the community planning process). The project principle of full
transparency will be implemented through a program of disclosure of plans, budgets, and
expenditures supplemented by voluntary and independent civil society monitoring.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
S 1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/8/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/8/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Cyprian F. Fisiy                            March 7, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Asger Christensen                      June 14, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          March 11, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Zafer Ecevit                                March 11, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH   -    L ! FEEDBACK  , *E MAFP _ __ , _5HODSSE~  . E



