ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                AWorld Froc of Povorty
l InfoShop
'Mc Wodd 8cink
Report No: AC49
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PHILIPP1NES                             Project ID: P066397
Global Supplemental ID: P072096
Project: Rural Power Project                     Task Team Leader: Selina Wai Sheung Shum
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 30, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m): 10.00
Bank Approval: June 3, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m):
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 9.00
Managing Unit: EASEG                             Sector: Power (50%); Renewable energy (50%)
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
Status: Lending                                 development (P); Rural services and infrastructure
(P); Environmental policies and institutions (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the proposed APL is to assist the country in making available affordable and reliable
electricity services to meet the needs of rural communities in a sustainable manner. However,
electrification must be viewed as an important component-but by no means the only one-of overall
rural development efforts. With financing from the Bank and other donors, the government is presently
carrying out projects to provide other infrastructure (notably roads and water supply), social facilities and
other rural development support. The APL for the rural power project would complement a range of
these ongoing and planned efforts for rural development in the country.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project components, which would be demand-driven, would include the following: (a) rural
electrification subprojects; (b) partial credit guarantee fund; and (c) capacity building.
I. Rural Electrification Subprojects
(a) Decentralized Electrification: This will include small scale energy generation and distribution of
basic electricity services to households, public centers (e.g. schools, health clinics) and productive
applications. For purposes of testing different business models, these customers would be classified into
two broad categories: concentrated and dispersed. The least-cost electrification solution for the
concentrated users is normally a minigrid (or microgrid depending on the number of connections)
powered by a centralized generation system, usually diesel, hydro and/or biomass power. For the
dispersed users who are remote from the grid, the least-cost solution is normally individual photovoltaic
(PV) systems, notably solar home systems (SHS). The first phase APL is intended to support systematic



2
ISDS
piloting of market-based electrification services at a sufficient scale and visibility, and generate needed
interest and support by the private sector and municipalities.
Small scale energy generation and minigrids
The strategy for this subcomponent is to group the target barangays into "market packages" of sufficient
critical mass for business operations. Depending on the characteristics of each package, one or more
minigrids may be installed. For example, several barangays could be linked into one minigrid powered by
a single hydro resource or the barangays could each have their own microgrids powered by small diesels.
In any case, the business model is for a single entity to be contracted to provide long-term services to all
customers in the entire package. Consistent with the provisions of the EPIRA, qualified third parties
would be allowed to provide energy services in the unserved franchise areas of the incumbent ECs. These
parties could be private rural energy service companies (RESCO), qualified NGOs or local cooperatives
organized for this specific purpose. An important objective of APLI is to pilot these various types of
service mechanisms and adopt the most successful ones for the subsequent phases. To the extent
possible, the priority packages for project support are those that are commercially viable in themselves
and require only non-financial incentives. It is recognized, however, that many of the offgrid
communities have very low-income consumers, and that some form of "smart" subsidies may need to be
provided by the government to enable the subprojects to be implemented. The preinvestment studies for
two of the market packages have recently been completed. A transaction task force will be established at
DOE and, with the assistance of transaction advisors, prepare bidding documents and model contract,
along with marketing activities, including consultations with potential investors, investment
promotion/road shows.
Stand-alone Renewable Energy Systems
For dispersed users that are not feasible to connect to the grids, this subcomponent will make available
funds for direct purchase various capacities of PV systems through private vendors and NGOs. The solar
PV subcomponents would include individual solar home systems, community or commercial sector
applications including battery charging stations, schools, health clinics and other social institutions,
community water supply, offices, shops, restaurants and other commercial facilities. Recognizing the
generally low incomes of dispersed users and the still high capital costs of PV systems, the project will
provide, through GEF and government funds, subsidies to lower the cost to consumers, and financing to
spread out the payments. The suppliers would offer small PV system options (e.g. 20-60 Wp) sufficient
to provide basic services to households. Competing vendors would be enticed to do business through
incentives that include assistance in market development and capacity building, product promotions and
other risk-reducing activities funded by the GEF grants. These grants would be supplemented with
government subsidies to bring PV system prices close to the willingness-to-pay levels of consumers.
Further, to remove the barrier of credit access, this subcomponent would provide a line of credits to
financial intermediaries (such as rural banks and micro-finance institutions) to enable them to provide
consumer loans for the PV systems and financing of incremental working for dealers. In addition, as
elaborated below, GEF funding would support the provision of training in PV financing operations and
partial credit risk guarantees for the suppliers and users of PV systems.
(b) EC Grid Subcomponents: This subcomponent of the project will include support for the
transformation of participating ECs through financially viable investments and other measures aimed at:
(i) improving power supply system safety, reliability, efficiency and power quality for existing
customers, through rehabilitation and capacity upgrades of the existing supply system and, in
pursuance of EPIRA, acquisilion of existing subtransmission assets from the National Transmission
Corporation (Transco);



3
ISDS
(ii) removing supply system constraints and thus allowing additional customers to be supplied within
financially viable grid service areas;
(iii) encouraging institutional development of ECs, through implementation and adoption of efficient
and effective staff organization structures, adoption of progressive, objective and transparent
policies for staff hiring and promotions, performance based compensation packages to improve
productivity and accountability of staff and management; and
(iv) providing the necessary hardwvare, software, motor vehicles, tools and equipment to improve
employee productivity, safety and efficiency of customer service provision.
II. Partial Credit Guarantee Funid
One of the key barriers for renewable energy development is the lack of medium and longer term
commercial debt financing, which is in turn attributable to the stringent collateral requirements of the
commercial banks. This has already been recognized in the UNDP-GEF project for Capacity Building to
Remove Barriers to Renewable Energy Development (CBRED) in the Philippines, which includes a Loan
Guarantee Fund, but does not cover solar PV. Under this project, a GEF-financed partial credit risk
guarantee fund would be established to provide grant funds to financiers of renewable energy technology
(RET), notably solar PV, to partially cover loan losses incurred in the provision of loans to RET
purchasers and suppliers. As it is more efficient and effective for the two funds to be consolidated under
one execution agency and one Project Management Office (PMO) at DOE, UNDP would be the
implementation agency for the GEF trust fund for this component.
III. Capacity Building
(a) Reduction of market barriers to the commercialization of renewable energy technologies
This component would mainly be financed by GEF to cover the reduction of market barriers to the
commercialization of RETs suitable for offgrid electrification through a comprehensive range of
activities to build capacity on RET matters in the various energy agencies (DOE, SPUG, NEA, ERC), the
financial intermediaries (DBP and other commercial banks, rural banks, microfinance institutions, etc)
and private participants (solar PV companies, ECs, NGOs, etc); reduce investment risks by more detailed
characterization of market packages; and develop and operationalize policies on subsidies, tariffs,
regulation and integration of RETs into the missionary electrification program. Taking into account the
lessons learned from similar projects in other countries, the technical assistance component to reduce
market barriers to the commercialization of RETs would be front-loaded during the first phase of APL.
(b) Non-renewable energy subproject appraisal/supervision
This component would be financed under the Bank loan to strengthen the capacity of DBP to appraise
and supervise non-renewable energy subprojects, notably those for EC transformation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
tbd
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes 0 No



4
ISDS
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                         0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                    0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                            0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                             * Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                    * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                              0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)      0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*              0 Yes 0 No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
Il.D.Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will be providing electricity services to rural communities, including using clean,
renewable energy technologies. The project is compliant with the Bank's safeguard policies and
the following is a summary of its compliance to each of the policies:
OP 4.01 -- Environmental Assessment
An Environmental Assessment is necessary to ensure that the preparation and operation of the
centralized or individual power generation, transmission and distribution systems will not cause
any harm, damage or nuisance to any of the end users or the environment.
The Project's Operational Manual contains a screening procedure for the site selection and
environmental issues of each component of the pre-grid (freestanding photovoltaic systems) and
mini-grid (power generation, transmission and distribution facilities) electricity services to
determine the level and scope of the environmental assessment and management of impacts that
needs to be accomplished per project.
The OM provides for procedural and substantive guidelines for the preparation of an Initial
Environmental Examination (IEE) or a full scale Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and its
attendant Environmental Management Plan (EMP). Especially during the construction and
operation of the facilities, the OM emphasizes the implementation of an Environmental
Management Plan that would address environmental concerns identified in the environmental
assessment such as safety and design standards, air pollution control, noise and dust control, and
protection of the renewable energy sources to be harnessed such the water body which feeds the
hydropower, and the organic source for the biomass. The OM also prescribes that projects will
follow local environmental regulations, building codes, land use and zoning plans, and solid
waste management standards as well as public consultation and the disclosure process.



5
ISDS
OP 4.04 -- Natural Habitats
The proposed sub-project screening process will be used to ensure that impacts on natural
habitats are identified and mitigated. Sub-projects which impact critical natural habitats will not
be eligible for project financing; therefore, no additional action is required at this time.
OPN 11.03 (being converted to OP 4.11) -- Cultural Property
It is not anticipated that the sub-projects will adversely affect sites having archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under the OPN. A
screening mechanism incorporated into the EA will ensure that impacts on such sites are
identified and mitigated; therefore, no further action is required at this time.
OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10) -- Indigenous Peoples
The project is planned to be implemented through a financial intermediary, who would select and
finance investment proposals on a demand-driven approach. It can only be determerned during
project implementation the whether the project would affect any indigenous peoples. Therefore a
programmatic approach has been adopted in line with World Bank policy in this regard. The
Borrower has developed a "Policy Framework And Procedural Guidelines: Social Safeguard
Policies" in line with local laws, decrees and World Bank policies on involuntary resettlement
and indigenous people. This policy framework includes a "Project Policy Framework on
Indigenous Peoples". This policy framework has been discussed and disseminated within the
government.
OP 4.12 -- Involuntary Resettlement
Similarly, a two-step approach is being followed in compliance with OP 4.12. The Borrower has
developed a "Policy Framework And Procedural Guidelines: Social Safeguard Policies" in line
with local laws, decrees and World Bank policy. This policy framework includes a "Policy
Framework for Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of Project-Affected Persons".
This policy framework has been discussed and disseminated within the government.
BP 17.50 -- Public Disclosure
The social policy frameworks and environmental guidelines have been posted on the DOE, NEA
and DBP bulletin boards and distributed to local governments for further disclosure.
Il.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
see above
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
see above
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
see above
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Presinvestment studies will address any actions needed to ensure compliance with the relevant safeguard



6
ISDS
policies
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The policy note was discussed with the government in October 1999. Since then, written comments have
been received from the DOE and NEDA which indicated their general agreement with the thrust of the
recommendations, while cautioning that it may take some time to effectively achieve a paradigm shift
towards maximization of private sector participation. Separately, supported by the World Bank pilot
fund to promote participatory activities in the Philippines, a series of broad-based consultations with key
stakeholders (NGOs/civil society, government and related agencies, key donors) took place in January
2000. The design and implementation of the proposed project will continue to take into account the
comments by stakeholders. To facilitate efficiency and effectiveness in project preparation, a
multi-agency Project Preparation Team (PPT) has been established under the leadership of DOE, and
comprise the relevant government agencies (e.g. NEA) and proposed borrower of the Bank loan,DBP.
This has proved to be a good practice in the case of such Bank-financed projects as the LGU Water
Project.
Consistent with the Bank's rural electrification policy, it is important to make sure that the targeted
beneficiaries participate in the project design and are offered choices in the different levels of services
that are commensurate with their ability to pay. The choices they make must also be based on full and
accurate information. This would require consumer education. For purposes of identifying self-selected
barangays for APL support, close consultations with the LGUs and local communities are an integral part
of the ongoing preinvestment consultancy study.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/14/2002      11/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            11/15/2002     1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12/16/2002     1/13/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                6/14/2002      11/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            11/15/2002     1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12/16/2002     1/13/2003



7
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework               Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 6/14/2002     11/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/16/2002    1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2002    1/13/2003
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Selina Wai Sheung Shum                      1/20/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz/Person/World Bank  1/20/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Chaohua Zhang/Person/World Bank        1/17/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Jitendra J. Shah/Person/World Bank     1/17/03
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          2/20/03
Sector Manager/Director:      Mohammad Farhandi                           2/20/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
| 5EARCHiTTJ ::|FEEDHACK     sTrrE MAP       SHOWCASE



