                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC120
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/01/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PHILIPPINES                                         Project ID: P066532
Project: Electric Cooperative System Loss Reduction          Task Team Leader: Selina Wai Sheung Shum
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 11, 2003              IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 23, 2003                             IDA Amount ($m):
                                                             Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 12.00
Managing Unit: EASEG                                         Sector: Power (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Climate change (P); Infrastructure services
Status: Lending                                              for private sector development (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main objective of the proposed GEF Philippines Electric Cooperative System Loss Reduction Project
is to achieve significant and sustained energy efficiency improvements in rural electric cooperatives (ECs)
in order to provide current and prospective viable EC customers with reliable and least-cost power supply
over the long term. Towards this end, the project would (i) develop and test financial and contractual
mechanisms to support private sector investment, management and operation, and risk sharing to support
system loss reduction measures in selected ECs; and (ii) support commercial lending to other qualified ECs
for efficiency improvements. For (i), the project would pilot the use of investment management contracts
(IMCs) to attract private investors to manage and operate selected ECs under long-term,
performance-based contracts, and to mobilize private finance without recourse to the government. For
those ECs that are yet unable to attract private investors, access to affordable term loans would be
facilitated under (ii).

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
This project would consist of two components: (a) establishment of a GEF-funded partial loan guarantee
facility for (i) pilot IMC contracts (for selected Type B ECs), and (ii) loans to qualifying Type C ECs; and
(b) technical assistance to develop both financing mechanisms. For component (a), the principles of GEF
contingent financing would be applied, whereby GEF funds would be used as a risk sharing tool to help
attract private debt and equity capital and participation where there is little or no government involvement.
Funds would be used to cover the ECs' general credit risk and thereby to mitigate the access barriers to
debt financing and equity investment in EC energy efficiency improvements. Through this financing
mechanism, the project will test and demonstrate the viability of a new management and operational
structure for ECs, using the IMC model, and transform Type B and C ECs to Type A over the medium and
longer term.     An estimated $20 million in investment would be sought from private IMC investors
(including equity and debt) for comprehensive improvements in EC operations and efficiency. A further
$20 million in loans would be sought from commercial and development banks for Type C ECs in order to
improve their system efficiencies. A total of $10 million of GEF funds would be used to buy down the
perceived risks associated with both the loans and the private investments.            A GEF-supported TA
component (b) would include $2.5 million of support to NEA, the ECs, the guarantee administrator (the
Guarantor) and participating local commercial and development banks to cover the incremental costs of
establishing and initially operating the new financial mechanisms. The design and operating modalities of

                                                       2
                                                                                                          ISDS


each component are summarized below.

Partial Credit Guarantee Facility: Given the high risk exposure of potential investors under the IMC model
and the marginal creditworthiness of many Type C ECs, it is proposed that a partial loan guarantee facility
be established using GEF funds. This facility would be managed by a selected financial institution (the
Guarantor) and operate two windows, one for the pilot IMCs and the other for loans to qualified Type C
ECs. Underlying principles of the facility would include: (a) the guarantee would provide risk mitigation to
lenders and investors to support energy efficiency investments; (b) guarantees would not distort or
undermine existing banking credit assessments or appraisal methods but would rather be used in
conjunction with these to reduce risks for lenders and investors and thereby improve terms and access to
financing and extend maturities for borrowers; (c) the requirement for GEF guarantee support would be
determined by the nature of each investor/EC and relative status of the EC; and (d) the guarantee liabilities
for a given transaction would be decreased over the life of the loan or contract, in line with the
investor's/creditor's risk exposure.

While a number of specific guarantee design options are now under consideration, the proposed approach
would be to design the credit guarantee program in concert with specific debt financing structures, given
that the Project targets a limited number of investments in a specific sector, i.e., ECs, which will have
similar credit and financial structure characteristics. This would require the guarantee facility to be
developed and general terms defined in close coordination with potential commercial and development
financial institutions (FIs) to the IMC investors and ECs. Given the nature of the rural distribution
business and the social need to prevent insolvencies that may disrupt service, use of a debt service reserve
fund is also under consideration as a means of covering debt service payments by the IMC investor or EC
where short-term revenues are insufficient to cover debt service. The sizing and terms of a debt service
reserve fund would be determined for each investor, each EC and/or each project and would likely vary
from 6-12 months of debt service. The fund would likely include some contribution from the borrower,
which would be increased over time, and supplemented with the GEF funds. In order to allow each
investor to determine their tolerance for risk, the guarantee facility would allow for flexible guarantee
coverage (up to certain maximum coverage) and charge investors an appropriately priced guarantee fee.
These fees, combined with interest earnings from the GEF capital, could then be used to defray
administration costs and serve as an initial loss reserve account for the guarantee program, allowing for
preservation of the GEF capital. In terms of leverage, it is expected that the Guarantor may be selected, in
part, on the basis of counterpart funding (from the Guarantor's internal sources), in which case the GEF
funds would likely be used in a first loss position vis-à-vis the counterpart guarantee funding; this approach
will improve the risk position of the local guarantor and improve prospects for obtaining the counterpart
guarantee funding.

GEF guarantee liability will be calculated against outstanding principal of guaranteed loans, and hence will
track both the underlying loan term and amortization schedule. Guarantee program will define (i) an
"Availability Period", during which new guarantees can be issued, e.g., five to seven years, and (ii) a
maximum guarantee term, e.g., seven to ten years. The maximum term will be determined based on overall
EC project finance requirements. IMC contracts may be for 15 years, but the loan term for financing
system improvements will likely be shorter, reflecting the economics of the projects and ability and
willingness of lenders to extend term finance. The guarantee program for Type B and Type C ECs will
likely be pooled to achieve greater flexibility to market response and economies in operation. By Project
Appraisal, the governance of the guarantee facility would be established, institutional arrangements for the
administration of GEF funds finalized, and an exit strategy for GEF funds at the end of the project
developed. GEF "exit strategy" means a plan for final disposition of GEF funds. The first best case
strategy in guarantee programs such as these has been for the GEF monies to be permanently granted to the
local Guarantor for continuation of the program; this decision would be made after appropriate evaluation

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


and subject to good performance by the local guarantor and continued demand for the EC loan guarantee
product. Other options would be considered and agreements would be reached during Project Appraisal.

(b) Technical Assistance: GEF grant funds will be sought to support capacity building in implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of the pilots as well as dissemination of pilot results for further replication in
subsequent phases. Activities under this component, which will be finalized by Project Appraisal, are
expected to include: (i) TA and training for the Guarantor in transactions involving EC operations; (ii)
workshops and information dissemination for interested ECs/investors on the IMC mechanism, EC
improvement program and guarantee facility; (iii) periodic reporting and monitoring of IMC investor
performance and protocol to determine actual energy efficiency gains; (iv) evaluation of pilot IMC
contracts and dissemination of results to all interested ECs, potential investors and relevant government
agencies; (v) development of refined bidding documents for expanded IMC program in future phases; (vi)
assessment of efficiency gains for Type C ECs from improved access to commercial lending and
sustainability of these improvements; and (vii) additional training and TA to NEA, EC Boards and other
key stakeholders for general project support.


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
TBD


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments: As in the case of the Rural Power Project, this project is rated a Category FI project, and the same
environmental safeguard framework (as contained in the Rural Power the Environmental Assessment Policy
Framework and Operational Manual) would be adopted for this stand-alone GEF Project. In addition, a
separate Operational Manual will be prepared for this project to include environmental screening procedures
for each subproject. This Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) will be prepared for each subproject by the
EC prior to approval for any credit guarantee. The IEE may be developed into a full-blown Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) should the IEE generate insufficient information to make a decision on the issuance of
the environmental clearance arise. The IEE identifies the potential environmental impacts of each subproject
and contains an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). However, no significant adverse environmental and
social impacts are expected under the project. Indeed, the project will result in major positive environmental
benefits, in terms of improved EC system efficiency, and these benefits (e.g., energy savings, reduced air
pollution, reduced GHG emissions) will be measured and quantified during the project.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes    No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes    No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will result in investments to reduce system losses in rural areas, through partial loan
guarantees and innovative management contracts for rural ECs. Thus, the project will result in
substantial positive net environmental benfits to these areas. The project will be compliant with
the Bank's safeguard policies and the following is a summary of its compliance to each of the
policies:

OP 4.01 -- Environmental Assessment
An Environmental Assessment is necessary to ensure that the preparation and operation of any
upgraded distribution systems, including construction of required substations, will not cause any
harm, damage or nuisance to any of the end users or the environment. The Environmental
Assessment Policy Framework and Operational Manual of the Rural Power Project as a whole
also applies to this stand-alone GEF project. In addition, a separate Operational Manual will be
prepared for this project to include environmental screening procedures for each sub-project
(which will be the same as the Rural Power Project). This screening process will define the level
and scope of the environmental assessment and management of impacts that needs to be
accomplished for each investment.

OP 4.12 -- Involuntary Resettlement
The Borrower has developed a "Policy Framework And Procedural Guidelines: Social Safeguard
Policies" in line with local laws, decrees and World Bank policy. This policy framework includes
a "Policy Framework for Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of Project-Affected
Persons". This policy framework has been discussed and disseminated within the government.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There will be no cumulative impacts generated due to the application of more than one policy or due to
multiple project components as the scope of the policies that may be triggered are distinct from one another
and that the various project components are homogenous in nature and do not potentially generate adverse
environmental impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
In cases wherein environmental impacts may occur, these can easily be addressed and managed since, by
their nature and scale, are not anticipated to accumulate and last for long periods of time.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Given the smallness in scale of the activities and the specificity of the rehabilitation works, proposed
treatment of alternatives is not necessary.

                                                        5
                                                                                                             ISDS




II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As noted above, development of an Operational Manual will ensure proper environmental screening of
potential subprojects and define actions to be taken to mitigate any potential negative impacts. On the
social side, the government has a track record of broad-based consultations, including recent consultations
with the civil society in connection with the Power Reform Act, which provides for consumer education and
protection.   In addition, DOE is developing a strategic communications plan with the assistance of
PPIAF-financed local consultants, taking into account the results of consumer opinion survey. Under this
framework, increased commercial and private participation is expected to substantially decrease the burden
of public financing for rural distribution while improving the level and quality of service at lower costs.
Through rigorous design of IMC contracts and loan agreements, such outcomes will be explicit, incentives
provided and indicators monitored throughout the project period.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Bank's rural power policy note was discussed with the government in October 1999. Since then,
written comments have been received from the DOE and NEDA which indicated their general agreement
with the thrust of the recommendations, while cautioning that it may take some time to effectively achieve a
paradigm shift towards maximization of private sector participation. Development of the concept for this
project was based on the PHRD-supported feasibility study on the use if IMC contracts for rural ECs in the
Philippines.   During this work, extensive consultation was done with government agencies, the ECs
themselves, EC Boards and their community representatives and potential investors and lenders. At
present, there is strong interest to test this approach which, if successful, could offer substantial benefits for
all stakeholders. Ongoing PDF B work is developing processes and procedures for community involvement
and consultation in the development of draft IMC contractual provisions, selection/award and negotiations
to be finalized by Project Appraisal. The further design and implementation of the proposed project will
continue to take into account the comments by stakeholders.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

                                                       6
                                                                                                    ISDS



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/14/2002       11/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          11/15/2002      1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           12/16/2002      1/13/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/14/2002       11/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          11/16/2002      1/13/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           12/16/2002      1/13/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Selina Wai Sheung Shum                             08/21/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz/Person/World Bank        08/22/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Chaohua Zhang/Person/World Bank                    08/22/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Jitendra J. Shah/Person/World Bank                 08/22/2003

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                         08/22/2003
Comments
Regional Safeguards Director:         Maria Teresa Serra                              08/22/2003

Sector Manager/Director               Junhui Wu                                          08/21/2003

