26574
December 4, 2002
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/04/2002
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: PHILIPPINES                             Project ID: P079628
Project: PH-2ND WOMEN'S HEALTH & SAFE            Task Team Leader: Teresa Ho
MOTHERHOOD
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 15, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m): 30.00
Bank Approval: April 29, 2004                    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASHD                             Sector: Health (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Population and reproductive health (P)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
1.    Two objectives are proposed for the project:
*   To assist disadvantaged women of reproductive age to gain sustainable access to high quality and
cost-effective reproductive health (RH) services and to enable them to safely attain their desired
spacing and number of children
*   To assist in the development and implementation of systems within the framework of the Health
- Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) that are critical for financing and delivery of reproductive health
services.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Component A: Support to Local Delivery of the WHSM Service Package
At selected project sites, this component would support local governments in mobilizing
networks of public and private providers as well as other community groups in the
locality to undertake activities and deliver services included in the Women's Health and
Safe Motherhood service package (WHSM-SP), with focus on maternal care, family
planning and STI/HIV control services. While local networks are intended to serve
everyone in respective communities, the Project activities and inputs would give priority
attention to assuring that disadvantaged women obtain their fair share in access to and
use of the WHSM-SP. The component would include the following as appropriate for
each project site:
A. 1. Critical Capacities to Provide Ouality WHSM Services. This subcomponent would ensure that
critical organizational, facility, and human resource capacities essential to delivery of currently
unavailable elements in the WHSM-SP are installed and maintained at the appropriate levels of
the local health care delivery network of the project site. Based on a standard planning protocol
to be developed by the Project, Local Government Units (LGUs) within each project site would
identify missing critical capacities necessary to deliver the WHSM-SP in terms of specific
organizational structures, new service outlets or additional facilities in existing outlets,
additional staffing or new skills of existing staff. The needs of each project site would then be
assessed and consolidated under this sub-component. The sub-component would provide: (i)
technical support to developing models for WHSM service delivery at the local level, with


﻿2
ISDS
appropriate variations for delivery of the package to difficult-to-reach disadvantaged groups
such as, among others, women in isolated and remote locations, adolescents and unmarried
women, or women in the commercial sex industry; (ii) material support to LGUs for the
establishment of the service delivery model appropriate in their specific localities.
A.2 Accessible and Affordable WHSM Commodities. This subcomponent would ensure an
accessible and affordable supply of commodities necessary to deliver the WHSM-SP by: (i)
establishing efficient procurement, logistics and management systems to enable coordinated-
support to local networks of public and private outlets in terms of mission-essential drugs and
commodities; (ii) supporting the expansion of existing commercial and non-governmental
initiatives providing affordable contraceptives to public and private outlets and other re-supply
points at the community level; and (iii) developing a model blood services system meeting
WHO standards for ensuring safe blood supplies to local networks of health outlets that
perform transfusions.
A.3 Advocacy and Promotion of WHSM. This subcomponent would support mass media and other
communications programs at the local level that: (i) promote knowledge, attitudes and behavior
consistent with attaining desired WHSM outcomes, including demand and use of appropriate
services; (ii) increase popular understanding of the barriers and risks to better women's health
and safer motherhood, including greater appreciation of the nature of sexual risks to HIV/AIDS
infection; (iii) create broad constituencies for vigorous, enlightened and forward looking local
government responses to delivering WHSM services, including public support to assuring
availability to all of the full menu of family planning methods.
A.4 Integrated Local Financini and Management of WHSM Services. This subcomponent would
develop and field test potentially replicable systems for local financing and management of
WHSM services delivered by the local networks of providers assisted and supported by
sub-components A.1, A.2 and A.3. Models for management systems of local networks would
be based on LGUs serving both as administrators of LGU-owned and managed service outlets,
and as facilitators of private providers that are sub-contracted, coordinated or linked up with
the public system. Models for financing would establish local arrangements for mixing and
matching different sources and uses of funds for WHSM services. National government
financing would be linked with LGU financing at provincial, city, municipal and/or barangay
levels, and this combined government financing would be matched and mixed with social
insurance payments and individual payments. The management and financing systems would
be linked to the service delivery systems. A focus of the subcomponent is the development of a
mechanism for sustainable financing of community-level activities and services for WHSM.
The sub-component would include developing a common system for management and
supervision of WHSM services delivered by public and private providers within the
convergence framework of the HSRA.
Component B: National Capacity to Sustain WHSM Services
This component would develop national-scale institutional capacities, policy frameworks
and knowledge management mechanisms that would create an operating environment
conducive to LGUs managing and sustaining local delivery of the WHSM-SP at levels
necessary to improve outcomes. The component would support four key channels
through which the national government continues to influence the cost, quality, reach


﻿3
ISDS
and equity of already locally devolved service delivery. These channels are: (a)
promulgation of technical guidance and regulatory standards with which local providers
are obliged to comply; (b) provision of staff competencies which are regarded as
valuable or attractive by local workers and managers; (c) extension of funding support
for goods and services through national government resource transfers or through PHIC
payments to local providers; (d) dissemination of monitoring, evaluation or research
findings which local providers have to confront or consider. While these channels
operate to serve a wide range of health objectives important to the national government,
the focus of the Project is to assist in those aspects of navigating these channels that are
important to the delivery of the WHSM-SP to all women in general and to disadvantaged
women in particular.
B. 1 Operational and Regulatory Guidelines for Provision and Use of WHSM Services. This
subcomponent will support the research-based formulation, transparent official adoption, and
thorough field dissemination and installation of two types of technical guidelines, namely,
best-practice advisory operational guidelines which providers need to consider for improved
services, and mandatory regulatory standards which providers are obliged to meet. The
guidelines themselves may be in various forms such as service delivery standards, clinical
practice guidelines, referral protocols, IEC and counseling guidelines, technical specifications
of goods and equipment, checklists and procedural manuals, etc. necessary for the provision
and use of WHSM services. The subcomponent will build on the already abundant reservoir of
documents, prototypes, technical materials and actual experience already available from earlier
and ongoing WHSM projects and RH programs. Among the most important options through
which this subcomponent would work are the DOH Sentrong Sigla movement, the PHIC
provider accreditation program, the successor of the USAID-assisted matching grants program
for LGUs, the DOH regulatory functions under BFAD and other licensing units.
B.2  HRD Systems for Competencies in WHSM. This subcomponent will provide support for local
providers and managers to obtain competencies and capabilities essential to providing the
WHSM-SP according to the needs and specifications of Component A. Two key systems
would be supported, namely, the health worker training system which extends a range of
training opportunities for health workers to acquire critical knowledge and skills; and the
public sector health worker appointment, deployment and supervision system which
administratively directs the broad function and behavior of civil servants in health.
For the health worker training system, the subcomponent would support the creation of basic
infrastructure that separates the three functions of training specification, training provision, and
trainee selection and payment. The DOH would focus on training specification, accreditation
of training providers, and monitoring and evaluation of training programs. A wide range of
providers from both public and private sectors would undertake training provision. And
Trainee selection and payment for training would increasingly be devolved to LGUs. The
subcomponent would support training programs for WHSM service capabilities by (i)
identifying the range of skills required and corresponding training needs for health personnel
and other individuals involved in the delivery of WHSM services; (ii) rationalizing national
programs for training in WHSM services to reduce costs, frequency and duration of training
and improve quality (by reducing duplication, combining and integrating programs, etc.); (iii)
assessing existing capacity to deliver the necessary training (including public and private
training providers) and identifying gaps in existing training programs; (iv) developing a system
for accrediting and contracting WHSM training providers and, if appropriate, providing
institutional support to training providers on a selective basis; (v) providing support for


﻿4
ISDS
development and updating of training modules and (vi) developing a system for sustainable
financing of training programs.
For the public sector health worker appointment, deployment and supervision system, the
subcomponent would provide support to: (i) incorporating key technical competencies in the
qualification standards for hiring or promoting health workers including workers in LGUs; (ii)
expanding the WHSM service contribution of the "Doctors to the Barrios" program; (iii)
developing a "midwife to unserved communities" program; (iv) expanding the utilization of
midwives in meeting WHSM needs of communities; (v) increasing the time and effort of
public sector health workers devoted to WHSM activities, particularly to family planning.
B.3  National Instruments for Financing Local Delivery of WHSM Services. The subcomponent
would support Component A through the strengthening of two specific national instruments in
terms of their sensitivity to WHSM concerns. One instrument is the DOH annual budget, which
can provide the important resource transfers from the national government to local
governments on cost items for delivering WHSM services. The DOH budget could provide
critical subsidies for some commodities, training, and other goods and services that are of
value to integrated local service delivery. The subcomponent would provide support for the
development of new WHSM-friendly budgetary provisions and budget execution mechanisms
that would be linked to LGU's budget formulation and allocation processes.
The other key national instrument is the NHIP policies concerning enrollment coverage,
benefit package specification, provider accreditation and provider payment. The subcomponent
would support the development of new NHIP policies in these areas, including policies
concerning new beneficiary services to be extended by PHIC through Local Health Insurance
Offices, which may offer opportunities for more effective support to local WHSM services.
B.4 Monitorink, Evaluation, Research and Dissemination. This sub-component would (a) track
progress in implementation of the WHSM service package using pre-identified intermediate
indicators and performance benchmarks; (b) carry out baseline and evaluation studies in
project sites; (c) support policy and operations research on WHSM; and (d) disseminate MER
results to relevant stakeholders.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
To be determined during preparation.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: EA Category will be further reviewed and clarified during project preparation.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on 0 for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)       ( Yes ( No     0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               ( Yes 0 No     (9 TBD
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                               (CYes * No      U TBD


﻿5
ISDS
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             OY es *No        O   TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                         (  Yes *No       0   TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                          *Yes 0        No  0  TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                7Yes        No   (   TBD
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                        Yes SNo       U TBD
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)          (  Yes      No   (   TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*               (9Yes ONo        (   TBD
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Pleasefill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1I.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The issue of medical waste management will require close attention in the project, in particular because incineration is not legal in
the Philippines. The Safeguards review of the proposed Philippine Health Sector Reform Project (minutes dated July 16, 2002)
recommended that the project review the country's solid waste legislation, its overall strategy for medical waste, its readiness to
respond to the new law, and how the project can contribute to that readiness. It was also suggested that the HSRP could consider
piloting alternative technology for the disposal of medical waste. A strategy for medical waste management will be worked out as
part of the preparation of the HSRP (also a FY04 operation) with PHRD funds now set aside for this purpose. Recommendations
from that study will be applied in this project (WHSMP2), to the extent appropriate.
The HSRP Safeguards review also recommended that, "if new construction is planned, then an Environmental Assessment could
be needed, depending on the nature and scale of the works. However, if limited construction or rehabilitation is planned, no EA
is needed, but construction contracts and bidding documents should included good construction practices. It was recommended
that all medical facilities be asked to prepare a medical waste management plan. The Safeguards team recommended that if the
exact project locations are not known by appraisal, then a screening process would have to be developed and used to identify
potential environmental concerns. However, if project locations are known prior to appraisal, then the task team should notify
the safeguards team on the nature and scale of construction so that the most appropriate environmental and social safeguards
measures can be determined."
For this project (WHSMP2), it is likely that there will be some rehabilitation and small new construction, and that not all
locations will be known prior to approval. The task team should be able to inform the safeguards team of the nature and scale of
construction by the time of appraisal, as advised for the HSRP.
A social assessment will be conducted during project preparation to have a better understanding of the project's
impact on the indigenous peoples and land acquisition/resettlement.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
To be further clarified and reviewed during project preparation.
II.D.Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
To be further clarified and reviewed during project preparation.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
To be further clarified and reviewed during project preparation.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
For the medical waste issue, pls see para (a) above of this same section.


﻿6
ISDS
The applicability of the Indigenous Peoples Policy in project sites identified to have populations of
indigenous peoples will investigated during project preparation and applied as appropriate. Likewise, the
existing pilot project of the Department of Social Welfare and Development with respect to the Social
Integration for Indigenous Peoples will be investigated for possible replication as well as the procedures
of the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples to ensure that existing GOP policies and procedures
are also complied with. Moreover, the task team will ensure that the project will be compliant with all
other safeguard policies of the Bank at all times. To help ensure this, the project implementation manual
may include the following provisions as applicable depending on findings during project preparation -
*   all land acquisition would be done between a willing buyer and seller or a willing donor and the
community, all following commercial practices in the area;
*   an Indigenous Peoples development plan or framework will be developed
For this purpose, the World Bank Office Manila's safeguards officer will be engaged to help in
investigating the safeguard issues of the project during project preparation.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The proposed project design is the product of three days of consultations with representatives of DOH
units, PHIC, public and private provider institutions, donor institutions and other stakeholder groups held
during the project identification mission in August 2002. These intensive consultations will continue
throughout project preparation and implementation.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ 1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analvsis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank


﻿7
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Darn Safety Management Plan:                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Teresa Ho
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
Sector Manager/Director       Emmanuel Y. Jimenez


