ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Frc¢ oi Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/14/2002                             24294
Section I - Basic Information                              November 14, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: PHILIPPINES                            Project ID: P073488
Project: ARMM Social Fund Project               Task Team Leader: Mary P. Judd
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 20, 2002      IBRD Amount ($m): 33.60
Bank Approval: December 5, 2002                 IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASRD                            Sector: Other social services (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
Status: Lending                                 reconstruction (P); Rural services and infrastructure
(P); Civic engagement; participation and community
driven development (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development goals of the proposed Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao Social Fund for Peace
and Development Project, herein after known as the ARMM Social Fund (ASF) Project are to reduce
poverty and support mechanisms for the promotion of a peaceful and safe environment in the
conflict-affected areas in the ARMM area. Specific project objectives are to: (a) provide and/or improve
sustained access to social and economic infrastructure and services by the poor and conflict-affected poor
communities; (b) provide capacity building for women, youth and other community groups for improving
food security, employment opportunities and household incomes; (c) strengthen social cohesion and
partnerships between and within communities in the ARMM region; and (d) improve local governance
and institutional capacities for implementation in the ARMM Region, with a focus on improved
transparency and accountability in the allocation and management of public resources by the
participating communities, local govemment units (LGU) and ARMM Regional Government.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project is designed according to the following principles:
Community-driven development (CDD), through: (i) improved partnerships involving ARMM
Government, LGUs, NGOs, and the private sector; and (ii) multiple implementation mechanisms
(e.g., quick response methods/QRM and catalytic development methods/CDM) to fast track
funds and resources to meet sustainable development objectives;
Social capital strengthening of participating communities;
Transparent and acountable management of criteria and priorities for community and
stakeholder participation;



2
ISDS
Adaptation of relevant lessons from international and national experiences;
Complementarities with other projects; and
Management and coordination through a semi-autonomous Project Management System,
focusing on sustainable mechanisms and arrangements.
Components:
Community Development Assistance: This component aims to empower target communities and create
opportunities for increased community participation in reducing poverty and promoting a durable peace.
Community-driven development (CDD) mechanisms will be implemented and adapted to ARMM
conditions. Community/peoples organizations (POs) from qualified barangays will receive on a demand
basis technical and financial assistance so they may efficiently implement and manage subprojects
addressing their priority socio-economic needs. The subprojects will be selected from a menu derived
from a social assessment of community needs in Mindanao, and will be formulated within the framework
of a prioritized community plan and an allocation ceiling to be phased in tranches. The proposed
approach will involve community contracting and various accountability mechanisms to ensure efficient
and transparent use of funds, to empower and benefit vulnerable target groups.
Proposed Pilots: Prior to project launching in early 2003, pilot activities will be undertaken to test the
design and implementation arrangements for the CDA component. One municipality in each province,
with five target barangays in each municipality (for a total of 20 barangays) will be covered during the
pilot stage.
Strategic Regional Infrastructure: This component will: (a) improve access and provision of services
by rehabilitating critical infrastructure damaged during the war in 2000; .(b) use regional infrastructure
projects to strengthen ARMM's processes in procuring, managing, and monitoring infrastructure
investments.
Institutional Strengthening and Governance: This component supports project management, and
institutional strengthening, and enhanced governance of ARMM, LGUs and other partner institutions
portion. In addition to a smooth implementation of the social fund itself, this component will initiate
processes towards improving performance delivery, transparency and accountability of the ARMM and
local government units to their respective constituencies, especially in conflict-affected communities.
Similarly, the component will support the cross-cutting theme of good governance in all sub-project
components.
This component activity will introduce open, transparent and accountability processes and mechanisms
into the ARMM administration, especially in at least one unit of the ARMM regional government; and
initiate accountability in the ARMM by piloting open and transparent procedures. LGUs will also receive
capacity building assistance in improving local governance. The component will organize cross-visits to
expose ARMM and LGU officials to best practices in local governance and public service delivery in
other regions.
A package of assistance to mainstream community-based informal education system, which currently is
primarily linked to religious education, into the national education system/curriculum. The activities will
enhance the quality of education at such religious schools, and therefore enhance their education
standards and the future employment prospects of such students.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites



3
ISDS
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project is located in ARMM region of the Southern Philippines, covering about 20% of Mindanao's
main island in terms of land area and population (or about 4 million persons). The main peoples benefitting
from the project will be the "Tri-Peoples" of Mindanao, comprised of Muslim (some 15 different tribes),
Christians (diverse group), and Indigenous Peoples (or highlanders, representing some 15 tribes).
The proposed project area has a number of important protected areas, including: Liguasan Marsh, Mt. Apo
Mt. Matutum. There are no planned project interventions which will directly affect these protected areas;
the project will support interventions which will enhance the ARMM planning capacity to better manage
these areas, to the extent they fall under the ARMM jurisdiction. Screening criteria within the project
guidelines will ensure that road construction within protected areas is not permited.
B. Chteck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Environmental Classification is B.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       0 Yes * No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               3 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes * No
Projects in Intemational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
lI.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Given the range of possible community sub-projects, and the initial information gathered from the field
relative to the absence of informal settler colonies in the areas surrounding strategic regional
infrastructure to be expanded, the Project does not foresee any significant negative impacts resulting
from these sub-projects. Rock causeways and timber ports, drainage water from irrigation and water
supply systems are projected to produce some environmental concerns, but these are considered highly
manageable.
Contact with indigenous peoples is very likely, as they are found in Basilan, Tawi-Tawi and the rolling
and upland areas of Maguindanao. They may either be found within the Project's target barangays, or
sub-projects maybe found within the IP ancestral domains (like a spring source for a water supply
system). Considered as "poorest" among the very poor communities, it is very possible that IPs can be



4
ISDS
excluded from the development agenda, as they do not have the capacity nor the confidence to participate
effectively in community meetings. Extra efforts will be made to include IPs as project beneficiaries.
Multiple claimants to lands being sold or donated appear to be a recurring issue in Maguindanao, one of
the provinces in ARMM, as previous experience of the Agrarian Reform Program in the '70s and
SZOPAD FMO will indicate. It is very possible to encounter the same situation in ASF Project,
regardless of the nature of the sub-project. This may threaten sub-project sustainability as ownership of
facilities become vulnerable to such insecurities/irregularities. The Project has put in processes that
require land issues to be solved before sub-projects are approved.
The proposed Project has issued three safeguard policies and their corresponding operational strategies
and guidelines, pertaining to Environment, Indigenous Peoples Development, and Land Acquisition,
Resettlement and Rehabilitation. The inclusion of such policies and operational guidelines in the
Project's Operations Manual, together with the required orientation of project stakeholders on the
safeguard and the constant monitoring by supervision missions/external monitors of compliance by all
concerned to the provisions of such safeguard policies will ensure that safeguard issues and negative
impacts foreseen are addressed by the Project.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
There are no significant cumulative adverse effects envisioned. The Project's monitoring and evaluation
system, managed by an independent project management unit, will be able to pick up unforeseen effects.
Il.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Long term impacts in the above areas due to project interventions are envisioned to be positive. The
highly feudal relationships found in Muslim Mindanao areas may eventually change into more
democratic socio-economic-political systems, where empowered communities directly participate in
decision-making activities where their lives are concerned.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not Applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Ref. the enviromental impacts, GOP requires I of 2 types of assessments, depending on the nature of the
intervention. Either an environmental compliance certificate (ECC) for projects/subprojects having
potential adverse environmental effects, or a "certificate of non-coverage", for subprojects not expected
to have an adverse effect. In both cases, the ARMM Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR) is the relevant oversight agency issuing the relevant certificate. The Project's Fund Management
Office shall enter into a Memo-of-Agreement with ARMM DENR and coordinate with its Field-level
representatives, to ensure compliance with environmental safeguards of sub-projects being proposed.
Corresponding action plans for mitigation measures and the indicators for monitoring compliance will be
drawn for sub-projects with environmental issues. The Project also will include operational training to
enhance the capacity of the ARMM DENR to carry out the environmental assessment and issuance of the
needed certificates for this and other projects.
Ref. the indigenous peoples, the Project's Policy Framework and Procedural Guidance for Indigenous
People's Development shall form part of the Project's Operational Policy Manual. It shall be translated in



5
ISDS
a language/dialect understood by the IPs, reproduced and distributed to all LGUs and IP Tribal
Councils/leaders who shall be tasked with the implementation of such policies at the community level.AII
Project staff and Community Facilitators shall be oriented and trained to enable them to successfully
implement the policy's provisions on deliberately seeking out IP communities found within target
barangays, and implementing the NCIP Administrative Order No.3, series of 2002. The Administrative
Order provides the guidelines and mandatory activities for the issuance of Certification Precondition for
project's found within ancestral domains, which require the IPs "Free and Prior Informed Consent". As
recipients of CDA, the willful inclusion of IPs in the development planning exercise is highlighted by the
proposed strategy of deploying service partners which can work directly with the IPs to enable them to
develop their own development plan, before participating in the Barangay Assembly meeting. The
appraisal of sub-projects will require this Certification Precondition as attachment to sub-projects which
may affect IPs directly or indirectly.
Ref. involuntary resettlement, the Project's Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy
Framework and Operational Strategies will be included as part of the Operational Policy Manual, to be
translated in the local dialect and distributed to all LGUs, NGOs, Peoples Organizations, IP Tribal
Councils and Project-Affected-Persons. All Project Implementers will likewise be oriented and trained to
enable them to facilitate compliance by LGUs and beneficiaries with the requirements of the Social
Safeguard. Additional safeguards in terms of documentation requirements will be made, especially for
lands to be purchased/donated for community and strategic regional infrastructure. Responsibility for
compensation of PAPs will remain the accountability of the LGUs and the proponent Community
Association.
The project does not envision any involuntary resettlment due to the nature of project interventions, with
the possible exception of possible resettlement of a limited number of persons due to the right of way
provisions to enable the implementation of certain infrastructure (e.g., new roads, new irrigation) if ever,
in the future. In any case, subproject criteria place greater priority on rehabilitation of infrastructure,
which may practically limit the application of the Bank's Safeguard Policy on Involuntary Resettlement.
In addition, the project's M&E system will include specific performance and impact indicators to capture
any significant effect(s) attributed to the Project. Also, the Project's Operations Manual has outlined the
specific steps to ensure compliance with the agreed guidelines. The ARMM Regional Government, the
ultimate implementing agency, has officially endorsed and adopted the Project's safeguard policies and
frameworks.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholder groups involved are the Local Govemment Units at the ARMM, provincial,
municipal and barangay levels, together with NCIP representatives and the leadership of IP/community
associations. The LGUs, with their Municipal and Community Facilitators, shall present and discuss the
Safeguard Policies during the orientation on the Project for the Barangay Assembly. Once the exact
location/alignments for the community and strategic regional sub-projects are identified, the LGU and the
community association concerned should call the members for a meeting, to discuss in more detail the
entitlement Framework and the organization for implementing the Safeguards. For sub-projects requiring
the IP Free and Prior Informed Consent, the provisions of NCIP Administrative Order No.3 Series of
2002 relative to the conduct of Mandatory Activities for FPIC shall be adopted by the FMO. As required
by the Administrative Order, outcomes of all these consultation meetings will form an important part of
the prerequisites for proposal/appraisal documentation.



6
ISDS
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/30/2002      5/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           7/19/2002      7/9/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            7/19/2002      7/31/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/30/2002      5/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           7/12/2002      7/9/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            7/19/2002      7/31/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/30/2002      5/30/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           7/12/2002      7/9/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            7/19/2002     7/31/2002
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Mary P. Judd                               06/12/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Mary Judd, Josefo Tuyor/Person/World Bank  06/12/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz/Person/World Bank  02/07/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date



7
ISDS
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn Morgan                                 08/15/02
Sector Manager/Director:       Mark D. Wilson                                08/15/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
,        SRC_                      iwEDACK  -E -A  | SHOWCASE



