Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC416 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 12, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Poland 
Project ID: P065270 
Project Name: POLAND RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT II 
Task Team Leader: Mark R. Lundell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: September 20, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Development Support 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector 
(20%);Micro- and SME finance 
(20%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);Roads and highways 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (P);Small and medium 
enterprise support (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (P);Other rural 
development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Barbara Letachowicz 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 200 
Other financing amounts by source: EU Structural Funds and GOP –  
1,400 ($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The development objectives are to
: 
(i) enhance the capacity of local governments to identify and 
plan local public investments and absorb EU Structural Funds in executing such investments; 
and (ii) increase the level of off-farm employment in rural areas. 
 
The following indicators would be applied to assess the success of the project: 
Increased institutional capacity to absorb EU Structural Funds:
 (1) Average amount of EU 
Structural Funds absorbed by project gminas as compared to gminas not participating in the 
project’s investment components. 
 
Increased off-farm employment
: (1) number of jobs created outside agriculture in project gminas 
as compared to non-project gminas; (2) the cost per job created; (3) increase in non-agricultural 
income in project gminas; (4) number of new enterprises established. 
 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
It is suggested that the project provide central budget support that would permit the central 
Government to co-finance EU supported programs, and traditional investment components 
directed at project interventions which are not covered under EU supported programs.  The 
budget support would be made conditional on the agreement of support for and execution of 
certain key thematic activities in the Government of Poland’s rural development strategy. 
 
So far, the project team has identified and grouped activities to be supported under the following 
three components: 
 
(1) Direct Central Budget Support:
 This component would provide support to the central 
government budget to (a) co-finance rural public infrastructure and other rural development 
activities supported under EU Structural Funds programs; (b) co-finance labor redeployment 
programs financed by the European Social Fund (ESF). The component might also finance 
activities aimed at institutional development of the labor market and social assistance and 
welfare programs at the gmina level. 
 
(2) Credit for Micro-Enterprises and SMEs:
 This investment component would promote off-
farm employment through improved access to financial resources. It would provide micro-credit 
and credit services to SMEs.  Micro-credits would be intermediated through NGO service 
providers and possibly commercial financial institutions. The SME credit line would contribute 
to borrowers’ ability to pre-finance their investment projects co-financed by EU Structural 
Funds. It would be intermediated by commercial banking institutions. 
 
(3) Human Resources Development:
 This component would (a) enhance gminas’ capacity  to 
identify, plan, and deliver public services, thereby improving their capacity to absorb EU 
Structural Funds; (b) build capacity of gminas and powiats to identify, design and implement 
social programs; (c) support community centers to provide better access to knowledge, increase 
the participation of a wider group of rural inhabitants in local community decisions, and improve 
the quality of education services at gmina and powiat levels; (d) finance provision of training, 
and training materials to improve the efficiency of the education system in rural gminas. 
 
 
D.  Project location 
 
All sixteen voivodships in Poland. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Environmental Assessment procedures to be reviewed as specified below under Environmental 
Assessment section. 
 
 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) – 
described below.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [X ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
For components (1) and (2) (Direct Central Budget Support and Credit for Micro-Enterprises and 
SMEs), the Bank will require that the Polish implementing agency for the relevant EU-financed 
program or financial intermediary screen proposed sub-projects and ensure that sub-borrowers 
carry out appropriate EA for each sub-project. Before approving a sub-project, the relevant 
implementing agency or FI will verify (through its own staff, outside experts, or existing 
environmental institutions) that the sub-project meets the environmental requirements of 
appropriate national and local authorities and is consistent with the Bank’s OP 4.01.   
 
In appraising the RDP2, the task team will review the adequacy of country environmental 
requirements relevant to the project and the proposed EA arrangements for sub-projects, 
including the mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental screening and review of EA 
results.  This will be covered under the Environmental Assessment and Action Plan consultancy 
to be executed with the support of PHRD grant funds.   
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared – March 30, 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Mark R. Lundell 
Nov 12, 2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
Nov 12, 2003 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Joseph R. Goldberg 
Nov 12, 2003 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
