Page  1
 
- 1 - 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC217 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 12, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P083620 
Project Name: TRANSPORT 
RESTRUCTURING PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Antti P. Talvitie 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 150 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (65%); 
Railways (35%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance 
(P);Other urban development (P); Public 
expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S); State enterprise/bank 
restructuring and privatization (S);Other 
rural development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: B. Baratz, A. Talvitie 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
Improve the Management, Productivity, Efficiency and regulatory Capacity of the Railways.
 
The project, together with the PAL program, seeks to complete the transformation of the 
consolidated state railways into economically viable entities, and establish regulatory 
competence for multiple operator market.  The project would result in a move towards the core 
railway network whose size, management, operation and regulation are commensurate with the 
market demands for freight and passenger transport, and will facilitate Romania’s accession to 
the EU.  The current subsidies, 0.6% of the GDP, would be limited to targeted public service 
obligations (PSO) and a share of maintenance of the public infrastructure that cannot be covered 
from the track access charges. Necessary upgrading of facilities would be accomplished through 
one-time budget transfers or credits and loans in addition to the revenues from access charges. 
 
Page  2
 
- 2 - 
Restructure Road Administration, Management, and Finance to Improve Efficiency.
 
The project, with aid from the PAL program, has the objective of transforming the road sector 
institutional framework in which the roles of the owner, administrator, manager, and supplier are 
clearly established.  This will give a voice to affected interests; define the road owners and their 
responsibilities, especially with regard to priorities, financing and cost recovery; separate 
administration from management; develop private, domestic road works industry and 
competitive procurement of service delivery. Tied with modern management systems, this will 
result in improved efficiency.  The project will help establish a modern road management 
practice in Romania and support investments in urban bypasses to foster economic growth, 
improve transport services and sustained development of cities (their competitiveness, livability, 
safety and environment) and to meet EU environmental requirements. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project is coordinated with the proposed PAL program for maximum leverage and full 
achievement of the development objectives.  The PAL conditionality in the transport sector 
includes targets for railway productivity, operating efficiency, and debt service ratio; and, for 
roads, privatization of direct labor organizations and increased cost recovery from road user 
charges.
  
 
The PAL consultancies (financed by PPIBL), for the railways, address the issues in restructuring 
and divesting the core and non-core operations, reducing the track length, and introducing a new 
railway regulatory regime, consistent with the EU practice, and improving the capacity of the 
railway regulator. The PAL consultancies for the roads include assistance and consultations for 
reorganizing the National Administration of Roads (NAR) to meet the privatization and EBRD 
project conditionalities, a road user charges study, and development of road management 
database and management system to prioritize the road program on engineering-economic 
principles. 
 
The Railway Component is estimated at US$65 million (loan US$45m
). It would include: 
 
• 
Technical Cooperation (consulting) to improve productivity. In addition to the PAL 
consultancies, technical cooperation would include management and staff training (the 
principal bottleneck), adoption of the point-to-point costing model by the operating 
companies, and completion of the management and track information system. 
• 
Track machinery. 
• 
Train Control system on the Bucharest—Brasov Line. 
• 
Other (small) priority capital improvements 
 
These components are identified as the priorities to ensure the full use of past investments and to 
achieve the targeted improvement of the railways’ productivity. 
  
Page  3
 
- 3 - 
The Road Component is estimated at US$150million (loan US$105million
). It would include: 
• 
Technical Cooperation and training to improve efficiency of road management and of 
NAR.  Consultancies on identification of road owner, administrator, and manager 
responsibilities; method of sharing road fund income between road owners and 
administrations; development environmental policy and program at NAR; and 
strengthening of the construction industry in modern pavement and road maintenance 
technologies.  
• 
Traffic Safety. Workshops in different regions of Romania for education and awareness, 
including minor works and goods, to improve road traffic safety. 
• 
Bridge rehabilitation.  
• 
Urban bypasses to be prioritized from the following list: Adjud, Bacau, Brasov, 
Sighisoara, Ramnicu-Sarat, Reghin, Medias and Targu Mures.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project comprises institutional reforms to the management and financing of both railways 
and roads, supply of equipment for railways, traffic safety for roads, and civil works mainly for 
the construction of selected urban road bypasses. The project locations for these will be based 
around Bucharest, except for the civil works components. The project locations for the civil 
works will be determined after studies that are being undertaken by the borrower have been 
completed. The results of the studies will be applied to prioritize the urban road bypasses that 
have been identified as candidates for financing from among the following cities: Adjud, Bacau, 
Brasov, Sighisoara, Ramnicu-Sarat, Reghin, Medias, and Targu Mures. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The railways have been restructured into three companies that are responsible for infrastructure, 
freight and passenger services.  The project seeks to complete the transformation from the 
previously consolidated state railways into economically viable entities, and establish regulatory 
competence for a multiple operator market.  The project would result in a railway network whose 
size, management, operation and regulation are commensurate with the market demands for 
freight and passenger transport, and will facilitate Romania’s accession to the EU.   
 
The NAR has been reorganized, but its organization, management systems and technology need 
further support.  The restructuring would include the reclassification of the road network and 
associated changes in administration, management and financing of roads, and increase 
efficiency of road works through privatization and development of the domestic construction 
industry. 
 
Page  4
 
- 4 - 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The results of the ongoing alternatives studies being conducted for the borrower by consultants 
include environmental assessment, and are expected around Spring 2004. An independent 
consultant will be appointed with the approval of ECSSD to carefully review the results to 
ensure compliance with Bank guidelines on environmental and other safeguard policies. The EA 
report will be available locally in Romania for public scrutiny and the executive summaries will 
be translated into English for Bank use.  
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Detailed assessment of the Bank’s Safeguard Policies will be undertaken after the selection of 
the urban road bypasses. This is expected to commence after September 2003 following the 
proposed project preparation mission that is planned for September 2003. A land acquisition plan 
together with a resettlement plan will be prepared in accordance with both Romanian and Bank 
guidelines. 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
- 5 - 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Upon approval of the PCN, project preparation mission is scheduled for September 2003 to 
define the project and to review progress in feasibility studies and environmental assessments of 
the roads component.  Other issues that will be discussed include procurement and institutional 
development, the TA program, and the specific railway investments, including the track 
machinery.  The proposed timetable, agreed with the GOR and the implementing agencies is: 
appraisal in May of 2004; negotiations in September 2004; and effectiveness in January 2005. 
Although the environmental category has been assigned as ‘A’, observations in the affected cities 
indicate that the bypasses would relieve congestion, reduce pollution, and improve the livability 
of the cities. Any negative impacts from the bypasses and their construction will be identified 
and a plan developed for their mitigation taking into consideration the specific environmental 
features of the selected right-of-way (such as proximity to residential areas, water courses, 
agricultural land, cultural property, natural habitats and biodiversity) and the views of affected 
citizens and other interests. The EA for each bypass will be reviewed by an independent 
consultant not affiliated with the consultants carrying out the alternative analyses, which include 
the EA. The Bank’s ECSSD will review and clear the TOR for the independent consultant. A 
land acquisition plan together with a resettlement plan will be prepared in accordance with both 
Romanian and Bank guidelines. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Detailed plans for the consultation and disclosure of safeguard assessments will be prepared 
during the safeguard assessments that are planned to commence after September 2003. The EA 
reports will be available to the public in the affected cities and the EA for each bypass will also 
be available in Bucharest and accessible to the public, possibly at NAR Headquarters, prior to 
Appraisal.  The executive summaries of the EA for each bypass will be translated to English for 
disclosure, including at the Bank’s Infoshop.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
ECSIE has mini and self QER before PCN and PAD reviews in order to focus more on technical 
details.
 
