ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorid Frec ol Povorty
InifoShop
WAXI1 ,fi
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/22/2003                               25381
Section I - Basic Information                                 January 22, 2003
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ROMANIA                                 Project ID: P043881
Project: ROMANIA IRRIGATION REHABILITATION       Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi
AND REFORM PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 16, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m) 100.00
Bank Approval: June 12, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit. ECSSD                              Sector: Irrigation & drainage (50%); Central
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (30%), Sub-national
Status: Lending                                  government administration (20%)
Theme: Decentralization (S); Rural services and
infrastructure (S); Environmental policies and
institutions (P); Water resource management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
a. Sector background
The agriculture sector has made significant contributions to the Romanian economy since the demise of
the socialist regime. Today, in conjunction with the agro-processing industry, agriculture accounts for
about a quarter of the country's GDP, and for more than a third of the country's total employment. In the
rural economy, it accounts for more than two thirds of employment opportunities and total income.
Nearly half of Romania's 23 million people still live in rural areas.
Irrigation is of vital importance to Romanian agriculture. While the annual average rainfall in Romania
amounts to 750 mm, the average rainfall in the southern and eastern areas does not exceed 500 mm, and
the monthly and seasonal distributions are uneven, with less than 20 percent of total rainfall occurring in
summer. The water demands of crops during July and August are 300-500 mm, leading to a crop water
deficit of some 200-350 mm, which cannot be supplied from soil moisture. This makes irrigation
necessary for most summer crops. Under the socialist regime, construction of irrigation schemes was a
priority. By the end of the 1980s, the government had constructed irrigation and drainage facilities
covering about 3 million hectares and worth about US$10 billion if converted to current values.
While the systems are still mostly operational, the area of irrigated agriculture has declined from a peak
in the late 1980s of over 2.0 million hectares to around 300,000-500,000 hectares in recent years. Much
of this decline is attributable to the recent transition, the loss of markets, the decline of agro-businesses,



2
ISDS
and the impact of land redistribution.  However, the systems themselves now have four principal
deficiencies in the context of servicing privatized agriculture.
*      Maintenance has been under-funded for well over a decade, so that systems are now in poor
condition, requiring an investment of around $600 per hectare to ensure their operation in the long term
*      The main systems were originally designed to service a number of large farms, each of which
operated one of the pressurized systems. However, now the pressurized units commonly serve more than
200 individual farms. Consequently, the distribution of irrigation water to farmers is technically more
complicated and further compounded by the absence of system management staff at this level
*      The systems were planned without regard to pumping costs or economic constraints. Many
systems, and parts of systems, pump irrigation water to elevations over 100 meters above the source, at
which level irrigation is generally uneconomic. Energy is wasted at all levels in the schemes.
*      A shortage of field irrigation equipment is also a severe constraint to larger use of irrigation
water by farmers. The original equipment deteriorated or became obsolete and farmers do not have
enough financial resources to invest in new equipment. In many schemes, the original design provided
for high head sprinklers demanding high energy consumption in pumping.
There is a critical need for institutional reform in the irrigation sector, and although policy adjustments
have been made in the past, they fell short of redefining the role of government in the sector, and thus
failed to establish sustainability. In particular, during the socialist era, state-owned district-based
National Land Reclamation Enterprises (IEELIFs) were in charge of the irrigation and drainage sector,
and implemented all phases in the sector, from planning and construction to operations and maintenance,
and their scope covered irrigation, drainage, soil erosion control, flood control, and land reclamation. In
1991, the IEELIFs were transformed into autonomous commercial enterprises (SCELIFs), and were
permitted to diversify their activities beyond irrigation, drainage and land improvement. In response to
severely reduced budget allocations for their core activities, SCELIFs shifted their business focus to
private businesses in order to maintain their revenue. In 1994, the Government established a state-owned
centralized Regie Autonome of Land Improvement (RAIF in Romanian abbreviation) to consolidate all
SCELIFs. However, RAIF was unable to address the issues in the sector, and in May 2000 the
Government passed an emergency ordinance to transform RAIF into a new state-owned centralized
enterprise for land reclamation (SNIF). However, SNIF retained all the weaknesses of its predecessors,
the distractions of non-core business, the characteristics of state monopoly service provider focussed on a
top-down management and control with no attention to users. The past reforms failed to address the
issue of non-economic irrigation, all irrigation was supported, regardless of economics, with a subsidy
provided directly to SNIF, and water charges were uniform across the country.
With encouragement from the Bank and other donors, the Government has finally addressed the main
issues in the sector and will introduce a new Law that will incorporate fundamental policy changes.
There are six key elements in the new policy.
(a)    SNIF will be restructured into a Land Reclamation Agency (LRA), becoming a government
agency under the direct control of MAFF.
(b)    The LRA will be funded by direct budget transfers for its drainage, flood control and soil erosion
control functions, and wholly by water charges for irrigation.
(c)    The LRA will be restructured so that non-core activities are divested, management at the scheme
level is strengthened and re-oriented as a service provider responsive to its clients, and overall
management is streamlined and modernized.
(d)    The subsidy for irrigation will be transferred to users and will be set at a uniform rate (in per



3
ISDS
hectare terms) across the country.
(e)    The irrigation service charge will no longer be uniform, but will represent the full costs of
delivery from source to each individual supply point.
(f)    WUAs will be formed, ownership of the tertiary irrigation facilities will be transferred to them,
and the irrigation subsidy will be provided solely to them of. These policy reforms will thoroughly and
completely address the institutional deficiencies in the sector. Deterioration of the physical infrastructure
will be addressed by rehabilitation.
b. Project development objective
The primary objective of the project is to achieve sustainable and equitable use of irrigation water for
agriculture production. In particular, the project would comprise the following main activities: (a)
rehabilitation of deteriorated high priority irrigation facilities, (b) introduction of participatory irrigation
management through WUAs, and (c) restructuring of SNIF at both local and central levels.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project will support the government's institutional reforms. The project will make a major
contribution to sustainability in the sector by full rehabilitation of up 100,000 hectares of deteriorated
main irrigation systems located in the low pumping economic zone of irrigation, and essential repairs to
the most critical main lift pump stations supplying about another 400,000 hectares in this zone.
Rehabilitation will restore the systems to their as-built condition, and will include valuable
modernization designed to improve performance and reduce energy consumption.
The project will also support the policy reforms through strengthening the development of WUAs,
support for MAFF units responsible for supervision of WUAs and the new LRA, and through support for
restructuring SNIF into LRA and the introduction of flat rate demand side subsidies. Support for WUA
development will include a demand-driven facility for broad support, including rehabilitation of WUA
irrigation infrastructure, field irrigation equipment, office fumiture and equipment and communications.
To achieve these goals, the proposed project would have the following components:
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Irrigation Infrastructure (US$77.8 mi#iUnhave seven
sub-components: (i) rehabilitation of main systems in up to 100,000 hectares; (ni) repair of critical
deteriorated main lift pump stations (in the economic irrigation zones); (ill) provision of water metering
equipment at all supply points; (iv) monitoring and control equipment to improve irrigation management
on the rehabilitated systems; (v) design and supervision of the main rehabilitation works, (vi)
rehabilitation of tertiary irrigation facilities under WUA management for up to 200,000 hectares; and
(vii) design and supervision of rehabilitation of the tertiary irrigation facilities.
Component 2: Institutional Reform (US$3.9 milllbnj clude the following four
sub-components: (i) restructuring the state-owned irrigation and land reclamation agency (SNIF) into
LRA, including addressing the divestiture program and re-organization of the agency into a more
effective and responsive service provider, (iii) support to the MAFF units for supervision of WUAs and
the LRA, (iv) economic analysis and development of an irrigation sector strategy for closure of
non-economic schemes, and (v) feasibility studies for the second stage rehabilitation sub-projects.
Component 3: Technologies for reduced energy consumption (US$1.1 milliowjl comprise a
technical study and a pilot/demonstration program to introduce energy savings for WUAs by employment
of lower head field irrigation equipment and pressure pumping equipment.



4
ISDS
Component 4: Project Administration and Implementation Support (US$4.6 millionjvill include
the incremental staff and operating costs of the PMU, including equipment and transport, technical
assistance and training in critical fields, such as procurement and contract administration, audit and
monitoring and evaluation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will operate at a general and institutional level through the lower terraces of the economic
irrigation zone, but with particular impact in sub-projects that are to be rehabilitated  These are
described as follows.
Phase I Subproject - Sadova-Corabia
The Sadova-Corabia irrigation scheme is located in Doij and Olt Counties in Southern Romania, on the
north bank of the Danube River, between the Jiu and Olt Rivers. The total command area of the
irrigation scheme is 75,058 ha, consisting of 9,537 ha on the floodplain and 65,549 ha on the higher
elevation river terraces. The floodplain areas lie at elevations of about 20-25 meters, with uneven terrain
and very low slopes of about 0.5 percent. The first terrace areas lie at elevations of about 90 meters,
generally with slopes of about 3 percent, falling north to south towards the Danube.
The climate in the Sadova-Corabia irrigation scheme is temperate continental, with cool and relatively
dry winters, hot summers, and a rainfall maximum in late spring or early summer The warm summer
temperatures and low annual rainfall with a short summer peak contribute to the marked aridity of the
area. The mean annual rainfall at Corabia is 519.3mm, varying between 700mm in wet years and nearly
300mm in dry years. The dominant winds in the area are from the east, followed by winds from the west
and southwest quadrants.
The sub-project draws its water from the Danube River, which is the subject of the Danube River
Protection Convention (1994) to reduce pollution, maintain and improve water resources, and develop
regional water management co-operation. The Danube Delta is of very high conservation value and is
designated as a Ramsar site and a Biosphere Reserve under the UNESCO Man and Biosphere Program.
Diffuse pollution from agricultural land contributes to environmental problems in the main river, the
delta and the Black Sea. However, the water resources of the Danube are of good quality (Class I),
suitable for drinking when properly treated, and for salmonid fisheries and irrigation. In Romania, the
Danube supplies irrigation water to 62 schemes and is a receiving body for domestic and industrial
wastewaters and irrigation return drainage. In the lower Danube, the mean discharge varies between
5,390 cubic meters per second in Orsova and 6,285 in Isaccea. The maximum discharge during the
spring-summer period reaches about 17,000 cubic meters per second, while minimum discharges are in
the order of 2,200-2,700 cubic meters per second in the spring, and 1,900-2,200 in the summer and
autumn.
Abstraction for the sub-project is not significant in comparison, generally around 1% of low flow. For
the overall scheme, including the part not considered for rehabilitation, the abstraction is expected to
drop from 52 cubic meters per second when the scheme was fully functional (before 1990) to some 40
cubic meters per second, a reduction of 23% of the maximum water abstraction rate. This reduction is
due to improved efficiency in water management and use after rehabilitation and a 50% reduction in the



5
ISDS
irrigated area on the upper terrace. In total abstraction terms, the total volume abstracted would represent
less than 0.1 % of total Danube average annual flow.
The main aquifer in the region is found in the sandy and sand-with-gravel strata of the Tratesti stratum.
The extent and continuity of the perched water tables are not known. Natural spring lines occur along the
front of the terraces augmented by through-flow from excess irrigation water. With the development of
irrigation during the 1970s, groundwater levels rose significantly, to within 2m of the surface. And
although drainage works were constructed during the early 1980s, groundwater levels have still not
returned to pre-irrigation levels.
The soils on the western side of the terraces are predominantly arenosols, with coarse sandy textures,
high infiltration rates, low levels of organic matter and poor soil moisture holding capacity. These soils
are developed upon loessial deposits and sand dunes that have been partially leveled in irrigation areas.
They lie in the irrigation suitability classes I and II. Soils on the eastern side of the area are sandy
chemozems characterized by a sandy-clay texture, lower permeabilities, and higher contents of organic
matter and soil moisture holding capacity. These soils are developed on fluvial clays. They lie mainly in
irrigation suitability classes I and II. The soils on the floodplain are mainly of fluvial origin with variable
textures. They tend to lie in irrigation suitability classes III and IV, and have been provided with
drainage. After irrigation commenced in the 1970s groundwater levels rose in the first terrace, and
specific locations became waterlogged.  The government treated the situation with surface and
sub-surface drainage, and the water table fell to acceptable levels. There are now no significant areas of
waterlogging.
Much of the natural ecology in the Sadova-Corabia irrigation area disappeared following the onset of
irrigation in the 1970s. The sand dunes on the terraces and the floodplains of the Danube have been
partially leveled for agricultural purposes. The plant communities on the sandy soils include typical
species, such as Agropyrum repens, Agrostis alba, Alopecurus pratensis and Poa pratensis. Small areas
of woodland occur in Doij and Olt counties. The fauna in the project area is characteristic of steppic
grasslands, with the addition of aquatic species of bird which nest and feed along the Danube. There are
no nationally designated environmental sites in the irrigation service area. However, there is a small (8.0
hectare) remnant of untouched dunes in the Dabuleni Research Station which will not be affected by the
project, and 302 hectare of Branistea Catarilor Forest, in Obarsia and Stefan cel Mare communes, in Olt
County, outside the service area of the sub-project which will also not be affected.
The Sadova-Corabia irrigation system is located across two counties, Doij and Olt. The 40,333ha of the
rehabilitation scheme cover five communes in Dolj and six in Olt. There are numerous villages within
these areas. The regional administrative and commercial centers for the project area are Cnjova and
Corabia.
Phase I Sub-project - Terasa Nicoreti-Tecuci
The Terasa Nicoreti-Tecuci irrigation scheme is located between the Siret and Barlad Rivers in the
Danube River Basin. The sub-project draws water resources from the Siret River. Mean monthly flow
peaks in late spring and early summer reflecting the rainfall pattern. The annual volume of river flow is
about 4,807 MCM, which corresponds to an average annual flow of 152 cubic meters per second, and
although the current sub-project abstraction is a significant proportion (6% of average annual flow rate),
there is no further demand before the confluence with the Danube. However, for the overall scheme,
including the part not considered for rehabilitation, the abstraction is expected to drop from 8.95 cubic
meter per second when the scheme was fully functional (before 1990) to some 7.2 cubic meters per
second, meaning a 20% reduction of total maximum water abstraction. This reduction is due to improved



6
ISDS
efficiency in water management and use after rehabilitation and shrink of irrigated areas on the upper
terrace by 40%. Subsequently, the proportion of abstraction will drop to 4.8% of total average river flow
rate. The water quality is reasonable (Class 11) and suitable for irrigation.
The general landform in the study area consists of extensive, gently sloping river terraces and
floodplains. It is mainly developed on the first terrace of the Siret River, but also includes a small area
on the Barlad River floodplain in the eastem part of the scheme. The climate in the study area is
temperate continental, with cold winters and warm humid summers; the heaviest rainfall is in late spring
and early summer. Despite summer rainfall there is a soil moisture deficit through the growing season,
requiring supplementary irrigation. Winds are light, with calm conditions prevailing for about a third of
the time.
The main groundwater aquifer on the terrace is reported to occur at depths in excess of 20m, with
overlying perched water lenses at depths of about 10m in the Holocene sands and gravels. On the Barlad
floodplain, groundwater levels are within 5m and in some locations within 2m of the ground surface,
however, there is no record that groundwater levels were higher at full development of the scheme. The
soils on the first terrace are chemozems with a loamy texture, good permeability, and 2-3.5% organic
matter Concentrations of N, P and K are poor to moderate suggesting exhaustion from extensive
cultivation. On the Barlad plain, the soils are generally poorly developed and affected by high
groundwater and secondary salinity. They tend to have a loamy and loamy-clay texture, medium
permeability, 1-2% organic matter and poor supply of N and P. Soil erosion by wind or water is not a
significant issue.
Very little natural habitats remain in the study area due to the conversion of steppic grasslands to dryland
and irrigated agriculture. There are two areas of woodland remnants on the terrace, and areas not suitable
for cultivation on the floodplains tend to be vegetated by grasses cropped short by grazing. There are
areas of riverine woodland, and Halophytic assemblages are found where secondary salinisation has
occurred. There are no nationally designated environmental sites in the irrigation service area.
The irrigation scheme extends across several communes, with most of the land lying in Nicoresti,
Cosmesti, Tecuci, Movileni, and Draganesti. The main town in the study area is Tecucl, with a
population of about 48,000. There are also a number of small villages highways.
Phase II Subprojects
The project would also finance the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes covering some 50,000 hectares.
The candidate schemes would be identified during the first year of implementation, and environmental
assessment and public environmental consultation would be carried out in accordance with the World
Bank's operational policy similarly to the two Phase I subprojects above. The selection of the Phase 11
subprojects would be subject to the World Bank's prior approval, and the World Bank will review and
clear all the documents before issuing such an approval.
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The propo,sed project would focus on the rehabilitation of existing deteriorated irrigation and
drainage infrastructure, most of which is 20 to 40 years old. In consequence, the social benefits of sustained
system life and improved service will be supplemented by the physical impacts of reduced water losses and
cleaned drains to impact positively on the environment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered



7
ISDS
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes C' No   C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            C} Yes * No   C, TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C Yes * No    C, TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   CYes * No     -TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               09 Yes * No   C, TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                C Yes *No     IC TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       C Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 C Yes * No    C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)   *         Yes 0 No     TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 C} Yes 0 No   C- TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
Environmental Assessment
Environmental Impact Assessments were carried out by intemational consultants during project
preparation for the two first phase irrigation sub-projects consistent with the provisions of the World
Bank OP 4.01 and Romanian environmental legislation. EIAs will be repeated for further sub-projects
taken up under the second phase of the project.
The two environmental impact assessments determined that rehabilitation of the schemes would have
mainly positive impacts on the environment. In addition to infrastructure rehabilitation, the project will
also introduce far-reaching institutional reforms that will improve scheme management and impact
positively on the environment. The project will support pricing and subsidy reforms, the restructuring of
SNIF into LRA and the associated development of irrigation water users associations. The impacts of the
institutional reforms will be to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation, to increase the
involvement of beneficiaries in irrigation, and to ensure the long-term future of irrigation.
Consequently, the project will have a number of positive impacts.  The environmental impact
assessments for the two first phase schemes indicate that the proposed project would have relatively few
adverse environmental impacts during construction and over the life of the project, and those that are
anticipated are considered low or not significant. The main adverse potential environmental impacts
would be:
*      increases in pollution loads in soils, groundwater and surface drainage from chemical and
organic fertilizers and pesticides; and
*      some risk of rising groundwater levels in specific localities.
Increased pollution from agrochemicals
A long-term potential environmental impact would be a possible increase in traces of agrochemicals in
groundwater, the drainage networks and nearby streams.  The current situation is that within the
perimeter of the existing irrigation systems, which total about 3.0 million ha, only about 15 to 20% is



8
ISDS
currently irrigated, and even in this area the use of irrigation water is comparatively low.  However,
almost all this land is cultivated, relying on the uncertain rainfall, and with a lower productivity. In
consequence, the current use of agro-chemical is at a very much lower level than at full development
under the former regime in the late 1 980s. Under the project, irrigation is expected to redevelop, but not,
however, to the earlier level. The most that can be expected in the years ahead is about 1.0 million ha of
irrigation concentrated on the lower levels, and even here there will be significant difference in
comparison with a decade ago. First, with rationalization of the power charges, and farmers paying an
increasing share of the costs, the application of irrigation water will never reach the earlier peaks.
Secondly, and similarly, the more cost conscious and economically aware farmers will not invest in the
levels of agro-chemicals previously experienced. So that, whilst agro-chemical levels will rise above
current levels in the drains and groundwater, the levels of the late 1980s will not be repeated. In no case
would it be expected that agrochemical usage would approach those of farm areas in the EU, North
America or Japan.
In conclusion, some increase in the contamination of soils, groundwater and surface drainage by
chemical and organic fertilizers and pesticides may result from the project. This could potentially affect
public health since groundwater is used as a drinking water source in the smaller villages surrounding the
irrigation command area.
Monitoring of groundwater wells for drinking water would be implemented as a matter of urgency, to
determine the level of contamination, particularly with regard to microbiological parameters, nitrates and
pesticides If the results exceed Romanian or EC standards for drinking water, alternative sources of
water would have to be provided to the villages, and the PMU would bring the situation to the attention
of other projects related to water supply. It is government policy to provide potable water to villages and
replace shallow wells. Romania has three programs operating in this field-the Social Program for
Water Supplies to Villages, the Program for Rural Development (World Bank), and the SAPART
Program for Agriculture and Rural Development-and at least one village in the project area is already
benefiting.
The increased pollution loads in surface drainage from a single scheme are unlikely to affect water
quality in the Danube significantly due to dilution capacity. However, noting the significance of the
River Danube and the international importance and sensitivity of the environment of the lower marshes
the project will include measures to minimize the runoff of pollutants.  Measures will include
strengthening the agricultural extension services in rehabilitated schemes to advise and instruct farmers
on two aspects of irrigated agriculture:
*      the proper use of agro-chemicals to minimize pollution in a sensitive area; and
*      better on-farm irrigation management, which would contribute to a reduction in agrochemical
runoff.
Rising groundwater levels
In the Nicoresti-Tecuci scheme, there is no evidence of high groundwater, or that at full utilization in the
past there were any locations were groundwater rose to damaging levels and affected crops or caused
salinization.  However, with increased irrigation after rehabilitation and increased system utilization,
there will be more infiltration in the future, and it is prudent to monitor groundwater levels on the Barlad
flood plain. A provision for this is included in the monitoring program.
The Sadova-Corabia scheme has a history of rising groundwater.  Some years after first construction,



9
ISDS
water tables began to rise in the first terrace area. This was particularly serious in spring in certain
locations where impermeable strata intersected the surface.  At its worst, some 2,400 ha became
waterlogged, and about 7,000 ha had water tables that had risen to within one meter of the surface. In
response, the government constructed a system of surface drainsOmitted in the original construction because
of the generally light textured permeable soils in the area. Drainage was provided in the initial construction for the
low-lying floodplain area, so that waterlogging did not occur in this lower and more vulnerable arem the first
terrace and a small area of buried pipe drains (1400 ha). These treatments successfully eliminated the
waterlogging, and currently the groundwater table is close to the surface in only one limited location.
However, it is clear that after rehabilitation, there will be an increase in the application of irrigation
water, and the risk of waterlogging may be revived. However, the project will include rehabilitation of
the drainage system, and the repairs to canal lining will reduce the losses of irrigation water currently
experienced, and further it is unlikely that, with farmers paying a part of the cost of water, irrigation
applications will rise to former levels. So that whilst it is considered unlikely that waterlogging will
re-occur, it is prudent to monitor future groundwater levels, and a provision for this is included in the
monitoring program to be executed by the project.
Projects in International Waters
The international waterways concerned by the irrigation project would be the Siret River and Danube
River. The Danube River is the natural boundary of Romania with Serbia (on about 150 km), Bulgaria
(on about 400 km), and Ukraine (on about 100 km) through one of its Delta branches (Chilia Branch).
Paragraph 2 of OP 7.50 states that the policy applies particularly to irrigation projects that involve the
use or potential pollution of international waterways. As a rule, in projects govemed by OP 7.50, the
borrower (beneficiary state) is required to notify all relevant riparian states of planned project activities.
However, paragraph 7 of OP 7.50 allows for exceptions to the Bank's requirement to notify other
riparians, stating that the exception applies "For any ongoing schemes, projects involving additions or
alterations that require rehabilitation, construction, or other changes that in the judgment of the Bank (i)
will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not be
adversely affected by the other riparians' possible water use. This exception applies only to minor
additions or alterations to the ongoing scheme; it does not cover works and activities that would exceed
the original scheme, change its nature, or so alter or expand its scope and extent as to make it appear a
new or different scheme."
The Irrigation Project proposes to rehabilitate ongoing schemes but does not aim to expand the irrigation
areas or increase the extraction amount of water from the original design. In our assessment, the
proposed project will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians
nor will it be adversely affected by the other riparians possible water use. Therefore, the exception to the
mandate to notify riparians, provided for in OP 7.50 paragraph 7(a) applies. In accordance with
paragraph 8(c) of the OP, it has been assessed that the project would not cause appreciable harm to the
other riparians, and will not be appreciably harmed by the other riparian possible water use. In this
context, on October 16, 2002, an exception was granted
The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) will include the map that shows the project areas in relation to
the international waterways.
Il.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
While the impact of rehabilitation of a single scheme is unlikely to have any significant effects, the



10
ISDS
cumulative impact of widespread rehabilitation of irrigated agriculture in Romania could have a
significant impact on the delivery of nutrients (N and P) and agro-chemicals to downstream areas, such as
the Danube Delta and the Black Sea, and on aquatic habitats. Consequently, the project will include
measures to mitigate pollution loads from agricultural land.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
See lI.D.lb above.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Between 1993 and 1995, the Government of Romania commissioned (with Bank financing) an
exhaustive study to evaluate the economics of rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in the country, the
objective being to identify most economic means of maximizing the utility of the past investment in the
sector. The proposed project will work within the framework of this study, which has already evaluated
alternatives and established priorities for investment. The two first phase sub-projects fall within the
high priority bands established by that study, these essentially focus investment in rehabilitation in the
lower areas where pumping for irrigation will not exceed about 70m. The project will not support
irrigation in areas above that limit where energy costs are prohibitive.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental
National policies for irrigated agriculture and the environment are developed by the Ministry of
Agriculture, Food and Forestry (MAFF) and the Ministry of Water and Environmental Protection
(MWEP) respectively.
The environmental legislation is Law No. 137/1995 on environmental protection, complemented and
amended by Government Emergency Ordinance No. 91/2002. This includes provisions for undertaking
environmental impact assessment (EIA) studies of new and existing projects including irrigation
schemes, control of dangerous substances including pesticides, and the protection of water resources, air,
soils, terrestrial ecosystems, protected areas, natural monuments, and the protection of human
settlements. The new framework law on the environment brought changes to institutionial arrangemiients
regarding the environment and the EIA legislation into line with EU directives, mainly with regard to
procedural requirements.
The main features of the environmental management plan (which is included as an annex to the Project
Implementation Plan) are related to the issues raised in 11-D-la) above, and include the following
monitoring and mitigation activities:
Action                                               Issue
MONITORING
Groundwater and surface water quality              pollution by agro-chemicals
Soil erosion, discharge of nutrients, chemical analyses  pollution by agro-chemicals
Groundwater depth and salinization                 Waterlogging
MITIGATION
Strengthen extension services (optimum use         pollution by agro-chemicals
agro-chemicals) in cooperation with ongoing Agriculture



11
ISDS
Pollution Reduction Project (that aims to reduce discharge of
nutrients in drainage water) and introduction of
environmentally sustainable agriculture management practices
Alternative drinking water sources [a]                pollution by agro-chemicals
Strengthen extension services (improved irrigation)  Waterlogging
Rehabilitation of drains (Sadova-Corabia scheme)      Waterlogging
Additional drainage [a] (Sadova-Corabia scheme)       Waterlogging
Notes
a)     If monitoring indicates unacceptable pollution of wells in any village, the project wvill bring the situation to the
attention of the ongoing rural water supply projects (Social Program for Water Supplies to Villages, Program for Rural
Development in Romania - World Bank and SAPARD Program for Agricultural and Rural Development)
Implementation of the environmental management plan will be discussed and agreed with the
Government during negotiations, has been adequately costed and will be supervised by the project. It is
anticipated that the restructured Land Reclamation Agency will be charged with environmental
monitoring in accordance with current EU policy. The project will strengthen this activity (through
training and resources) on the rehabilitated schemes as a pilot and model for later wider adoption by
Land Reclamation Agency. The project will include resources for monitoring and for implementation of
the identified mitigation measures. In addition, the project will fund the EAs of the schemes to be
included in Phase 11.
International waters
An exemption has been obtained (see above).
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The PPU has translated and distributed the environmental impact assessments for the two schemes to be
rehabilitated to the Ministry of Water and Environmental Protection, the Environmental Protection
Inspectorates at Craiova, Slatina and Galati, three County Councils (Dolj, Olt and Galati), and to the
concemed Commune Councils.     The foregoing have confirmed their agreement to the proposed
rehabilitation.
The PPU has also carried out public consultation workshops for discussions on the EIA and WB
safeguard policies, the workshops were advertised in the National press, open to all stakeholders,
including direct beneficiaries, environmental NGOs, interested institutions, and government agencies,
copies of the translated EIAs were distributed.  Sixteen people attended the public workshop for
Sadova-Corabia irrigation scheme on October 30, 2002, and twenty-two at Terasa Nicoresti-Tecuci
scheme on November 6, 2002. Both public meetings endorsed the rehabilitation proposals.
Beneficiary participation is essential to irrigation development. A participatory approach would be
incorporated throughout the project, so that beneficiaries are involved in all stages from identification of
the rehabilitation requirements, to design and construction supervision, to final system transfer. The
primary mechanism for participation will be water users associations, which will be established based on
hydrological elements of the irrigation system. Through the water users associations beneficiaries will
participate in rehabilitation planning, design, construction supervision, and will eventually take
responsibility for operation and. This will not only ensure the selection of irrigation facilities where
farmers are committed to irrigated agriculture and optimize the allocation of available funds, but will also
help establish farmers' ownership of the on-farm facilities, ensure proper maintenance and operation, and



12
ISDS
minimize the risk of deferred maintenance and neglect in the future.
E. Safeguards Classiflcation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/9/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/6/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            12/10/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Pem                ework:                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan                                  Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Toru Konishi                                01/13/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:



13
ISDS
Approved by:                    Name                                           Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                  01/22/03
Sector Manager/Director:        Joseph R. Goldberg                             01/14/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
[3R _"A X                 _      IS   E   MP I  'ESNdCW&CE S   0



