                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                               Report No: AC132
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/25/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                                   Project ID: P076826
Project: Judicial Reform Support Project                      Task Team Leader: Friedrich Peloschek
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 22, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m): 100.00
Bank Approval: June 29, 2004                                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LEGEC                                          Sector: Law and justice (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution
Status: Lending                                               mechanisms (P); Legal institutions for a market
                                                              economy (S); Access to law and justice (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is the improvement of the selected priority areas of the justice system.
The justice system is defined as the institutions responsible for creating and implementing law including
those concerned with dispute resolution.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Components:
1. The Courts of General Jurisdiction Component aims at strengthening the capacity of the courts of
general jurisdiction to resolve cases fairly and efficiently. The component has four subcomponents:
1.1 The Modernization of Case Management Subcomponent will promote strengthening selected aspects
of case management through:
(1.1.a) optimizing case management processes within the framework of applicable procedural codes;
(1.1.b) preparation of recommendations to amend the procedural codes to allow implementation of case
management efficiency improvements; and
(1.1.c) upgrading the technological infrastructure, including both hardware and software, at the court
level to facilitate the implementation of the new case management procedures.
1.2 The Modernization of Court Administration Subcomponent will promote strengthening selected
aspects of court administration through:
(1.2.a) optimizing court administration within the courts, including justices of the peace, and the Judicial
Department in the areas of human resources, finance, physical infrastructure and information
management including statistics and forms;
(1.2.b) definition of new roles of court staff in case management (chancellery staff, judicial assistants,
court administrators, consultants and court secretaries);
(1.2.c) system-wide implementation of the court recording and records management systems.
1.3 The Modernization of the Infrastructure for Skills and Information Management Subcomponent will
support: (1.3.a) the development and implementation of training programs and supporting infrastructure,
including trainers and technology, to develop the necessary skills and facilitate behavioral change of the
judges and courts staff;
(1.3.b) strengthening the central advisory capacity to support the implementation of the new case
management and court administration procedures and to provide the judges and other courts staff with
advice e.g. best practice on resolving difficult issues and improving performance;
(1.3.c) creating the infrastructure for a unified information environment for the court system.
1.4 The Public Education in Support of the Judiciary Subcomponent will support a better understanding

                                                        2
                                                                                                         ISDS



by the public of the judges' authority and responsibilities and develop a more constructive relationship
between the judges and the public.

2. The Arbitrazh Courts Component aims at strengthening the capacity of the arbitrazh courts to resolve
cases fairly and efficiently. The component has three subcomponents:
2.1 The Modernization of Case Management Subcomponent will promote strengthening selected aspects
of case management through:
(2.1.a) optimizing case management processes within the framework of applicable procedural codes;
(2.1.b) preparation of recommendations to amend the procedural codes to allow implementation of case
management efficiency improvements; and
(2.1.c) upgrading the technological infrastructure, including both hardware and software, at the court
level to facilitate the implementation of the new case management procedures.
2.2 The Modernization of Court Administration Subcomponent will promote strengthening selected
aspects of court administration through:
(2.2.a) optimizing court administration within the courts in the areas of human resources, finance,
physical infrastructure and information management including statistics and forms;
(2.2.b) definition of new roles of court staff in case management (chancellery staff, judicial assistants,
court administrators, consultants and court secretaries);
(2.2.c) system-wide implementation of the court recording and records management systems.
2.3 The Modernization of the Infrastructure for Skills and Information Management Subcomponent will
support: (2.3.a) the development and implementation of training programs and supporting infrastructure,
including trainers and technology, to develop the necessary skills and facilitate behavioral change of the
judges and courts staff;
(2.3.b) strengthening the central advisory capacity to support the implementation of the new case
management and court administration procedures and to provide the judges and other courts staff with
advice e.g. best practice on resolving difficult issues and improving performance;
(2.3.c) creating the infrastructure for a unified information environment for the court system.

3. The Public Education in Law at the Secondary Schools Component aims at improving the legal
knowledge of the younger generation. It will build on the positive experience generated by the Legal
Reform Project and support efforts to mainstream law as a high school course across Russia.

4. The Access to Legal Services Component aims at strengthening the mechanisms for providing access
to essential legal services and has two subcomponents:
4.1 The Promotion of Sustainable Legal Clinics Subcomponent will help to establish and strengthen, in a
sustainable way, thirty to fifty legal clinics, primarily in the geographical areas with concentration of
low-income population.
4.2 Developing a Comprehensive Public Policy on Access to Legal Services Subcomponent will make
available for policymakers the international experience in analyzing the legal, social and economic
aspects of the provision of legal services provision and in assessing the effectiveness of alternative
policies aimed at ensuring adequate access to essential legal services for all citizens.

5. Promotion of Alternative Dispute Resolution Component aims at improving conditions for the
development of ADR and includes three subcomponents:
5.1 The Development of Private ADR Subcomponent will support:
(5.1.a) developing proposals for continuing improvement of the policy and regulatory framework for
private ADR; and (5.1.c) targeted capacity building and training in ADR.
5.2 The Development of ADR within the Judicial System Subcomponent will support developing
proposals for continuing improvement of the policy and regulatory framework for ADR within the
judicial system;

                                                        3
                                                                                                        ISDS



5.3. The Public Awareness Campaign on ADR Subcomponent will promote raising public awareness in
the opportunities and benefits of ADR both within and outside the judicial system.

6. The Applied Research Component aims at strengthening the capacity to conduct multidisciplinary
applied research in support of justice sector modernization.

7. The Strengthening Regulatory Capacity of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade
Component aims at improving the MoEDT's capacity in the areas of creation and implementation of laws
and regulations and includes two subcomponents:
7.1. The Regulatory Drafting Capacity will support strengthening the capacity of the MoEDT to achieve
a greater integration of policies and regulations including both laws and sublaws and to better assess the
likely impacts of proposed regulatory actions
7.2. The WTO Regime Implementation Subcomponent will support creating selected elements of
institutional infrastructure for implementing the WTO regime in Russia.
8. The Project Management Component aims at providing organizational and expert support to project
implementation.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented primarily in Moscow, with subsequent roll-out of computerization
programs to the regions. No environmental or social characteristics of any area and/or population will be
affected.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: The project does not include any civil works or rehabilitation of any infrastructure. The project
will finance only technical assistance and goods procurement (computer technology).


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

                                                      4
                                                                                                        ISDS




II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The Project does not anticipate compliance with any safeguard policies.




II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Since the initiation of the project concept preparation, the Task Team has sought to engage a broad range
of stakeholders in the justice system. During the diagnostic review, interviews were held with judges,
court support personnel, lawyers, court users and NGOs. The Task Team made the creation of working
groups for each branch of the court system a condition of project concept preparation. Such working
groups are composed of representatives of the judiciary, court administrators and experts in various
aspects of court management. Upon the establishment of the working groups, the Task Team organized a
workshop in order to review the findings of the diagnostic studies so as to further develop the project
concept. In parallel, the Task Team has established channels of communication to the recently created
federal Union of Lawyers and regional bar associations including those in Moscow and St. Petersburg.

The Task Team is collaborating very closely with stakeholders in the area of alternative dispute
resolution including the Chamber of Commerce, the Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs
and the newly created Center for Dispute Resolution. It is expected that a special working group will be
established to lead the preparation of the ADR related activities.

While the proposed Applied Research Component has received an endorsement from all relevant
counterparts, the structure of the Russian Government does not offer an obvious candidate for leading the
efforts on preparation of such activities. Assurances have been received that a working group composed
of representatives of relevant institutions such as Presidential Administration, MoEDT, Judiciary,
academia and, potentially, MoJ will be established.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are

                                                    5
                                                                                                    ISDS



         technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Friedrich Peloschek                                June 4, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                           June 6, 2003
Sector Director                      Cheryl W. Gray                                     June 6, 2003

