                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                               Report No: AC116
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/10/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                                  Project ID: P079494
Project: Regional Banks and Small & Medium                   Task Team Leader: Hormoz Aghdaey
Enterprises Development
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 15, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m): 300.00
Bank Approval: February 17, 2004                             IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPF                                         Sector: Banking (50%); Micro- and SME finance
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           (50%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                             development (P); Small and medium enterprise
                                                             support (P); Other financial and private sector
                                                             development (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The goal of the Project is to stimulate regional economic activity and sustainable growth through
developing regional banks and small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The main developmental
objectives will include:

(i)     Supporting institutional development of the medium size banks at the regional level;
(ii)    Improving small and medium enterprises access to finance; and
(iii)   Improving enabling environment for SME growth and financial intermediation.

The policy objective is to achieve elimination of interest rate subsidies for SMEs.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project would have three main components: (i) development of private medium size regional
banks; (ii) a line of credit to provide medium and long-term credit resources for SMEs through eligible
participating regional banks; and (iii) improvement of business environment for SME growth and
financial intermediation.

Given the diversity of regions and potentially eligible participating financial intermediaries (PFIs), the
project would primarily focus on regions where the overall business environment and possibility of
identifying eligible regional banks would be strong. Regional selection criteria will take into account
various economic development indicators, the state of development of the regional banking infrastructure
and SME sector, and commitment of Regional Authorities to reform. This would increase the probability
of successful project implementation and its developmental impact.

A. Development of Regional Banks

The component aims to strengthen the institutional capacity of private medium sized regional banks.
Technical assistance to banks would seek to: (i) strengthen financial intermediation and resource
allocation capacities of recipient banks, especially their capacity to identify, appraise, price and manage
financial and operational risks; (ii) enhance internal controls, improve corporate governance, accounting
and auditing, asset and liability management, and human resource management; (iii) introduce

                                                        2
                                                                                                        ISDS



standardized SME tailored financial products; and (iv) improve banking technology, including the
upgrading of management information and other systems and controls that are required for minimizing
risks involved in lending to SMEs. This component would be to some extent independent from the Credit
Line component making funding available also to the banks that did not qualify for the line of credit, but
who may still receive TA funding to develop their institutional capacity.

The regional banks would repay the institutional development funding received under the Project to the
MOF. The provision of funds would be contingent upon the banks having and implementing institutional
development programs (IDP), including measures agreed upon as a part of their strategic business plans.
MOF will explore various softer lending terms to the banks for technical assistance (e.g., same interest as
Bank Loan, possibly mix with the grant funds, and accepting collateral in the form of the bank
management guarantees rather than an asset-based collateral).

B. Medium and Long-Term Funding for SMEs

A credit line component would provide medium and long-term credit resources to Private Financial
Intermediaries for on lending to creditworthy private SMEs for viable projects at market rates. Maturity
for sub-loans will be between one to five years with up to one-two-year grace period. Sub-loans will be
used to finance capital investments and permanent working capital. The eligible PFIs will enter into
Subsidiary Loan Agreements (SLA) with the MOF. Within the framework of these agreements, the PFIs
will receive funds for up to five years, including up to two-three year grace period. Other loan terms and
conditions will be determined in the process of project preparation. Repayment from sub-loans will be
made available for further on lending to SMEs through eligible PFIs. The PFIs would also participate in
Part A of the Project to develop adequate capacity for medium- and long-term lending.

C. Improvement of Business and Lending Environment

This component would aim at supporting improvements in the business and regulatory environment
including (i) assistance to regional and federal authorities in the development of legislation required for
deregulation and reduction of administrative barriers (including entry and exit, inspections, licensing and
certification), and simplification of the existing tax legislation; (ii) preparation of studies related to
business climate monitoring, SME related regulatory impact assessment, etc. and (iii) training for the
representatives of Regional Authorities, Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCI), entrepreneurs, and
banks in internationally proven approaches to creating a favorable environment for SMEs.


This component would also support: (i) development of an adequate legal framework governing the
activities of credit information bureaus (CIB) and the system of centralized movable collateral registry
(pledge registry); (ii) research and feasibility studies (including developing rules, regulations and
operations procedures) underpinning these and credit guarantee scheme (CGS) initiatives; (iii) designing
streamlined collateral foreclosure procedures for SMEs; and (iv) possibly supporting the establishment of
actual institutions in this area.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Russia is composed of 89 regions. Given the diversity of regions and potentially eligible PFIs, the project
would primarily focus on regions where the overall business environment and chances of identifying
eligible regional banks would be greatest. Regional selection criteria are currently being developed and
will take into account various economic development indicators, the state of development of the regional
banking infrastructure and SME sector, and commitment of Regional Authorities to reform. It is

                                                      3
                                                                                                       ISDS



envisaged that 7 pilot regions would be selected to participate in the Project. These regions will be
identified at a later stage.


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments: The proposed Project will not finance a specific set of pre-identified subloans. The project will
not finance land transactions by beneficiaries, including either involuntary acquisition of land under eminent
domain, or commercial land transactions that may cause involuntary displacement of people. The
classification of the environmental impacts of the subprojects will be determined during project
implementation by the PFIs and the PIU. The Project was thus classified as Environmental Category FI, as
specified under the provisions of OP (paragraphs 11 and 12) BP/GP 4.01. Special implementation
arrangements will be put in place a per standard credit line/FI procedures to ensure adequate screening and
environmental review process of sub-loan applications. These procedures will be spelled out in a detailed
Environmental Review developed specifically for this Project.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                    Policy                                         Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes      No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes      No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes      No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes      No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes      No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes      No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes      No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes      No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes      No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes      No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The proposed Project will not finance a specific set of pre-identified investments. Funds will be
intermediated to SMEs by PFIs. No specific sector has been pre-determined and PFIs will solicit sub-loan
applications based on market principles which could result in a variety of sector representation ranging
from food, light industry, construction to retail trade and catering. Financing under the credit line will
cover small loans (up to $0.5 million) to finance capital equipment and incremental working capital.
There are thus no safeguard or environmental issues identified at this stage. Special screening and
environmental assessment procedures will be put in place as described below to process incoming
sub-loan applications. Remaining Loan components will provide technical assistance to strengthen
institutional capacity of financial intermediaries and improve regional business climate. There are no
environmental issues related to these activities.

                                                      4
                                                                                                        ISDS



II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The Operational Guidelines will include all necessary provisions for environment safeguards.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Various safeguards are being built into the design of the project to ensure that funds will be onlent
according to the project's legal agreements and Operating Guidelines. A detailed Environmental review
manual will specify the guidelines for identification and analysis of environmental impacts of subprojects
and will describe the mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental screening and review of
subprojects. The following specific arrangements will be put in place:

·        The potential beneficiary (the SME) will prepare an initial sub-project concept, including the
descriptive portion of the Environmental Screening Form (developed by the Bank). The subproject will
be first appraised by the PFI, including its environmental aspects. The PFIs will screen the required
information submitted by the sub-borrowers on proposed subprojects in early subproject preparation
stage and inform the sub-borrowers of the environmental assessment requirements, if any, and
subsequent follow-up requirements for sub-loan processing (based on the environmental requirements of
appropriate Federal and Regional/Local Authorities and the applicable environmental policies of the
Project).

·        The PFI will make a preliminary classification of the subproject into one of 4 environmental
categories established by the Bank. Should the subproject require preparation of an Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA), the PFI will advise the potential beneficiary about the environmental impact
assessment requirements applicable to the subproject. The cost of the EIA will be borne by the
beneficiary and the scope of the necessary EIA will vary depending on the nature and location of a
subproject. PIU will supervise the PFIs environmental evaluation and monitoring mechanisms.

·        Once the EIA (if required) is completed, it will be submitted (by the potential beneficiary) to the
national environmental protection authorities. The environmental protection authorities would review the
environmental analysis and report their findings (in writing) to the potential beneficiary. The
responsibility to obtain all necessary permits and approvals for the subproject as required by the
environmental regulations will be borne by the beneficiary. The PFI will provide its clearance based on
the above.

·        During subproject implementation, the PFI will monitor the implementation of the environmental
mitigation plan, as applicable. In case a breach of environmental regulations or safe and sound business
practices is suspected, an environmental audit will be required.

·        The Project operating cost will include adequate provisions necessary to defray the cost of
environmental experts at the level of the PIU which will include environmental staff capable of
familiarizing participating banks and their enterprise sub-borrowers with the project's environmental
review process and requirements, by way of workshops or individual sessions. The PIU will review the
capability of the banks at the time of their entry into the project. The Bank will also review the

                                                     5
                                                                                                        ISDS



environmental assessment capability of the PIU and PFIs through regular supervision.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As mentioned above, the individual enterprise sub-borrowers cannot be identified at this stage, nor can
the subprojects. During project preparation, however, the Borrower's project preparation team and the
Bank's missions visited several regions, met with Regional and local Authorities and had preliminary
discussions with potential participating banks on the conditions for participation and onlending. The
Bank and the Borrower's project preparation team are planning to assess 20 to 40 additional banks and
meet with GOR representatives, Central Bank of Russia and CCI to discuss the project safeguard
requirements prior to appraisal.

Subprojects will be identified during Project implementation. At that time, the PIU, the participating
banks and sub-borrowers will be required to follow the Environmental Review Guidelines, including the
consultation and disclosure requirements for Category A or B subprojects, if any.

The Environmental Review Guidelines will be sent to ECSSD for review and clearance and upon
completion the guidelines will be disclosed in the Infoshop (prior to apprisal) and will be posted on the
Bank's Moscow office external website in both English and Russian for public disclosure.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[X] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/20/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          7/31/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           7/31/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure

                                                   6
                                                                                                    ISDS



Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Hormoz Aghdaey                                     6/10/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                           June 10, 2003
Sector Manager/Director              Tunc Tahsin Uyanik                                 May 8, 2003
Comments
The project is well conceived and will improve SME access to credit finance.

