Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC241 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 27, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P079032 
Project Name: REGIONAL COMMUNAL 
SERVICE REFORM (APL) 
Task Team Leader: Peter D. Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 29, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 100 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration 
(100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The project’s main objective is to support reforms of the HCS sector by shifting from relying almost completely on 
government provision of services to market-based mechanisms for service delivery.  The proposed project will focus 
on reforming the institutional relationships within the whole HCS sector, from housing management and 
maintenance to utility enterprises.  The main problems facing the sector now are an inability to cover costs, badly 
targeted social protection, an unsustainable role of municipal governments, and deteriorating infrastructure 
networks.  The existing multi-family buildings continue to deteriorate as a result of chronic under-spending on 
operating and maintenance costs, while residents do not take responsibility for common property areas.  The 
proposed project would seek to help implement a comprehensive set of reforms in the HCS sector, thereby placing it 
on a more sustainable path where there is less reliance on government finance and support. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The deteriorated state of the housing and utilities stock suggests that fixed investments are of high priority.  
However, without comprehensive policy reforms, it will be impossible to place the sector on a sustainable path.  
Given the vast investment needs and limited loan funds, the project would generate greater value added by focusing 
on policy reforms.  The project would be designed as one where municipalities compete for participating in the 
project and funds are disbursed based on willingness to reform and actual implementation of reforms. 
 
The project will be designed around five key areas of reform for the HCS sector as identified by both the 
Government and the World Bank.  These are: (a) making the sector financially viable; (b) improving the system of 
social protection for the poor; (c) reforming the relationships between consumers, housing maintenance companies, 
utility enterprises, and local governments; (d) creating private (building-level) housing management structures; and 
(e) reforming housing maintenance.  The project will seek to provide incentives and support to three stakeholder 
groups—municipalities, enterprises and consumers—to implement reforms.  
 
Participating municipalities will be selected through a competitive mechanism, and must be willing to pursue overall 
reform of the HCS sector, and not only to reform certain sub-sectors.  In deciding on the indicators for participation, 
the ideal reform package will be outlined, and the matrix of policy reforms will have the locus of controls clearly 
Page  2
 
 
indicated, as well as the key beneficiaries and stakeholder groups.  The minimum threshold set of criteria for 
participation in the contest will be defined, and the measurements of improvements (outcomes) will be cast in both 
absolute and relative terms, given variations in population size and income of different localities, as well as the 
nature of relationships with oblast governments. 
 
A. 
Financial Viability  
Most municipalities have made significant progress in improving cost recovery for utilities, but 
housing rents remain low, while maintenance and capital repairs continue to be seriously under-
funded.  In general, the sector still faces difficulties in covering its maintenance and investments 
costs for both the infrastructure networks and the housing stock.  Local governments felt they 
could raise tariffs as long as service quality also improved.  Tariffs do not necessarily keep pace 
with increases in energy prices or inflation, suggesting the need for more dynamic tariff-setting 
policies.  Local authorities currently grapple with reforming the tariff-setting regime, and need a 
consistent set of rules regarding setting and regulating tariffs. 
 
B. 
Social Protection 
Housing allowances continue to be the main form of social protection provided to households as 
tariffs increase, and the municipalities see this an effective way to target subsidies to the poor, 
compared to programs such as privileges and exemptions (l’goti), and the across-the-board 
subsidization implicit in cost-recovery levels of less than 100%.  The government has begun to 
experiment with personal social accounts in a few cities, but given the early stage of this 
program, more analysis is needed to assess its effectiveness.  
C. 
Redefining Institutional Relationships
 
The lines of distinction between municipalities and enterprises 
(including utilities) are still blurred.  This contributes to the 
payment arrears problem, thereby presenting a serious distortion 
to the creation of market-based relationships.  It also leads to 
non-transparent financial flows and confuses the relationship 
between consumers, enterprises and governments, which also 
serves to erode confidence in the role of contracts.  Institutional 
and regulatory relationships need to be clarified and redefined if 
the sector is to operate along market-based principles.  Attracting 
private-sector investments presents a key challenge, especially 
given recent experiences with system failure during winter.  While 
there is indication of growing interest among private investors in 
the HCS sectors, a key challenge is attracting large-scale 
Page  3
 
 
investments—Russian, foreign, and international financial 
institutions.  With appropriately tailored technical assistance, and 
continued legal and regulatory reform, investment attractiveness 
could be improved. 
 
D. 
Housing Stock Management 
Reforming management of the housing stock presents a very 
challenging aspect of HCS reforms to municipalities.  No city has 
managed to significantly improve housing management and all 
agreed that the creation of building-level management structures 
are crucial to the success and sustainability of reforms.  The 
formation of building-level management would allow for the 
installation of block meters, which would reduce wastage as 
consumers are billed closer to actual consumption, rather than 
norms.  Ideally, building management must be transferred from 
the municipalities to either residents or private housing 
management companies, who then contract maintenance 
enterprises.  A problem with the current situation is that municipal 
companies mix management with maintenance functions within 
one company. 
 
E. 
Housing Maintenance 
Reforms in the provision (quality and quantity)
 
of maintenance services have been very modest.  First, existing 
maintenance companies need to be reformed and exposed to a competitive market.  The challenge is to corporatize 
or privatize these companies.  Second, a program to develop consumer lending for maintenance and repair of 
existing housing units holds the potential to contribute significantly to the quality of the existing housing stock.  
Many commercial banks boast substantial liquidity, but few have developed a capacity to manage consumer-lending 
programs.  Expanding consumer finance could help create vibrant credit markets, while making available resources 
for demand-driven housing maintenance. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations under consideration 
or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
Municipalities participating in the project will be determined via a competitive process during the project appraisal 
process. 
Page  4
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
Borrower has experience dealing with World Bank projects through implementing of the recently completed 
Housing Project, and previous and current energy and water projects. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [X] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding safeguards during 
project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P:\RUSSIA\INFRA\Housing-Com.SVCS\1LENP\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - Concept Stage.doc
 
