Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC336 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 6, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P079017 
Project Name: HOUSING MARKET 
Task Team Leader: Peter D. Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2005 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 100 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Housing finance and real estate 
markets (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The project’s objective is to promote reforms that will allow the housing sector to operate under 
market-based principles for both the delivery of new housing units and the provision of mortgage 
finance.  This will be attained through:  (i) reform of housing delivery markets, supported by 
streamlined permit and approval processes, clearer land-use regulations, and improved access to 
serviced land; and (ii) increased origination of mortgages across Russia, encouraged by the 
creation of uniform standards for lenders and the implementation of efficient housing subsidy 
schemes, along with the capitalization of a mortgage credit insurance scheme. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project will be designed around the two key segments of the housing market, as identified by 
both the Government and the World Bank:  (a) strengthening the housing delivery system; and 
(b) developing residential mortgage markets.  The project will be designed as a hybrid operation 
to reflect the nature of the reform demonstration effects sought.  While the project will require 
reforms at all three tiers of government (federal, oblast, and municipal), the pace of reforms will 
differ at each level.  The mortgage finance component will be implemented at the federal and 
oblast level and coverage can extend across many regions.  The housing delivery component, on 
the other hand, requires reforms at the municipal level, and a sequenced approach would work 
better in implementing this component.  The project will start by selecting about three 
municipalities for a first phase, and implement reforms and investments in these cities.  A second 
Page  2
 
 
phase will be implemented in about five municipalities, drawing on the lessons learnt from the 
first phase, and revising the component as needed.  To help insure buy-in to the required reforms, 
regions and municipalities will compete to qualify for participation in both components.  
 
A. 
H
OUSING 
D
ELIVERY 
 
Low productivity and high cost housing construction undermine the supply responsiveness of the 
housing market.  The ineffective implementation of existing regulations by regional and 
municipal governments, along with a lack of access to developable land by developers, 
exacerbate the high costs and prices of new construction.   
 
Streamlined Permit and Approval Process
.  Housing producers incur high transaction costs and 
related risks through excessively protracted permit and approval procedures for planning, 
infrastructure and construction.  Unequal enforcement of regulations by municipal governments 
contributes to the lack of a level playing field for newer market entrants.  Local governments 
should ensure that laws and regulations are transparent and enforced fairly for all participants.  
The project will assist cities and regions to reduce development risks and costs by streamlining 
the approval process into a “one window” investor service with increased transparency and 
accountability.  
 
Land Accessibility and Real Estate Markets
.  Access to developable land is often constrained by 
the lack of supply of serviced land in desirable locations, and unclear municipal land allocation 
and management practices.  While developers need better access to suitable land titles (freehold, 
leasehold) and clear land-use requirements, municipalities need to respond by increasing the 
amount of titled, serviced and zoned urban land, in order to increase potential supply.  Given the 
unwillingness of many cities to transfer freehold title to land, access could be substantially 
enhanced by improving the marketability of long-term land leases, which could also help to 
reduce required initial equity investment by developers and end-users. 
 
Access to Housing Related Infrastructure
.  The Federal Government and municipalities have 
identified access to infrastructure as one of the major impediments to more efficient housing 
delivery in Russian cities.  Improving and expanding housing-related infrastructure requires a 
mixture of regulatory and investment activities by local governments.  The provision of 
infrastructure by local governments can use public funds, the private sector, or a hybrid form of 
financing.  The recently closed Housing Project in Russia provides important lessons for 
municipalities regarding the possible design of projects that seek to deliver housing-related 
infrastructure.  The project will propose both regulatory initiatives and investment actions. 
 
B. 
M
ORTGAGE 
F
INANCE 
 
The project will support the development of a mortgage finance system with effective pricing 
and allocation of risk.  The creation of a national mortgage market will require:  creating a 
mortgage credit insurance program; introducing uniform financial standards and procedures for 
regional mortgage agencies in order to strengthen regional mortgage schemes; and reforming 
regional subsidies.  
Page  3
 
 
Creating Uniform Standards
.  The current lack of financial standards for regional mortgage 
agencies poses substantial risk to the nascent housing finance system.  A program will be 
developed for commercial banks and regional agencies to adopt standards for the financial 
controls, data, and systems required to price and manage credit risk.  Regions that participate in 
the project will be required to adhere to recognized standards for the financial design of their 
lending programs, internal controls, and external reporting.  
Housing Affordability
.  Currently
, 
regional mortgage agencies seek to make housing more 
affordable by interest rate subsidies.  However, interest rate subsidies create long-term financial 
liabilities on regional budgets and pose greater risks in the event of economic shocks.  The 
project will demonstrate a more sustainable subsidy system by requiring participating regional 
mortgage agencies to move to a system of targeted, up-front subsidies to boost affordability, 
thereby limiting the financial cost to the regional government budget to a single transfer per 
participating household.  
 
Mortgage Credit Insurance
.  Commercial banks are reluctant to lend for housing, in part because 
of weaknesses in the enforceability of the mortgage pledge.  The Federal Government needs to 
address weaknesses in the foreclosure law and the judicial system.  Credit insurance could be 
used to mitigate legal risk for lenders during the time that it takes to make these reforms.  A pilot 
credit insurance program would contribute to creating a housing finance system where risk is 
priced and shared among all participants, while spreading government assistance to the largest 
possible number of households.  The insurance program could involve capitalizing or 
guaranteeing a government-backed initiative, with technical assistance and possibly reinsurance 
from a private sector international insurer. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [X] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
