                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: 30315




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 8, 2003

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Russian Federation                     Project ID: P082239
Project          Name:        HYDROMET Task Team Leader: Vladimir Tsirkunov
MODERNIZATION PROJECT
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
2004                                            IBRD: 95.2
Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2004
Managing Unit: ECSSD                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood Theme:         Water    resource    management
protection    sector   (60%);Irrigation   and (P);Climate change (S)
drainage     (30%);Information    technology
(10%)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Vladimir Tsirkunov
Other financing amounts by source:                                               ($m.)



B. Project Objective

The main development objective of the project is to improve RosHydromet's capacity to provide
weather and hydrological services and to assure effective delivery of weather forecasts to the
Government and the public by modernizing key elements of its technical base and strengthening
its institutional arrangements. In turn this objective supports the higher-level goal of reducing the
risk to life and damage to the economy from weather and climate-related events. Project success
with be measured through increased lead times for emergency warnings and through improved
accuracy of forecasts over an increased period.




C. Project Description

The project is designed to meet the above objectives and it             would consist of the four
components: (a) modernization of data processing, archiving, computational and transmission
facilities; (b) upgrading of the observation networks; (c) institutional strengthening,
improvement in information dissemination and emergency preparedness; and (a) project

management, monitoring and evaluation. As mentioned above the project preparation is well
advanced, therefore, the components structure, implementation arrangements as well as cost
estimates (in particular for Component A), shown in the table below, are well defined:



                  Project Components                                     Total      Cost
                                                                         US$ Million
                A.    Modernization of data processing, archiving,
                computational and transmission facilities                48.7
                A1. Upgrading of World Meteorological Center (WMC)
                   A1.1 Main Computing Center in Moscow                  21.2
                   A1.2 Data Storage and Archiving facilities (Obninsk) 15.0
                A2. Upgrading of Regional Meteorological Centers
                   (RMC) in Novosibirsk and Khabarovsk                   7.2
                A3. Communication System linking WMC, RMCs, and
                   Hydro-Meteorological Centers                          5.3
                B: Upgrading of the observation networks                 39.0
                  B1 Upgrading of Ground Hydromet stations               22.0
                  B2 Upgrading of Weather Radars                         8.0
                  B3 Upgrading the Upper Air sounding stations           4.0
                   B4     Upgrading of 10-12 Hydromet Centers, GIS
                Systems,    Satellite  Receiving   Stations,  Hydrologic
                Forecast Improvements                                    5.0
                C:   Institutional    strengthening,  improvement      of
                information        dissemination     and      emergency
                preparedness                                             5.0
                D: Project Preparation, Management,         Monitoring
                and Evaluation                                           2.5
                Total                                                    95.2

Component A is aimed at modernizing the transmission and storage of data as well as
significantly increasing the computational power at the disposal of RosHydromet. This
component would have highest impact in improving the timeliness and effectiveness of weather
forecasts and data sharing both within Russia and globally. The Component B is aimed at
arresting the degradation of the observation networks which is the backbone of the
Hydrometeorological service.

The Component C is aimed at improving the delivery of the services, responsiveness to the
natural disasters, institutional strengthening to make RosHydromet a more viable, vibrant and
client oriented agency. The institutional strengthening subcomponent would comprise a modest
institutional strengthening program including such activities as improvement of a long-term
institutional development program and possible upgrading of the management, operation and
maintenance procedures. The second subcomponent involves a design of Client Service System
aimed at improvement of data presentation and dissemination procedures ensuring that
information are made available in required formats to the whole range of clients. The emergency
preparedness subcomponent would examine how information from RosHydromet is used for

emergency preparedness with the goal to improve cooperation with local and regional
authorities, Ministry of Emergency and other concerned agencies during the development of
emergency situations and emergency preparedness planning.

Finally, the Component D is designed for project management, supervision and monitoring and
evaluation of the project impact. Implementation arrangements for the project have been
discussed with Roshydromet and MOF, and it was agreed that Roshydromet staff will be
responsible for overall and technical project implementation issues. A small PIU will provide
assistance to Roshydromet in such areas as procurement and disbursement.

An opportunity to identify and prepare a GEF grant for additional funding of
hydrometeorological activities associated with climate change assessment has been discussed
with RosHydromet. Such activities may include installation of additional meteorological and
hydrological equipment for better recording of climate variables, development of a specialized
modeling capability, and/or data exchange improvement.



D. Project location (if known)

Main project activities will be concentrated within the Roshydromet premises located in
Moscow, Obninsk, Novosibirsk, and Khabarovsk. These activities will be primarily
refurbishment of those sections in the buildings where new equipment will be placed. No land
acquisition is expected. Renovation will be conducted within the existing Roshydromet
buildings.

Additional minor activities dealing primarily with the replacement of hydrometeorological
instrumentation will be undertaken in many dozens sites elsewhere on the territory of Russia.
Seven or eight weather radars located in various regions will be installed on the existing
buildings which are used now for the similar purposes.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity

Russia has an elaborate and quite stringent EA system governed by the Law on Environmental
Expertise/Review (SER), Guidelines on Environmental Impact Assessment and other
regulations. According to the EA legislation all types of economic activities including laws and
sectoral economic plans are subject for SER review and approval. EA function undertaken by the
Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) is somewhat deteriorated recently but still it is fully
operational as was confirmed by the recent WB study on EA capacity assessment. The
RosHydroment has competent staff capable of development and implementation of the project
and mitigation of minor environmental risks, if they appear in the course of the project
implementation.



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                   Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
                   If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[x]                Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                   The project poses minimum environmental risks. Project does not involve any new
                   construction or major refurbishment works. Moreover, the project will provide great
                   environmental benefits, since it will support in mitigating natural hazards risks and in
                   improving environmental management. A comprehensive hydrometerologocial system
                   coupled with a strong agency responsible for its operation and maintenance will set the
                   foundation for reducing the risks associated with floods, drought and fire, winds, extreme
                   weather events and even industrial accidents.
[ ]                Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

[ ]                Pest Management (OP 4.09)

[ ]                Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

[ ]                Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

[ ]                Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

[ ]                Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

[ ]                Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

[ ]                Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

[ ]                Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [X] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:



Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ ] S1 [X] S2 [] S3 [ ] SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)
(Given the fact that one safeguard policy applies)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:




III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION

*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas

    A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues
        and prepare to mitigate them?

No further actions are expected during project preparation. Attention will be given to include
relevant standard environmental guidelines in bidding packages for civil works associated with
the refurbishing of existing buildings as well as for the installation of new equipment. It should
be noted that so far there was no evidence that the buildings planned for refurbishment have
asbestos. Nevertheless, it is planned that requirements to bidders to present how they plan to
protect their staff and other present at the site in case asbestos is found should be elaborated and
included in the bidding documents. Another reference will be made to ensure a safe handling and
disposal of construction solid wastes, debris and disfunctional IT equipment. Project team plans
to develop a full understanding with Hydromet officials and PIU on the importance to deal with
environmental issues and the need for their mitigation should they be identified. The standard
environmental guidelines referred above will form part of the PIU Operational Manual

In addition, it is projected that in October 2003 Roshydromet will submit an updated project
concept document for the review and approval of the Russian State Environmental Expertise
(Review) (SER) undertaken by the MNR. This is a mandatory requirement according to the Law
on Environmental Expertise for any kind of investment. It is not expected that specific project
activities or project documentation will require another SER approval.



B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?

Standard disclosure methods will be followed, e.g., place PID in the InfoShop. In addition,
consultations will be held with with Roshydromet officials, potential beneficiaries of information
generated by the Project and PIU staff in order to include their views in project design and
implementation

    IV.     AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW

There was agreement on the environmental category C of the project and that no further action is
expected from the safeguards perspective Recommendations were made on the following
aspects:
            -   Procurement of civil works and supply and installation of equipment addresses
                potential negative environmental impacts by including environmental guidelines
                to contractors/suppliers in bidding documents.
            -   Provide training to the PIU staff to oversee the implementation of the above-
                mentioned environmental guidelines.



Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:


