                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/06/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                                    Project ID: P078420
Project: LAND REGISTRATION & CADASTRE                          Task Team Leader: Edward C. Cook
PROJECT - RU
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 15, 2003                IBRD Amount ($m): 130.00
Bank Approval: March 11, 2004                                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                                           Sector: General public administration sector (34%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Law and justice (33%); Housing finance and real
Status: Lending                                                estate markets (33%)
                                                               Theme: Personal and property rights (P); Rural
                                                               services and infrastructure (P); Legal institutions for
                                                               a market economy (S); Municipal governance and
                                                               institution building (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the Project is to build efficient land administration systems with the purpose of
contributing to the development of efficient markets for land and real estate. The basic thrust of the
Project is to improve the functioning of the registration and cadastre systems, with a primary focus on
their mutual cooperation. This will include linking databases, elaborating existing procedures, and
addressing improved customer interface. As part of the customer interface improvement, the Project will
be introducing means testing for improved access to services. The objectives are to reduce both the time
and cost associated with transactions in land and real estate, to make those transactions more reliable,
and to improve access for low income segments of the population to services. Improved coordination of
the cadastre and registration systems, along with strengthening their linkages with other parties, will
result in improved Government coordination of land and real estate administration.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project will be composed of three components: (1) the unified cadastre and registration systems; (2)
improved service delivery; and (3) project management.

Unified cadastre and registration systems

The goal of the first component will be to link the operation of the system for registration of rights in
land and real estate with the cadastre system. The component will also upgrade both of these systems
taken separately. The component will be broken into three sub-components. The registration
sub-component will create a national information and technological infrastructure for managing a
uniform national registration system of real property. The cadastre sub-component will allow the
creation of a truly unified real property cadastre, linking land parcels structures attached to them, allow
for a more rapid process of land inventory and valuation, and upgrade existing automated data systems.
The linked systems sub-component will address improved information flows and institutional
cooperation between the registration and cadastre systems.

The component will put in place communication systems between the state land cadastral offices and
real estate registration offices on the federal level, on the level of federal okrugs, subjects of the

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS



Federation, and on the rayon/municipal level. The system will be designed to provide potential users
with improved access to land cadastral information and information on registered rights. This will
require development of software and hardware packages, use of modern information technologies and
information protection systems. It will be necessary to ensure compatibility of information systems.
Software and hardware packages would include necessary hardware (servers, PCs), peripheral
equipment (scanners, plotters, printers, copy machines), software for data processing and managing
mapping and descriptive information, filing, data protection, and office software.

Creating an automated system of state land cadastre and an automated system of a unified state registry
of rights in real estate and transactions with it would allow to speed up the processing of registration
requests and the issuance of land cadastral and real estate documents; it would ensure information
exchange in real time with local administrations offices involved in issuing certificates to legal and
private persons and to establish interagency information links. The automated system would allow
exchange of land and cadastral information, to provide information regarding unregistered rights to the
agencies responsible for managing the state urban development cadastre, forest cadastre, water cadastre,
cadastre of subsurface resources and other cadastres and registries. The appropriate technology (or
technologies) for linkage of the information systems will be examined carefully during project
preparation. Emphasis will be on utilization of the internet, though our counterparts are concerned about
the supporting infrastructure for internet use in some parts of the country.

Our counterparts have indicated their intention of providing nationwide coverage under this Project. The
task team views this as being highly ambitious, given the complexities that will be encountered in each
location where the Project is implemented. The way forward will be to agree on a list of pre-conditions
necessary for system implementation at the local level, a list of criteria for selection of regions to
participate in the first phase of the Project, and a piloting of the work load at the local level.

Improved Service Delivery

This component would focus on further institutional capacity building for both the registration and
cadastre systems with primary orientation to improving the quality of interface with the client. An
important element will be improving access of low-income segments of the population to registration and
cadastre services. This component will be composed of three sub-components: (1) legal/regulatory
reform and implementation; (2) systems management; and (3) public awareness campaign.

The first sub-component will identify and address needed changes and additions to the legal and
regulatory basis for operation of the cadastral and registration systems, particularly with respect to their
more efficient coordination with each other and in codifying means testing in providing cadastral and
property registration services. Needed changes in institutional roles and relations for the purposes of
simplifying, and reducing the costs of, transactions in immovable property will also be handled.

The systems management sub-component will improve the efficiency of operation of the registration and
cadastral offices by identifying weaknesses in the current operational procedures and business practices.
A critical aspect of this will be improving the quality of services provided to clients. This
sub-component will:

    identify ways in which office operations can be made more efficient
    provide a strategic plan for interaction with the client (optimization of the office design, steps for
    improving practices of interactions with the population, aligning incentive structures with the goals
    of servicing the client swiftly and efficiently)
    develop a strategy for means testing for cadastral service provision

                                                       3
                                                                                                          ISDS



    provide resources for re-equipping offices in selected sites as samples of client friendly spaces for
    efficient service provision
    provide training to the staff of the cadastral and property rights services in interactions with client
    and service provision
    create benchmarks for measuring staff performance in terms of service provision
    create instruments for measuring client satisfaction.

The public awareness sub-component will provide information to the population about the reasons and
procedures for registration of land and real estate. The purposes of this will be to provide assistance to
potential clients in understanding basic procedures and the institutions involved and to reduce the number
of transactions that are occuring outside the official cadastral and registration of rights systems. This
sub-component will develop an information strategy for the cadastral and property rights services,
develop pilot media interventions (television, radio, newspapers), and develop and produce brochures
and other printed materials for distribution throughout the country.

The component will finance consultant services for legal and regulatory reform, business systems
analysis, stakeholder analysis, and public information. It will finance training of staff of the cadastre and
registration offices, and repair and refurbishment of a select number of offices. It will also finance the
production of printed materials and other media interventions.

Project Management

A Project Implementation Group, staffed in accordance with Project needs, will be financed. This Group
will be dually subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and Roszemkadastr and will be a direct continuation
of the Project Preparation Group (PPG) now being established. (As noted below, the PPG is being
established on the basis of the LARIS PIU). In addition there will be project implementation groups at
the regional level and services provided by other regionally based organizations (see section 4, below).

This component will finance consultant services and office operating costs. Office operating costs are to
be financed by the Government.



Components:



Unified cadastre and registration systems
Improved service delivery
Project management

                                                        4
                                                                                                        ISDS




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Geographic location of the Project remains undefined, though it is clear that our counterparts would like to
cover a large number of oblasts.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: The Project will improve the cadastral and registration databases, information flows among
agencies, and office operation procedures. The Project will not be involved in adjudication of rights or in
making decisions about land use. The Project will provide an improved basis for appropriate land and real
estate administration.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes    No     TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes    No     TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes    No     TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes    No     TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes    No     TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes    No     TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes    No     TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes    No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.



II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.



II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
In it's broader dialogue with the Government, the Bank should work to ensure that general policies on
land use are consistent with the appropriate safeguard issues.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

                                                      5
                                                                                                         ISDS




II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues




II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

A detailed stakeholder analysis will be carried out at the beginning of Project implementation. To
increase pro-client orientation of cadastral and registration offices and their individual employees,
consultations with private individuals and legal entities will be carried out to determine needs, concerns,
and expectations of the clients in terms of efficiency of cadastral and registration services. The result of
these consultations will be incorporated into the social assessment of the Project as well as in the design
and monitoring tools of its Service Delivery Component.



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
          in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
          similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
          safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank

                                                   6
                                                                                                  ISDS



Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                             Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Edward C. Cook                                     05/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                               Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                           06/02/2003
Sector Manager/Director              Joseph R. Goldberg                                 06/04/2003

