1                           25340
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                       Project ID: P069063
Project: ST. PETERSBURG ECONOMIC                  Task Team Leader: Richard L. Clifford
DEVELOPMENT
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 5, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 162.06
Bank Approval April 29, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECCUI                              Sector: General industry and trade sector (30%);
Lending Instrument. Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL)  Other social services (30%); Housing finance and
Status Lending                                   real estate markets (20%); Sub-national government
administration (20%)
Theme: Municipal governance and institution
building (P); Municipal finance (P); Legal
institutions for a market economy (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Background: The break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the transition from central planning to
market economy in Russia was difficult Continuing infusion of financial resources into unprofitable
State enterprises and economic management indiscipline created high rates of inflation and increasingly
unsustainable fiscal imbalances. This led to the August 1998 crisis when Russia defaulted on its
domestic and foreign debt obligations. Since 1999, however, the macro-economic turnaround has been
remarkable. Real GDP increased by about 3 percent in 1999, about 8 percent in 2000, 5 percent in 2001
and is expected to reach about 4 percent in 2002. Inflation declined from about 86 percent in 1999 to
about 19 percent in 2001 and is expected to drop to about 14 percent in 2002. Excessive dependence on
natural resource exports leaves the economy highly vulnerable to external chocks and greater
diversification of economic activities will be indispensable for sustaining growth in the medium and
longer term. Of critical importance will be the expansion of a more broad-based private sector and
increase, in particular the role of small and medium enterprises which, at this point, still remains below
the levels of other more advanced ECA countries.
Achievements and failures of the Federal Governm1ent are echoed in Russia's 89 Regions (Subjects of the
Federation). Regional economic growth over the past decade has been uneven giving way to growing
inequality in terms of income per capita, investments, and social indicators. Successfully extending
structural reform to sub-national level and reinvigorating flagging regional and local economies
constitutes a major challenge for the Federal Government which has put in place an impressive program



2
ISDS
of reforms (Medium-Term Program of Social and Economic Development for 2002-04) to reduce poverty
levels, achieve economic modernization, develop financial intermediation, improve fiscal efficiency, and
reduce regional economic disparities.
Sustainable growth of the economy will require: (a) developing and implementing policy and regulatory
frameworks that foster private sector development as the main engine of economic growth, (b) improving
fiscal management in order to allow local authorities to ensure adequate delivery of public services; and
(c) improving the efficiency of funding and management of public economic and social infrastructure. A
number of regions are striving to improve their fiscal management and increase their attractiveness for
domestic and foreign investors. Prominently among them, St Petersburg, Russia's former imperial
capital and a paramount center of culture, arts and education, has been a leader in the drive for reform.
Efforts to create the basis for the city's development in the new political and economic context were
begun by the Government of the City of St. Petersburg as early as 1996 with the preparation of a
Strategic Plan outlining the options for the future development of the city. Designating economic
diversification as one of its key targets, the Strategic Plan identified support for new businesses,
privatization of City-owned state enterprises, improved land use, and tourism development as the main
pillars for the future economic growth of the city and highlighted that the exploitation of the unique
opportunities provided by its geographical position and the riches of its historical heritage should be a
keystone for the success of the development strategy.
ProjectDevelopment Objectives: The St. Petersburg Economic Development Loan (SPB-EDL) will
support the City Government of St. Petersburg in its efforts to accelerate the implementation of key
elements of the Strategic Plan, enhance the city's prospects for sustainable economic growth, and allow
it to more fully exploit its position as Russia's "Window to the West" To this end, SPB-EDL will seek
to (a) improve the business climate in St. Petersburg, stimulate the expansion of private sector
participation in the local economy, and promote the development of land and real estate markets, (b)
strengthen the City's fiscal management and ensure the long-term stability of its fiscal revenue base; and
(c) enable St. Petersburg to take greater advantage of its unique position as one of Russia's top centers of
culture and the arts and provide the basis for developing tourism as a key element of future economic
growth. An additional indirect, yet strategically important goal pursued by the Bank through preparing
SPB-EDL, is to develop and test a model of Bank operation in support of structural reform at
sub-national level that, in the future, could be replicated elsewhere in Russia or other ECA countries.
SPB-EDL builds up on the experience of the recently completed St. Petersburg City Center
Rehabilitation Project (Ln. 41440-RU) and complements the assistance provided to Russia by the Bank
through the Fiscal Federalism & Regional Fiscal Reform Loan (Ln. 46470 -RU), the Foreign Investment
Advisory Services (FIAS) Surveys, and other operations in the areas of business development, land and
real estate markets development, and sub-national fiscal management (see Section D.2: Major Related
Projects). SPB-EDL is designed as a hybrid loan for the reasons explained below, (see Section B.4
Strategic Choices). The adjustment component of the loan will address the first two of the above
objectives while the investment component will support the third objective.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will include three components:
Adjustment Component] City's Budget support (US$100.00 million)



3
ISDS
This component wvill provide budget support to the City Government of St. Petersburg. The funds will be
on-lent by the Borrower, the Federal Government, to the St. Petersburg City Govemment in local
currency against the implementation by the latter of a series of agreed policy reforms. The reforms aim
at (a) improving the business climate in St. Petersburg, stimulating the private sector participation in the
local economy, and promoting the development of land and real estate markets, and (b) strengthening the
City's fiscal management and ensuring the long-term stability of its fiscal revenue base. The component
is designed on the basis of two disbursement tranches. The conditions for the release of the first tranche
(USD 40 million) will be fulfilled as a condition for Board Presentation and the conditions for the release
of the second tranche will be fulfilled at the latest 24 months thereafter.
Investment Component 2 (USS1 09.40 million)
The component consists of four sub-components:
1. Sub-component (a) Rehabilitation of cultural assets (US$93.30 nillion?Ehe sub-component will
finance repair and/or rehabilitation works that will help protect historical buildings of eight major
cultural institutions from further physical deterioration, increase the exhibition and activities capacity
of the institutions, improve the operational safety and efficiency of the facilities for both visitors and
personnel, and provide higher safety of artworks on display from physical damages, theft or other
hazards. The projects to be financed under the sub-component are the following:
*   State Hermitage Museum: Urgent repair and rehabilitation works in the East Wing of the General
Staff Building.
*  State Mariinsky Theatre: Rehabilitation works including repair and/or replacement of internal
utility networks in the existing building; replacement of stage machinery and rehabilitation of
stage area; and upgrading of commercial services areas.
*   State Russian Museum: Rehabilitation of two inner courtyards in the Mikhailovsky Palace,
reconstruction of the Winter Garden in the Marble Palace; and restoration of the St George Hall
and two Corps-de-Gardes (guard pavilions) in the Mikhailovsky Castle.
*   Peter and Paul Fortress Museum: Repairs of drainage and other utility networks; and
reinforcement of the St. Peter and Paul Cathedral foundations.
*   State Shostakovich Philharmonic Academy: Replacement of lighting, air conditioning, and sound
systems; and repair of other internal utility networks.
*  State Rirnski-Korsakov Conservatory: Rehabilitation of the English Church to its previous use as
a concert hall and training facility.
*  Tsarskoye Selo Palace State Museum: Rehabilitation of the Henrnitage Kitchen and Turkish
Baths.
*   Pavlovsk Palace State Museum: Rehabilitation of the Temple of Friendship.
2. Sub-component (b): Cultural Investment Facility (CIF) (USS7.00 million).The sub-component will
help replicate the successful experience of the Cultural Fund which was part of the St. Petersburg
City Center Rehabilitation Project. It will provide grant funding to eligible cultural institutions in,
and in the vicinity of, St. Petersburg for small-scale investments of up to USD 200,000 equivalent
that would help the recipients to: (a) increase own-source commercial revenue, (b) improve the
accessibility to cultural assets or activities of the public througiver alia, installation of special
facilities for the handicapped, development of outreach programs, and upgrading of public



4
ISDS
information systems; and (c) carry out critically needed small investments for the preservation of
buildings and assets including security systems, other protective equipment, and emergency
restorative emergency repair works. Specific operational arrangements, including eligibility criteria
and selection and evaluation procedures for the facility are detailed in a specific Operations Manual.
3. Sub-component (c) Institutional Strengthening (US$1 50 million)The component will provide
technical assistance including training, to two major cultural institutions (State Mariinsky Theater
and State Russian Museum) with a view to improve the institutions' capacity to (a) carry out
financial management incliding budgeting, accounting, and planning in accordance with
international standards, and (b) improve marketing and business development The sub-component
would also include the provision of small-scale technical assistance for other institutions, including
CIF Grant recipients, in response to needs that are likely to arise during project implementation
4. Sub-component (d) Project Implementation (US$7 6 nullhon).The component will finance: (a) the
operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (FISP) for the duration of the project; (b) the
completion of design studies required for the implementation of the works for the State Mariinsky
Theater and the State Hermitage Museum, and (c) services of technical specialists for specific
aspects of project supervision, including technical expertise in rehabilitation of historical buildings.
Summary of Costs
Component              Indicative Costs Bank-financing % of Bank  GoRF
(US$M)        (USSM)     Financing   Financing
(Us$m)
1. City's Budget Support                100.00        100.00      100.00        0.00
2a. Rehabilitation of cultural assets    94.90         47.58        51.0       45.72
State Mariinsky Theater             48.40          24.68                   23.72
State Hermitage Museum               15.00          7.65                    7.35
State Russian Museum                  8.80          4.49                    4.31
St. Peter and Paul Fortress          11.60          5.92                    5.68
State Philharmonic                    3.50          1.79                    1.72
State Conservatory                    3.00          1.53                    1.47
Tsarskoye Selo Palace                 2.00          1.02                    0.98
Pavlovsk Palace                       1.00          0.51                    0.49
2b. Cultural Investment Facility         7.00           5.50      78.57         1.50
2c. Institutional strengthening          1.50           1.20      80.00         0.30
3. Project implementation                7.60           6.18      81.25         1.43
PIU Operations                        2.40          1.95                    0.45
Design and Supervision                5.00          4.06                    0.94
Other consultant services             0.20          0.16                    0.04
Total Project Base Costs     209.40        160.46       76.63       48.94
Physical Contingencies      16.76          0.00       0.00        16.76
Price Contingencies      10.94                                 10.94
Front-end fee       1.60          1.60        0.00        0.00



5
ISDS
|          Total Financing Required      238.70         162.06       67.89        76.64
L.A 4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is carried out exclusively within the administrative boundaries of the City (Oblast) of St.
Petersburg and is not expected to entail any environmental issues of significance.
B. Chleck Environmental Classification: U
Comments: The project is a hybrid loan combining a structural adjustment component with an investment
component.
The adjustment component of the project will help improve prospects for new business formation,
contribute to more rational and economically efficient land use through improved zoning and increase the
availability of land for new developments through the removal of tax concessions and promotion of
competitive market mechanisms for land and real estate. As a result, the project can be expected to have,
over time, a significant positive environmental effect as it will,inter alia, encourage existing and largely
derelict manufacturing plants, warehouses or other out-of-place businesses to move out of the historic
city center and give way to gradual environmental clean up and replacement of environmentally
detrimental activities by service oriented activities and residential housing.
The investment component will exclusively finance the repair and rehabilitation of existing historic
buildings and focus on interior restoration and improvement works. Effects on the environment resulting
from construction activities may include dust, noise, and other construction-related local and temporary
nuisances such as temporary increase of heavy vehicle traffic. To mitigate such adverse environmental
impacts contractors will be required to follow environmentally sound construction practices (including
handling of asbestos and other hazardous materials) and include environmental safety requirements into
the technical specifications and contracts for civil works. Compliance with such instructions will be
closely monitored during implementation. Possible environmental issues arising from activities under
the Cultural Investment Facility (CIF) will be addressed through appropriate instructions in the FISP
Operations Manual to be submitted to the Bank for review and approval before Board Presentation.
In accordance with prevailing Federal Government legislation, environmental management in Russia is a
shared responsibility of the Federal Government and the Regions. Environmental reviews and
environmental impact assessments are carried out by the Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) and its
deconcentrated units in Russia's seven administrative regions4krugs) and are governed by a legal and
regulatory framework that can be considered satisfactory according to a Bank review of June 2002. In
accordance with the Federal regulations, all works financed under the investment component are subject
to mandatory review including an Environmental Impact Assessment (which provides for public
participation) and a State Environmental Review by MNR staff or if, advisable, MNR appointed
independent experts. Compliance with environmental regulations will be monitored and/or enforced by
the North-West okrug MNR branch in St. Petersburg in close cooperation with FISP and relevant City
agencies.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    C Yes * No    . TBD



6
ISDS
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)             ^                Yes * No      TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       SYes * No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     Yes * No      TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                 Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                  Yes * No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       S Yes 0 No      TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 S Yes *No       TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         5 Yes * No      TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 S Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The adjustment component of the project does not trigger any safeguard policy issues.
The objective of the investment component of the project is to protect the buildings of eight major cultural
institutions in St. Petersburg from further deterioration, increase the exhibition and activities capacity of the
institutions, improve the operational safety and efficiency of the facilities for both visitors and personnel;
and provide higher safety of artworks on display from physical damages, theft or other hazards The
rehabilitation and restoration works include primarily repair and upgrading of buildings and interior utility
networks (electricity, water, heating, a/c, etc.) as well as, in the case of the State Mariinsky Theatre,
replacement of the staging machinery. The Cultural Fund will finance small-scale investments of up to USD
200,000 equivalent that would help recipient cultural institutions to: (a) increase own-source commercial
revenue; (b) improve the accessibility to cultural assets or activities of the public through, inter alia,
installation of special facilities for the handicapped, development of outreach programs, and upgrading of
public information systems; and (c) carry out critically needed small investments for the preservation of
buildings and assets including security systems, other protective equipment, and emergency restorative
repair works.
Institutional support provided under the project will help selected institutions improve their financial and
administrative management with a view to secure the long-term sustainability of their operations and
reduced dependency on Federal Government funding for operation and maintenance.
The project will not involve any new construction or the demolition of existing buildings. The project will
exclusively deal with existing public buildings, will not require land acquisition or result in involuntary
resettlement
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
n/a
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
n/a



7
ISDS
II.D.2 In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
n/a
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project does not target any specific group of stakeholders and its beneficiary is the city's 4 7 million
population as a whole. The program of policy reforms included in the adjustment component is the direct
outcome of the Strategic Plan which was prepared in extensive discussion with the various stakeholders
interested and the population of St. Petersburg at large. None of the reforms proposed has direct
environmental implications and only positive effects in the medium-and longer term. Reforms involving
management or divestiture of City-owned real estate deal exclusively with commercial premises and have
no direct social impact or adverse effects on housing, or conditions of delivery of public services.
The works financed under the investment component are carried out under the auspices of the Ministry of
Culture of the Russian Federation and the oversight of the Boards of the institutions which, in a number
of cases, include or are advised by experts and representatives of the international art scene, public and
private international cultural institutions as well as, the case of the State Hermitage Museum for instance,
organizations such as UNESCO. Preparation of the component was carried out with the assistance from
experts of the French Government, and in particular, management staff of the Chateau de Versailles.
International experts with similar qualifications will be hired by the Bank to participate in project
supervision.
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



8
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.



9
ISDS
Signed and submitted by        Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Richard L. Clifford                          01/08/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E Holt                               01/09/2003
Sector Manager/Director:       Sumter Lee Travers                          01/08/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
HCH                                       S#IOWCA     g



