ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                           AWorld Frc, ol Povorty
-InfoShop
'1>. Wrd)a K;:,k-
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2002                               24232
Section I- Basic Information                                   November 13, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                      Project ID: P072960
Project: Customs Development Project             Task Team Leader: Carlos D. C. Ferreira
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 24, 2002  IBRD Amount ($m): 140.00
Bank Approval: May 29, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPE                             Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Other public sector governance (P)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to reform and modernize the Russian Customs administration, with
a view to (a) promote internationally acceptable practices for processing of international trade flows by
Customs, so as to further integrate the country into the world trading community, improve the investment
climate and secure the benefits from foreign and domestic investments in the economy; and (b) increase
taxpayer compliance with the Customs Code and ensure uniformity in its application, to support
macro-economic stability and increase transparency, equity and predictability in customs operations.
The project would promote internationally acceptable practices for processing of international trade
flows by Customs by: (a) adopting Customs standards that facilitate trade through the implementation of
procedures to expedite the processing of low-risk transactions while improving the detection and
prevention of contraband; (b) facilitating international commerce and accession of the Russian
Federation to the World Trade Organization (WTO); (c) fostering a stronger partnership between
Customs and participants of foreign economic activities; (d) transforming the mindset of SCC officers
towards the trade activity from one of protection of the domestic economy to one of facilitating
legitimate international commerce; (e) implementing improved business processes and automated
systems designed to increase efficiency and reduce discretion and opportunities for rent seeking
behavior; (f) modernizing the Information Technology infrastructure of the SCC, and adopting
standardized, highly automated operational procedures, including electronic filing of declarations, which
would reduce the level of discretion by customs officers, and e-Government facilities for information and
interaction with the trade community.
The project would increase taxpayer compliance witl thle Customs Code and ensure uniformity in its
application by: (a) adopting standardized and automated procedures countrywide to facilitate voluntary
compliance and reduce compliance costs; (b) improving the knowledge and training of participants in
foreign economic activities about the customs laws and procedures; (c) improving transparency,



2
ISDS
uniformity and predictability of Customs actions; (d) implementing efficient dispute resolution
procedures; (e) improving enforcement capacity against smugglers and tax evaders through improved risk
management, intelligence, investigation and post-release audit; (f) further developing the organization of
the SCC and its management systems to increase overall organizational effectiveness; (g) enhancing
professional integrity and skills of SCC officers; and (h) improving the conditions for countrywide
training and retraining of SCC officers.
The project would support the SCC's implementation of the three-year Targeted Program for the
development of Customs and further its goals significantly.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will provide consulting services, training and goods to support activities under the three
major areas of Customs Operations, Organizational Structure and Management and Information
Technologies. These are divided into the following project components: Customs Control and
Clearance; Trade Facilitation; Tax Policy; Improvement of Legdl Framework for Customs Activities;
Organizational Structure; Operational Management; Financial Management; Human Resource
Management; Human Resource Training; Improving Integrity of thie Customs Service; Information
Technologies Development. A Project Management component is added to the project to ensure smooth
implementation of project activities.
I. Customs Operations.
A. Customs Control and Clearance - US$ 2.68 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated
US$ 2.34 million)
The component will support SCC in developing a strategy to introduce selectivity in customs control
during the clearance process based on risk analysis and management systems. In accordance with this
strategy, cargo clearance and control procedures will be simplified and standardized; post-clearance
control and audit will be strengthened, and a new monitoring system for transit operations will be
introduced at selected sites. The component will also support improved cooperation between the customs
authorities and the tax authorities, other executive authorities and the trading community to increase
compliance, uniformity of application of the customs legislation and transparency of customs actions.
B. Trade Facilitation - US$ 18.22 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$ 17.42
million)
The component will assist SCC in development of a comprehensive program of facilitation to
international trade, including preparation and development of new procedures, development and
implementation of new mechanisms of cooperation between the customs administration and trade
community (e.g. establishment of focus groups, conducting surveys), implementation of e-filing for
customs declarations and dissemination of information on the new procedures. The component will help
to increase customs staff awareness of the advantages of trade facilitation to the national economy and
increase their commitment to it and bring the existing customs procedures in accordance with
international standards. The component will also promote the use of performance indicators in strategic
planning and internal control.
C. Tax Policy - US$ 2.87 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$ 2.40 million)
The component will enhance the SCC capacity to provide information and analytical support to the



3
ISDS
government with respect to customs duties, customs exemptions and non-tariff customs policies, support
development of methods and techniques for customs revenue forecasting, assist SCC in development and
implementation of a new system of cost-based customs fees in compliance with WTO standards. The
component will also provide assistance in improving system for accounting of customs revenues paid to
the federal budget and help to simplify and standardize procedures for control over customs collection.
D. Improve Legal Framework for Customs Activities - US$ 3.54 million, including contingencies
(base cost estimated US$ 3.22 million)
This component will assist in implementing the new Customs Code by reviewing overall legal and
regulatory framework, training staff and conducting mass information campaign on the changes
introduced to customs laws and rules. The component will also support a review of legislation to ensure
its consistency with WTO standards and the revised Kyoto Convention; introduce new administrative
appeals system; improve coordination with the judiciary; strengthen SCC capacity in interpretation of
customs laws and presentation of customs cases in courts and enhance SCC law enforcement function.
II. Organizational Structure and Management
A. Organizational Structure - USS 0.09 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$
'0.07 million)
The component will assist in optimization of organizational structure of customs authorities at the
federal, regional and local levels to improve coordination and links between different functions and
different administrative levels, facilitate teamwork and eliminate duplication of efforts, as well as to take
into account new systems and procedures introduced by the project.
B. Operational Management - US$ 7.44 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$
6.64 million)
The component will assist in setting organizational objectives for SCC, improve performance evaluation
through developing and promoting use of performance indicators system in key areas, introducing
feedback systems and strengthening incentive systems for SCC staff. The component will also support
improving reporting, supervision, inspection and monitoring systems. The component will improve
internal information flows by introducing a management information system of document flows with the
use of e-filing and electronic signature, as well as developing executive support system which would
provide SCC management with integrated information on different customs operational areas in a timely
manner. Also, the component aims to promote coordination and information exchange with other
government agencies, neighboring countries and trading community.
C. Financial Management - US$ 3.33 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$
3.03 million)
This component will assist in developing SCC administrative budgeting procedures to allow for greater
flexibility in resource management and greater accountability for results. The component will also
support introduction of a new financial management information system
D. Human Resources Management - US$ 2.44 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated
US$ 2.14 million)
The component will provide technical assistance to SCC in developing and implementing a



4
ISDS
comprehensive human resources development strategy; building institutional capacity to carry out a
systematic analysis of staffing needs; enhancing human resource management regulations, procedures
and practices and developing proposals for improving the remuneration and non-monetary benefits of
customs staff and managers, so as to improve the capacity of the SCC to recruit and retain qualified staff
and improve the integrity level. The component will also support development and implementation of a
Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS).
E. Human Resources Training - US$ 3.99 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$
3.51 million)
This component will assist SCC in carrying out a systematic training needs analysis and developing and
implementation of a comprehensive SCC training strategy. The component will assist SCC staff in
acquiring modern management and change management techniques. The component will also support
development of curriculum in different subjects related to customs operations, development and
implementation of distance learning courses, and strengthening capacity of the Russian Customs
Academy and regional SCC training centers.
F. Improving the Integrity of the Customs Service - US$ 0.92 million, including contingencies (base
cost estimated US$ 0.74 million)
This component will support development and implementation of a comprehensive customs integrity
strategy through development of the Customs Code of Ethics, development of corruption risk maps, and
implementation of changes in business processes to mitigate risk, development a strategy of preventing
breaches of professional ethics, exploring use of DataMining technology for identification of cases of
misconduct; strengthening the capacity of the Personnel Inspection Division of SCC and developing
system requirements for the Unified Automated Information System (UAIS) in a way to decrease
subjectivity in the decision-making process.
III. Information Technologies
A. Information Technologies Development - US$ 136.50 million, including contingencies (base cost
estimated US$ 128.74 million)
The Information Technologies Development component will have seven sub-components. The
activities to be supported under each sub-component are the following:
Sub-component 1: ITInfrastructure Development - US$ 59.73 million, including contingencies (base
cost estimated at US$ 56.70 million)
This sub-component will assist SCC in developing and implementing telecommunications infrastructure
strategy, carrying out a program for renewal/upgrade of IT equipment and operation system software,
creating/upgrading LANs at customs offices and SCC units. The component will also support
procurement of special equipment for customs control of goods transported by large trucks and
containers, risk minimization, prevention of fraud and smuggling of weapons, drugs and explosives.
Sub-Component 2: Development and Implementation of the SCC UnifiedAutomated Information
System - Plhase III (UAIS III) - US$ 69.00 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$
65.20 million)
This sub-component will support SCC in enhancement of UAIS IlIl concept, improve automated systems
for cargo clearance and control, strengthen the capacity of regional computing centers and GNIVTS. The
sub-component will assist in development and implementation of the new IT systems in selected pilot



5
ISDS
sites, including systems for electronic processing of customs declarations, export control, and control of
private vehicles import. The sub-component will also support a subsequent roll-out of the piloted system
to other sites and assist SCC in ensuring information security of automated systems for customs
clearance and control.
Sub-Component 3: Strengthening Executive Management - US$ 0.56 million, including
contingencies (base cost estimsted US$ 0.46 million)
The sub-component will assist SCC in further developing its strategy in IT policy area with due attention
to the interests of the clients, improving performance management of the IT sector, introducing effective
quality control procedures for provision information to trading community and developing a strategic
plan for business continuance and minimization of disaster consequences.
Sub-Component 4: Improve Management of Application Software Development - US$ 0.22 million,
including contigencies (base cost estimated USS 0.20 million)
The sub-component aims to assist SCC in introducing a new system for IT projects management and
improving financial management of extensive IT investments.
Sub-Component 5: Strengthten ITHuman Resources - US$ 2.22 million, including contingencies
(base cost estimated US$ 1.83 million)
The sub-component will support the development of a long term IT human resource development
strategy including distance leaming and closer integration with Russian Customs Training Academy to
facilitate development of IT awareness and faster adoption of change management related issues. The
sub-component will also assist in developing and implementing measures to reduce high IT staff turn
over and improve staff development.
Sub-Component 6: Transparency and Compliance with International Standards - US$ 0.13 million,
including contingencies (base cost estimated US$ 0.10 million)
The sub-component will assist in developing a system for control over efficiency of investments in IT to
ensure transparency of customs operations and will help to ensure compliance with recommendations of
Annex J to WCO Kyoto Convention.
Sub-Component 7: Develop Customs Information Database - US$ 4.63 million, including
contingencies (base cost estimated US$ 4.26 million)
The sub-component will support improvement of operations and maintenance of the central SCC data
base, including development and implementation of data downloading, monitoring, archive and
administrative subsystem, as well as development and implementation of a unified transport subsystem to
provide interaction of applied processes.
IV. Project Management - US$ 2.94 million, including contingencies (base cost estimated US$ 2.39
million)
The component will assist in managing project implementation in accordance with the Bank's
procedures, including conducting procurement, disbursement, financial management and reporting under
the project. The component will also support progress monitoring activities, including periodic surveys
that would allow to track the achievement of project development objectives and identify improvements
necessary for the project's success.
V. Front-End-Fee - US$ 1.4 million
It is expected that Front-end-fee will be financed by the Borrower from its own resources. Nevertheless,
the estimated amount of the front-end fee is indicated here for completeness of project cost estimates.



6
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project would have countrywide scope, but no environmental or social impact is expected. Minor
buiding refurbishment to support the introduction of automation equipment may be financed where required.
B. Chteck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: There is no substantial civil works or reconstruction associated with the project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       C Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 C Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         G Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
None.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
lI.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



7
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project would institute procedures for the Customs Committee to benefit from the participation of
key stakeholders from both the public and private sectors. It is important to recognize that the Customs
Committee has already put in place excellent consultative processes at the very top of the organization,
and that the project would take advantage of and build on this effort. It is intended that key stakeholder
ministries have continuous input on the direction of the project: Ministry of the Economy, Ministry of
Finance, and Ministry of Taxes and Fees. It is also intended that project steering would include
representatives of international trading community, both domestic and international, representing the
interests of a representative cross-section of the firms involved in foreign economic activities.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Developnment Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



8
ISDS
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:              Carlos D. C. Ferreira                         5/8/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                11/12/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Helga W. Muller                               5/8/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
[SEARCH f____ _  FUD8AC,           - -5d            E   .] U



