Report No. 23282
Report No: I046497 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/20/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION       Project ID: P046497
Project: Health Reform Implementation Project     Task Team Leader: Olusoji 0.
Adeyi
Appraisal Date: November 15, 2001         IBRD Amount ($m): 30.00
Board Date: July 9, 2002          IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSHD     Sector: HB - Basic Health
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)         Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The general objective of the proposed Health Reform Implementation Project
(HRIP) is to strengthen the capacity of the Federal-level institutions,
particularly the Ministry of Health, in the stewardship of health sector
reform in Russia. In that context, the Project would also support
regional-level initiatives aimed at improving the equity and efficiency of
health services, including the testing of Federal guidelines at the
regional level.
More specifically, the Project Development Objectives are to: (i) develop
Federal-level competencies and instruments that are required for effective
regulation and support of a highly decentralized system; (ii) develop and
implement strategic approaches to health sector reform in selected
regions; (iii) improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the MOH as a
regulatory agency; (iv) draw lessons from the implementation of
small-scale regional programs and disseminate them to other regions; (v)
develop and implement a more equitable and efficient financial regime and
(vi) improve the quality and efficiency of health services that would
benefit from direct investment under the project.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project Components.      The Project has four components:   (i)
rationalization of health services, (ii) strengthening of financial and
economic management, (iii) improving policy and governance and (iv)
project management. In line with the basic design of a Federal-level
project with small-scale application in two regions, there is no separate
regional component. Component (i) would be implemented in part at the
federal level and in part at the regional level, where health
restructuring plans would be implemented. Components (ii) and (iii) would
be implemented principally at the federal level, but in coordination with
the regions. Component (iv), project management, would cut across all
components. Out of the total IBRD loan of US$30 million, about $10
million would be spent on Federal-level activities while about $20 million
would be spent on activities at the regional level.



Component I - Rationalization of Health Services
This component is aimed at the development (at the Federal level) and
implementation (at the Regional level) modernization of health services
delivery at the regional level and its long term financial sustainability
by shifting as much as possible from in-patient to out-patient care and
from specialist to primary health care using modern guidelines. These
changes would result in improved access to health services and better
quality of care.
Federal level
The project would support the following:
(i) The development of strategic approaches to comprehensive restructuring
of health service delivery aiming at a balanced and well interconnected
system of primary care, diagnostic services, specialist in- and
out-patient care as well an integrated emergency medicine system with an
upgraded ambulance services;
(ii) the development of new norms and standards for health service
institutions based on pilot program experience and a package of benefits
to be offered by primary care facilities that would provide services
currently delivered in specialist and in-patient care.
(iii) the development of guidelines and best practice manuals for
implementation and phasing of comprehensive restructuring based on pilot
experience;
(iv) the development, dissemination, implementation and review of the use
of new clinical practice guidelines based on the principle of
evidence-based medicine;
(v) the development of new quality and outcome oriented criteria for
licensing and accreditation of health providers; and
(vi) the update and unification of licensing and accreditation processes
across regions and strengthen institutional capacity of licensing and
accreditation bodies, as well as the introduction of a
"certificate-of-need" requirement for major investments in health.
Regional Level
At the regional level, the Project would support the implementation of
guidelines specified above. The design and implementation of this
component will be done in close connection with the activities in the
other components that are facilitating the restructuring. The scope of
the project will be mainly on publicly funded and provided curative
services, but with attention to the regulation and development of
privately funded and provided services. It would also relate closely with
the sanitary and epidemiological system (SANEPID). Health services as
organized and provided under the jurisdiction of other ministries would
also be taken into account.
Within federal guidelines, emphasis would be on the preparation and
implementation of restructuring and rationalization programs in two
regions (Subjects of the Russian Federation). In these regions all
developed models and guidelines for planning and financing would be used
to start the rationalization process. Careful monitoring and evaluation
would help in specifying the technical parameters of the reform program,
testing the broad range of choices to be made, fine-tuning the reform
process and its instruments as well as provide for future Federation-wide
implementation as soon as feasible. Chuvashia and Novgorod (supported by
-2 -



CIDA and Sida, respectively) would be the first two subjects of the
Russian Federation to benefit from the reform. The Federal Ministry of
Health would ensure that other subjects also have access to the models and
instruments to guide their reform processes.
Disbursement from the IBRD loan for the procurement of lumpy equipment at
the regional level would be contingent upon the completion of regional
restructuring plans and the passage of enabling laws and regulations for
implementing those plans. These would include, for example, the
rationalization of hospital bed capacity and shifting of resources from
in-patient care in hospitals to out-patient care at the primary health
care level.
Component II - Strengthening of Financial and Economic Management
This component would help: (i) develop analytical tools including national
and regional financing models and equalization formula, and apply the
models to the costing of benefit package and regional restructuring plans;
(ii) develop training programs in economic and financial analysis; (iii)
develop best practice methods and manuals for financial management and
business planning; (iv) develop institutional capacity to carry out
technology assessment; and (v) develop new approaches to contracting and
paying health workers.
The project would restructure both the sources and uses of financing. The
details of the regional strategies are not yet fully developed, but there
are certain principles guiding the process:
Improved pooling of all resources, optimally into a single-payer fund,
organized either through the regional department or the local HI fund.
This would improve purchasing power.
A unified benefit package, and one which improves incentives for
allocative improvements. For example, current benefits packages cover
drugs for inpatient care, but fail to cover pharmaceuticals on an
outpatient basis, discouraging the movement of services to an outpatient
setting. Changing the benefits package can also improve levels and
distribution of financial protection.
Improved incentives through new provider payment systems that integrate
with objectives to restructure the delivery systems, encourage new
patterns of staffing, and encourage improved technical and allocative
efficiency.
There also are current legislative proposals in Moscow which could affect
the project. The most significant proposal is to integrate the current
social insurance and health insurance funds, and to collect and pool all
funds in Moscow. This proposal promises improved pooling across all of
Russia, but it is not clear how the money would be allocated and the
impact of these decisions for the region. Once passed, the law would need
to be integrated into the regional pilot strategies.
Component III - Sector Policy and Governance
This Component would support the design of a consistent body of laws and
other regulations to ensure adequate governance of the health sector on
the federal level and compliance with federal regulations at the regional
level. It would also support a process of advocacy to secure the
endorsement of the Government of the Russian Federation, the Ministry of
Health and respective regional authorities The institutional potential of
-3 -



the Ministry of Health and regional authorities would be enhanced in terms
of generating future adequate laws and regulations.
The component would help to close existing gaps, provide the legal
framework for health reform implementation activities and help to create
new regulations as appropriate. This component is thus also a condition
for the restructuring of the health system in the pilot regions. The
activities under this component would help to:
a. review existing health care legislation and correct inconsistencies;
b. increase the capacity of the MOH, Duma Health Committee, and pilot
regions to develop appropriate health legislation;
c. develop new legislation and regulation to support reform measures under
components I and II, including new proposals on regulatory arrangements
for health care delivery and health financing as well as
amendments/additions to the current acts to ensure a practicable, reliable
and monitorable legislative system;
d. review and clarify governance relationships between MOH, regional
health authorities, Federal and Territorial Health Insurance Funds, and
providers;
e. review and strengthen the role of the MOH in preparing and implementing
health sector laws and regulations;
f. undertake a public information campaign on the project at the federal
level; and
g. undertake monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of lessons learned.
Component IV - Project Management
This component would finance the support provided to the project in terms
of technical coordination, procurement, and financial management by the
RHCF.
Phasing of the Project. The selected regions have already started working
on the regional strategies, the implementation of which would be financed
by the project, starting from the end of year 1. The Chuvash Republic has
been receiving technical assistance from the Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA), and the Novgorod region from the Swedish
International Development Agency (Sida). During the project preparation
there has been a regular dialogue between the Bank, the federal level and
the regions. The regional investments, included in Component I of the
project, would start after the proposed restructuring strategies of the
regions are presented and approved. The strategy for each region would be
elaborated on the following basis: (i) it would follow the guidelines for
restructuring included in the Operational Manual; and (ii) it would be
financially sustainable. To ensure proper phasing/ synchronization of
activities, the implementation of regional-level work would be phased in
after the preparation of the required guidelines at the Federal level.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Overall responsibility for the implementation of the Health Reform
Implementation project will be undertaken by the Project Implementation
Unit (PIU). It will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the
-4 -



project and reports directly to the Ministry of Health. The PIU is
located in Moscow.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: The project would not present any significant environmental
concerns and will not finance rehabilitation or civil works. The project
does not deal with disposal of medical waste.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
- 5-



that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Olusoji 0. Adeyi         11/13/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   11/13/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Armin H. Fidler 11/19/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



