Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC239 
 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 15, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P060005 
Project Name: URBAN 
INFRASTRUCTURE & CITY 
MANAGEMENT PROG 
Task Team Leader: Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 3, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 40 
Estimated Board Date: September 4, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector Investment Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government 
administration (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the 
poor (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S);Other urban 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Isabelle Paris 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The primary development objective of the program is improve urban infrastructure and services 
delivery in Kigali and 5 secondary cities.    
 
This will be accomplished along three lines : (i) physical investments, (ii) capacity building and 
(iii) appropriate mechanisms to ensure sustainable results. This would entails programs,  to  (i) 
develop programming and financing mechanisms of priority urban investments within a 
programmatic and participatory approach, (ii) upgrade infrastructure and services delivery in 
urban setting , (iii) assist urban local governments to improve local revenue mobilization, and 
financial management, (iv) assist GoR in operationalizing the fiscal framework and 
intergovernmental transfers and prepare mechanisms for urban PRSC, and (v) build the capacity 
of cities, local stakeholders and government to develop, implement and monitor urban strategies 
and programs. 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The program has a medium term goal in recognition of the fact that decentralization and local 
government capacity building are dynamic process associated with risks, thus whose objective  
can only be achieved over time. In this regard, the program should be conceived over a medium 
term horizon with two phases. A Sector Investment Loan would be the instrument used to 
develop the program during the first phase over a 4-year period in Kigali and 5 secondary cities. 
The geographic coverage is limited in this phase in order to build capacity and momentum in the 
use of urban planning and management tools and to consolidate progress in the implementation 
of the city contracts. The 4-year time framework would also allow to develop appropriate 
funding mechanisms for implementing budget support programs in an ulterior phase (PRSC), 
that would expand this approach to all urban districts.  
 
The SIL would include three components :   
 
(i) 
Urban Districts Programs for Kigali and for five secondary cities 
(Butare, Kibuye, 
Kabuga, Nyanza and Ruhengeri).  This component aims at introducing tools for better 
programming and managing cities and build the capacity of local governments. Local consultants 
would support executive and consultative bodies of the city  to prepare urban, financial and 
organizational audits with the participation of the communities and the local private sector.  
Based on the outcomes of these audits,  district representatives  and communities will define a 
City Contract which would include : (a) a priority investment program to build or upgrade local 
level infrastructures , (b) a priority maintenance program for these investments and (b) a city 
improvement and capacity building program to enhance management and resource mobilization. 
These programs will build on existing Local Development Plans. The investment programs 
would focus on city level infrastructure as opposed to community micro-projects but would 
provide a framework for CDD to integrate the Decentralization and Community Development 
Project approach. This city contract will be approved by the City Council and the CDC and 
signed between the mayor and the Ministry of finances. Audits will be prepared during project 
preparation phase in order to sign contracts and start implementation at project launch.  
 
(ii)  
A specific program for the Capital City Kigali of priority large-scale economic and 
environmental infrastructure
. To support economic development, improve the urban environment 
and contribute to facilitating the functioning of the City of Kigali, the program would include 
large investments that are beyond the sole responsibility of the City  (roads, drainage, solid waste 
management) . This component could also include a slum upgrading and prevention program 
which would require specific implementation methods. This program design will be defined 
during project preparation. 
 
(iii)  
An institutional development program
. This component would support (i) sector studies 
and implementation of selected reforms in the fields of decentralization, land management, urban 
environment and development, infrastructure delivery and preparation of specific studies and 
activities for transition to urban PRSC, (ii) capacity building of local, provincial and national 
institutions in these fields and of local entrepreneurs, (iii)  monitoring and evaluation system, 
annual external audits and (iv) the operating costs of a small coordination unit which would play 
an advisory role and collect essential data. During preparation, several studies will be conducted 
Page  3
 
 
(land management, upgrading strategy, urban transport review, urbanization issues, 
intergovernmental transfers) to identify areas in need of specific supports. 
 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The Project will target the Capital City Kigali and five secondary towns : Ruhengeri, Kibuye, 
Butare, Nyansa and Kabuga. All areas are still affected by the consequences of genocide and 
have a population structure with a high proportion of widow-headed households. Because rural 
areas have experienced destocking of livestock and declining soil fertility, and with the return of 
refugees,  the urban population growth is very high close to 6% which brings a new pressure on 
urban land and services.  
  
There are important differences between provinces. Some, like Ruhengeri and Gisenyi, are of 
high agricultural potential but have been badly affected by insecurity and have many people 
without housing. In Ruhengeri, large inflows of population contribute to the infrastructure deficit 
and put additional environmental pressure.  Other provinces, such as Kigali-Ngali and Butare 
have chronically low incomes arising from dense population, relative aridity and soil acidity, 
compounded by a high number of vulnerable households as a result of genocide, and aggravated 
by the current drought. 
 
(1) Butare province
. This province has a lower agricultural potential and the high population 
density has reinforced declining soil fertility and interest in wetland reclamation. Deforestation 
also is a particular problem, and industry (which is centered in the main town) has been 
damaged. City of Butare
,
 the administrative capital of the region is about 105 km south of Kigali 
the capital, with a population of about 47, 650 according to the 2001 census.  Butare  is the third 
largest city after Kigali and Ruhengeri and is home to important health, cultural commercial and 
educational institutions including University of Butare.  The transient population of Butare town 
is estimated at about 70,000. City of  Nyanza
, the seat of the King and ancient center of political, 
administrative and business activities.  Nyanza has a population  of 50,000 and an area of 129 
m2. 
(2) Kibuye province, 
despite it’s acid soils and high levels of erosion has very high potential for 
agriculture, particularly coffee and for tourism.  Parts of it are very poor but the availability of 
lakes and wetlands present an opportunity to increase agricultural production. City of Kibuye
, 
the administrative seat of the province is situated about 140 km to the west of Kigali and has a 
population of about 42,000 inhabitants.  The recently improved road between Kigali and Kibuye 
induced increased level of housing and commercial development in Kibuye.  Lying on the shores 
of lake Kivu the town offers attractions to tourists.  The challenge will be to encourage a sound 
development taking into account harsh topography and preservation of the quality of the urban 
environment and lake waters. . 
(3) Kigali-Ngali province
 includes some of the poorest areas in the country, despite its location 
close to the capital city. It is densely populated, soil fertility is declining, coffee trees are old, 
access to water is poor, and the region has been affected by a period of poor rains. City of
 
Kabuga
, the administrative capital of the province has a population of about 45,000.  Its close 
proximity to Kigali, 20km, and relatively flat topography offers suitable sites for building and 
Page  4
 
 
there is a burst of construction activities.  Kabuga’s location makes the town open to the creation 
of informal settlements if relocation and spill-overs from Kigali are not controlled. 
(4) Kigali-urban
 has experienced a sharp increase in population since 1994. Like other capital 
cities in the region, it has lower child mortality than the rest of the country, but higher HIV 
prevalence. The large population influx has put a strain on urban infrastructure, especially for 
water and sanitation. While there are pockets of severe poverty in Kigali; as a whole the urban-
rural gap is very marked. Kigali City
, the political, administrative and commercial capital of 
Rwanda is central located in the country.  The population of Kigali is increasing at a very fast 
pace: the population in 2002 is reported to be 670,000 with an intercensal growth of rate of 
almost 9.2 percent growth between 1991 and 2002 putting a pressure on local infrastructure and 
resources. A large part of the city is informal due to the large population flows.  Kigali’s central 
location with radial roads linking it with the provinces has led to a lot of rural-urban migration 
particularly during the last 5 years..  
 
(5) Ruhengeri province 
is a high-potential area for local economic development but severely 
affected by insecurity. There is severe destocking, and a very large need for rehousing (in the 
order of 100,000 households). Ruhengeri City
, the administrative capital of the province is 
situated about 87 km north-west of Kigali and has more than 34,800 inhabitants.  Ruhengeri is 
located in a fertile agricultural zone at the cross-roads for important routes; the Kigali-
Ruhengeri-Gisenyi axis as well as the corridor to the RDC and Uganda ( the Uganda border is 
within 25 km).  Situated at the base of the extinct Viruga volcanic mountain and close to the 
natural habitat of mountain gorillas, Ruhengeri has the potential of contributing to the 
preservation of this natural habitat by
 the development of infrastructure and services that support tourism.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The Borrower recruited high level skilled staff to coordinate and manage the project and set up a 
steering committee led by  CEPEX. Focal persons have been designated in each relevant 
ministries and cities. Institutions like the national tender Board and the Office of the General 
Auditor are fully functional and will be critical in the implementation and control process. The 
City of Kigali has been staffed by skilled professional who initiated the first preparation 
activities for this project.  However, the capacity to manage urban development programs at the 
local and at the national level is still weak, both on technical and financial aspects. Institutional 
audits will be carried out to assess local capacity and design appropriate capacity  building 
programs tailored to each stakeholders. The environmental and the social assessments will 
furhter define complementary programs that will help institutionalize the management of 
safeguards issues beyond the program life-cycle. 
 
 
Page  5
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
Environmental assessment (including environmental, social and environmental 
management plan) will be carried out before appraisal. See par. IIIA 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
A resettlement framework will be defined as part of the environmental assessment 
to be carried out during project preparation. It will address the slum upgrading 
component as well as the upgrading of urban infrastructure. 
[] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[x ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
Cultural Properties will be identified during urban audits and mitigation measures 
defined. 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [x ] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The program is designed to have beneficial impacts on the population in terms of better service 
delivery and improvement of living conditions in slum areas. Potential negative impacts will be 
mitigated as they would have been identified at the early stage of urban audits. Consequent 
works program would be designed along WB technical and policy guidelines (health and safety, 
environmental and social) that will be also specified in the bidding documents. 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
 
 
 
Although three safeguard policies are triggered, effects are expected to be limited in their 
impacts and are considered technically and institutionally manageable. 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
The project is designed to gradually  improve the urban environment through rehabilitation and 
upgrading of local infrastructures. At this stage of preparation and before the production of urban 
audits, the proposed local investments are not fully identified but would typically include small 
roads and pathways, school and health facilities, city halls, sports and recreational facilities, 
sanitation, drainage and environmental improvement, markets, stations  and other economic 
investments. Kigali structuring infrastructures would include: upgrading roads, drainage works, 
landfill rehabilitation. The program  will  also define a slum upgrading component. This 
component would seek to gradually  improve neighborhood infrastructures (mainly pathway, 
drainage, social facilities) without disrupting the social and urban tissues. Land tenure issue will 
not be addressed at this stage. 
 
The following steps have been factored into  project preparation to mitigate potential negative 
impacts : 
(i) An environmental and social assessment will be conducted during project preparation and will 
have four distinct components :  
(a) an environmental impact assessment at the project level that will also help  develop 
guidelines for environmental impact screening for small scale infrastructure projects,  
(b) a social assessment to ensure adequate consideration of social issues, social 
mobilization, consultation and participation mechanisms and avoid any social 
disruption in a sensitive country. Specifically, issues related to gender, vulnerable 
households, social groups relationships, representativeness and participation of 
different stakeholders and social groups, access to land assets will be addressed,  
(c) a resettlement framework to guide upgrading activities in slum areas and define when 
a more detailed RAP is needed and  
(d) an environment and social management plan which will provide a tool and timetable 
for implementation that will address environmental and social issues. 
 
(2) Urban audits and technical studies: terms of reference will specify stakeholder consultation 
and environmental screening requirement along WB policies and technical guidelines. All 
physical works identified to achieve project objectives will be designed in full compliance with 
environmental, social and health and security directives.  
 
(3) Tender documents : These environmental, social and health and security directives will also 
be specified in bidding documents. 
 
Page  7
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Key stakeholders include : urban communities and people leaving in precarious areas, local 
executive and consultative bodies, contractors, central governments, NGOS. Consultation and 
involvement of communities and stakeholders will be systematic during project preparation at 
different levels : (i) during the preparation of the urban audits and the definition of the city 
contract component, and (ii) during the preparation of the social and environmental assessments 
and resettlement framework. Consultation requirement are specified in the terms of reference of 
the different studies. Stakeholders will be also involved in a series of workshop scheduled along 
the preparation process. Relevant safeguards documents will be disclosed at district levels and in 
communities through existing committees and community organizations. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
At PCN review meeting is was requested to adopt the new ISDS format (not available at time of 
submission). The Safeguards Unit suggested that the ISDS be revised to provide more 
information specifically on the social aspects of the project.  Following the PCN review meeting, 
revision of the ISDS content was carried out with the Safeguard Specialist before submitting the 
document for formal approval. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
It was agreed with the Sector manager and AFTOS that a QER will be organized before the next 
mission scheduled October 2003. 
 
 
 
 
Signature  
and Date: 
______(signed)_____________________
 
Catherine Farvacque-Vitkovic 
Acting Sector Manager – AFTU2 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
 and Date: 
___(signed)_________________
 
Sylvie Debomy 
Task Team Leader - AFTU2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature  
and Date: 
_____________(signed)_____________
 
 
Africa Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
 
 
