Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC125
Section 1 - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/13/2003
A. Basic Project Data (fron PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO                   Project ID: P079116
Project: Montenegro Environmentally Sensitive Tourist  Task Team Leader: Manuel G. Marino
Areas Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 1, 2003        EBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 11, 2003                IDA Amount ($m): 7.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE                             Sector: Solid waste management (100%)
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance  Theme: Pollution management and environmental
Loan (SIM)                                       health (P); Environmental policies and institutions
Status: Lending                                  (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main objective of the Project is to create ecological and commercially sustainable solid waste
collection and disposal services in Montenegro coastal municipalities, needed to maintain a clean,
environmentally attractive coastal area. This will be achieved through: (i) developing the sector's
institutional, policy and regulatory framework; (ii) rehabilitating two current municipal disposal sites,
that operate without sanitary conditions, to function as properly designed regional sanitary landfills; (iii)
closing current disposal sites in an environmentally acceptable manner; (iv) provision of modern
collection equipment; (v) initiating a pilot recycling campaign; and (vi) strengthening multi-municipal
joint companies (MJC) that will be created to operate the two regional solid waste disposal systems.
Additional to the environmental benefits the project seeks to achieve, the Project aims at bolstering
tourism prospects by eliminating the important obstacle that represents the current solid waste collection
and disposal problems, that are gravely affecting enviromnentally sensitive tourist areas in the coast.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The total project costs of US$9.5 million, of which SDR 5.0 million (equivalent to US$7.0 million), will
be Association financed through an IDA credit. The project will be organized in the three components
summarized below.
Component I. Environmental Infrastructure
*      Regional Landfills. The Project will finance the improvement of environmental infrastructure in
the coastal municipalities, rehabilitating two of the current municipal landfills that operate without
sanitary conditions, to develop in the same areas properly designed Regional Landfills. The Project will
finance landfills in Kotor, for Kotor and Budva, and in Bar, for Bar and Ulcinj, including the equipment
needed for operation.
*      Collection Equiipment. In addition to the development of the two regional landfills, the
component will finance equipment for collection and transport of solid wastes to the landfills (containers,
underground facilities in sensitive areas, compactors, collection trucks, support vehicles and mobile
equipment for the cleaning of containers).



2
ISDS
Component II. Environmental Rehabilitation
*      Closing of Uncontrolled Disposal Sites. The project will finance equipment and civil works
needed to permanently close five current municipal unsanitary disposal sites in an environmentally sound
manner, and institute long-tern environmental monitoring.
*      Pilot Recycling Campaign. The project will finance works for the rehabilitation of solid waste
management facilities, recycling equipment and technical assistance to support a pilot program of
recycling, that includes: (i) the execution of a public dissemination campaign, with particular attention to
local schools; (ii) the introduction of separation of wastes at the source in selected locations; (iii) an
study on recycling options, demand, and markets; and (iv) the improvement of current infonnal recycling
practices in Kotor's landfill.
Component Ill. Technical Assistance
*      Project Management. The project will finance equipment and consultant services for project
management, including auditing and follow-up social monitoring, and for the supervision of the proposed
regional landfills.
*      Sector Institutional Development. The project will also finance consultant services and training
to support the GoM to strengthen the newly created MJCs and further develop the regulatory framework
for the sector.
Project costs by component and percentages financed by the Association are shown below.
Components:
I. Environmental Infrastructure
a. Regional Landfill Construction
b Collection Equipment
II. Environmental Rehabilitation
III. Technical Assistance
Unallocated (contingencies)
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other cultLrally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Montenegro Coastal Area represents a unique and valuable location. It is characterized by specific
biotic and biotic-environmental resources with a majestic geographical setting and very high cultural and
historical values, ruins of past glories, such as old palaces, cathedrals and little churches, cowers and bell
towers. The shore area also offers a great number of small ports and picturesque villages. The landscape is
typified by the Mediterranean vegetation, with olive-trees, pomegranate-trees, oleanders and chestnut-trees.
Some sites deserve to be mentioned, for instance the sandy beaches of Budva and the Boka Kotorska Bay,
on which Kotor and Tivat are located. In particular, this area, ingress of the Adriatic Sea, via narrow
channels, making wide bays extending 36 Km inland, is included in the UNESCO list of World's natural and
cultural heritage (Committee for World Heritage, Cairo and Luxor 22-26 October 1979) because of its
exceptional environmental, cultural and historical values.
B. Check Environtental (Classificationt: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.: An Environmental Impact Assessment, in parallel with a Social Assessment, has been carried



3
ISDS
out during project preparation. Environmental Management Plans have also been prepared before appraisal
as part of the EAs. Based on the results of these stLdies it has been confirmed that the project will have a
positive environmental impact and any potential negative consequences will be properly managed and
mitigated with the proposed measures. The Bank has confirmned the Environmental category B for the
project.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered (fromi PDS)
(click on E for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        0 Yes () No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               () Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                C) Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  C) Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              U) Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               C) Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      ( ) Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          C) Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  U) Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*    U) Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sutmmary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If iniformation is lnot available,
describe steps to be tak-en to obtaini necessary data.
T.iD. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or ilTeversible impacts.
The project is expected to have an important and positive environmental impact in the project area. By
closing current uncontrolled sited and developing two of them to function as properly controlled sanitary
landfills, that include all necessary pollution control measures, the project will not only eliminate the
existing degradation, but provide the basis for adequate management of solid wastes in the future, in an
environmnentally and financially sustainable manner.
An Environmental Assessment (EA) has been completed of the proposed regional landfills in Kotor (for
the municipalities of Kotor and Budva) and Bar (for the municipalities of Bar and Ulcinj). The EAs
follow the guidelines of the EU and the Government of Montenegro (Official Gazette 21/97). Public
consultation meetings with local stakeholders and public in general, including NGOs, were carried out by
PEW during project preparation to discuss the proposed assessment TORs and results. The conclusions
of these consultation meetings have been incorporated in the Final EAs submitted to the Bank.
Issues/impacts known to occur in landfill development and of most concem to stakeholders were studied
during the preappraisal mission, and in the EAs, particularly: (i) social, socioeconomic and cultural
issues; (ii) hydrogeology, hydrology and water quality; (iii) health and safety; (iv) air quality; (v)
noise; (vi) ecology; (vii) off-site traffic; and (viii) visual/landscape. The types of likely impacts
expected and the mitigation measures that will be applied are presented in the project's EAs, which
conclude that since the project proposes to remedy past environmental degradation and incorporates



4
ISDS
necessary pollution prevention measures, these impacts are positive in tenns of the local environmlent and
any effect on the environient would be limited and teclnically and institutionally manageable. During
project preparation the Bank obtained from the relevant authorities confirmation of the compatibility of
the proposed landfill with activities carried out in its surroundings. In particular, consultants reviewed
during appraisal any potential attraction to birds associated to the proposed landfill, the problems and
risks this might cause in the nearby Tivat's airport operation, and proposed measures to prevent them.
The consultants concluded that the current status is unacceptable and represents a high risk, that further
recommends the urgent implementation of the project. The consultants also recommended locating the
landfill further away for the ninway for added security, and full coverage of the wastes. With these
measures, the Federal Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications approved the location of the
proposed landfill on January 28, 2003. This issue was also reviewed in the EA, which concluded that the
landfill was, with the proposed control measures and in the proposed location, fully compatible with the
airport and a fundamental improvement of the current situation. The control measures have also been
incorporated in the EMP and will be a credit covenant. The EA and EMP were approved by the
government and the municipality, that issued the required construction pennit.
As part of the preparation of the EAs, an Environmental Management Plan for each landfill was also
prepared. These were published, together with the EAs summary, in the official gazette and made
available to the public at the beneficiary's offices and local libraries. The obligation to implement the
EMPs will also be adopted by the MJCs under the Sub-credit and Project Implementation Agreement.
These EMPs are binding documents and the commnitment for their implementation by the Project
beneficiaries is part of the project legal agreements.
Local NGOs and community representatives will have an opportunity to be involved in the monitoring
and control of the proposed activities, to ensure that the EMP requirements are followed.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
Il.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatmiient of alternatives (if required)
I[.D.3. Describe arrangement for the boirower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment: An environmental impact assessment has been carried out by PEW under
tenns of reference acceptable to the Association. This assessment has been complemented by a social
assessment and an environmental management plan.
Involuntary Resettlement: The project does not involve any resettlement, land acquisition or involuntary
changes in land use. Both landfill sites are municipal property. This was confirmed by the Bank's team
as part of the preappraisal mission. Thus OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered.
International Waters: During preparation and appraisal the team verified that the project does not
involve works or actions on intemational waterways or discharges into surface or groundwaters. This OP
is not triggered.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on



5
ISDS
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Social Assessment included focus groups with key stakeholders to discuss the project components,
approach and investments and to identify both areas of concem and means to address them. As part of
project preparation, the project team also conducted meetings with relevant stakeholders and local NGOs
to review the results of the Enviromnental and Social Assessments. These were followed by additional
public consultations in each city prior to appraisal to discuss the Environmental Assessment and
disseminate information about project objectives and components.
E. Safeguiards Classification (select in SAP). Category is detenrined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediaiy projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requiremiienits
Environmental Assessment/Analvsisv/Management Plan:        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               4/1/2003      6/4/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           6/16/2003     5/27/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                            4/1/2003      7/16/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Franmework:                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



6
ISDS
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted bv       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Manuel G. Marino                            6/18/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Stan Peabody/Person/World Bank         6/18/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Rita Klees/Person/World Bank           6/18/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Namie                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane Holt                                07/17/03
Motoo Konishi                               03/24/03
Sector Manager



