ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frec of Poverty
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date IS DS Prepared/Updated: 10/15/2002                              24966
Section I - Basic Information                                   October 15, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SIERRA LEONE                             Project ID: P079335
Project: NATIONAL SOCIAL ACTION PROJECT          Task Team Leader: Eileen Murray
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 15, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 31, 2003                    IDA Amount ($m): 21.00
Managing Unit: AFTH2                              Sector: Primary education (25%); Health (25%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  General water/sanitation/flood protection sector
Status: Lending                                  (20%); General agriculture; fishing and forestry
sector (15%); Roads & highways (15%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
reconstruction (P); Decentralization (P); Other
human development (S); Vulnerability assessment
and monitoring (S); Gender (S)
I.A.2. P'roject Objectives:
The project is designed to support two goals of the March 2002 Transitional Support Strategy for Sierra
Leone: (a) to reduce the risk of renewed conflict, and (b) to generate sustained poverty reduction
(including improvements in nutrition, health and education).
The project development objective is to assist war-affected communities (with a focus on newly-
accessible areas* and vulnerable people within these areas) to re-establish themselves in terms of
restored rural services and capacity for collective action.
This objective would be achieved through participatory processes in which the National Commission for
Social Action (NaCSA), ministries, local governments and communities are mutually accountable. These
processes would include locally-driven and implemented community development sub-projects;
labor-intensive public works; and capacity-building support for communities and local government
authorities.
*Newly-accessible areas are chiefdoms (defined by the Security Committee of UNAMSIL) which were
under rebel control up to the end of the conflict and have come under Government control since January
18, 2002 wvhen the warringfactions issued a declaration to end the war.
I.A.3. Project Description:



2
ISDS
The project will support the Government's move towards a post conflict stage with an increased focus on
community development, as a mechanism for support war-affected communities to re-establish
themselves, especially in the newly-accessible areas, through implementation of the following
components:
N.B. The project will place strong and explicit focus on building a sense of comnmunity and building
social capital, therefore social capital activities wvill be built into all sub-projects.
Components:
1. Community-Driven Program (CDP): Direct financing of communities will constitute the core of
this program. Communities will be fully empowered and responsible for managing, implementing, and
maintaining social and economic sub-projects at the community level. All community initiatives would
be selected through a community participatory process and processed according to technical, financial,
social and environmental guidelines described in NaCSA's Handbook on Direct Financing to
Communities. In cases where communities are not yet deemed capable of benefitting from the direct
financing approach, they will be able to hire NGOs (on a competitive basis) to assist them in
implementing sub-projects. Participatory poverty assessments will be undertaken in the most needy
communities to build organizational capacity to ensure that the needs of the most vulnerable groups are
metwhenidentifyingsub-projects.
2. Pilot Rural Public Works Program: This approach would focus on basic rehabilitation efforts for
very basic chiefdom and district infrastructure (e.g. feeder roads and drainage systems for these roads) as
a mechanism of providing employment to ex-combattants and other vulnerable groups while at the same
time supporting the rehabilitation of community infrastructure in newly accessible areas. NaCSA would
be responsible for contracting local public works, using competitive bidding procedures, based on
specific demands from  chiefdom  and district authorities.  Concurrently, NaCSA would support
systematic capacity building support measures for chiefdom and district authorities so that NaCSA will
be able to fully hand over this responsibility to them by the time of the mid-term review. NaCSA is in the
process  of  developing  a  Handbook  on   this  proposed  Rural  Public  Works  Program.
3. Project Management and Support for Innovative ActivitiesSupport will be provided to the
National Commission for Social Action (NaCSA) to coordinate, plan, monitor, program, and supervise a
wide range of demand driven community based poverty alleviation activities with maximum community
empowerment at all stages in cooperation with NGOs, CBOs, relevant line ministries, private sector
partners, civil society etc. This component will support: (i) capacity building activities for communities,
chiefdoms, and districts authorities--conflict resolution will be a key entry point for capacity building at
all levels; (ii) a pilot shelter program in newly accessible areas to be implemented by an experienced
partner; (iii) IEC activities in selected communities; (iv) monitoring and evaluation; and (v) technical
assistance for social assessments, beneficiary assessments, risk and vulnerability work, micro-finance,
financial and technical audits, PPAs, environmental studies, and participatory M&E; and (vi) support to
the Financial Management and Procurement Unit (FMPU).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Project activities will take place throughout the country. The exact location will depend on the type of
activity identified by the various communities based on a participatory consultation process.



3
ISDS
In terms of the Bank's safeguard policies, the environmental assessment, pest management, and involuntary
resettlement safeguards will be triggered nationwide. Since the project's activities are demand driven, it is
extremely difficult to determine at this point the exact location for the implementation of activities that
could trigger the safeguards on natural habitats, forestry, and cultural property.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Connwents: The project's Operational Manual will contain specific chapters on environmental and social
management, resettlement, and pest management. The Operational Manual will include "mini"
environmental assessment for the various types of sub-projects to be financed as well as the corresponding
mitigation measures.
NaCSA staff (at the central, regional and district levels) will be trained on environmental and social
management issues. In addition, as part of the project's overall community mobilization process,
environmental and social issues at the community level will be addressed.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes     Noo    TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                          Yes . No   * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 Yes   .No   *TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 *Yes    _No     TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      Yes . No   * TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          Yes * No      TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                *Yes     No     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                   Yes *No    _TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*              Yes 0 No   _ TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         3 Yes * No    ' TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment: The Bank's policy on environmental assessment is triggered by the fact that
the project will support rehabilitation of community based infrastructure (through a participatory
mechanism) with the potential of some localized environmental impacts. An environmental management
framework will be prepared to identify mitigation measures and a specific action plan for each type of
sub-project eligible for financing in order to reduce or eliminate environmental impacts. These mitigation
measures and corresponding action plan (mini environmental assessment for each specific type of
sub-project, preferably in a check-list format) will be added to the project's operational manual and as part of
the review/approval process for the individual sub-projects, specific mitigation measures will be proposed
and put in place.
Pest Management: Provision of agricultural inputs to communities may likely: (i) affect crop production



4
ISDS
and productivity levels; (ii) foster agricultural diversification and intensification; and (iii) modify training
curricula in agricultural intensification techniques for producer organizations.  In addition, irrigation
perimeters are likely to increase vector borne diseases, such as malaria and bilharziasis of which will have
implications on pest populations and management practices. A pest management plan will be prepared
which will include the establishment of linkages between this project and the Government agency
responsible for pest management, training of dealers in agricultural inputs, users such as farmers,
particularly training of farmers in rational use of pesticides, and integrated pest management. This plan will
need to foster ecologically based pest control practices designed to minimize reliance on synthetic
agricultural inputs.
Natural Habitats: The Environmental Assessment will look at whether this safeguard is actually triggered.
In the case that it is, a natural habitat. plan will be prepared to include the identification of agencies
responsible for management of natural habitats and these agencies will also benefit from the relevant
training.
Forestry: The Environmental Assessment will look at whether this safeguard is actually triggered. In the
case that it is, a forestry plan will be prepared to include the identification of agencies responsible for forest
management and these agencies will also benefit from the relevant training.
Cultural Properties: The Environmental Assessment will look at whether this safeguard is actually
triggered. In the case that it is, a cultural property plan will be prepared to include the identification of
agencies responsible for management of cultural properties--these agencies will also benefit from the
relevant training.
Resettlement Policy Framework:This framework, which will be prepared, will identify tenure and
ownership rights, squatter claims, and land acquisition compensation. This relates to construction of simple
houses and other basic community structures.
Medical Waste Management: A National Plan for medical waste management has been designed during
the preparation process for the IDA financed HIV/AIDS project. Both teams will be collaborating on this
issue to ensure that an adequate waste management plan is put in place for all health posts to be rehabilitated
under this project (in parallel to staff training).
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No potential cumulative impacts are foreseen.
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The potential long-term impact would be the expansion of agricultural activities due to the return of
displaced population groups. In this context, an environmental mitigation plan will be prepared as part of
the Environmental Assessment.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
There are no alternatives envisaged at this time. NaCSA in parallel with the concerned Ministry and other
entities will need to enforce compliance of the pest management plans.



5
ISDS
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment: An environmental management framework will be prepared to identify
mitigation measures and a specific action plan for each type of sub-project eligible for financing. These
mitigation mesures, in a checklist format, will be part of the project operational manual and will be used for
the review/approval process of individual sub-projects.
Pest Management: A pest management plan is in the process of being prepared and will include linkages
between this project and the Government agency responsible for pest management, training of dealers in
agricultural inputs, users such as farmers, particularly training of farmers in rational use of pesticides, and
integrated pest management. This plan will foster ecologically based pest control practices designed to
minimize reliance on synthetic agricultural inputs.
Natural Habitats: In the case that a natural habitat safeguard is triggered, a natural habitat plan will be
prepared to include the identification of agencies responsible for management of natural habitats and these
agencies will also benefit from the relevant training.
Forestry: In the case that a forestry safeguard is triggered, a forestry plan will be prepared to include the
identification of agencies responsible for forest management and these agencies will also benefit from the
relevant training.
Cultural Properties: In the case that a cultural properties safeguard is triggered, a cultural property plan
will be prepared to include the identification of agencies responsible for management of cultural
properties--these agencies will also benefit from the relevant training
Resettlement Policy Framework:A framework is being prepared which will identify land tenure and
ownership rights, amonst other things.
Medical Waste Management: Collaboration is underway with the Ministry of Health to ensure that health
facilities to be rehabilitated by this project will have a corresponding waste management plan.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Under the Community Reintegration and Rehabilitationi Project (CRRP), responsibility and ownership of
community sub-projects has resided squarely in the hands of the implementing partners. Under the
successor Nationa Social Action Project (NSAP), it is important that NaCSA moves toward a
community-driven approach whereby communities take much greater - if not complete - responsibility for
sub-project identification and implementation. NaCSA will introduce standard arrangements for
community procurement which have been developed in Bank-financed community-driven development
projects that enable communities to comply with procurement and financial management rules that are in
line with World Bank procedures, such as local shopping. These arrangements would be set out in
NaCSA's revised implementation manual.
Given the concentration of NSAP assistance in the newly-accessible areas, it is likely that particular
challenges will be faced in mobilizing and building capacity in communities of returnees with as yet little
community organization or experience in working together. NaCSA has begun to address this issue by
training a core group of staff in "third generation" participatory poverty assessment (PPA) methodology
(with the assistance of a DFID-financed PPA specialist trainer). This methodology is particularly
well-suited for less organized communities, as it involves not only standard PPA poverty diagnostic



6
ISDS
techniques, but also an action-planning process and the provision of modest follow-up matching grants
for small projects identified by the community during the PPA process. This provides a
"learning-by-doing" experience for communities to work together on a priority, easily-achievable project.
Under the NSAP, all NaCSA field staff and key implementing partner staff would receive training in this
methodology, which would then increasingly be introduced as standard procedure when initiating
NaCSA support with the weakest communities. The poverty diagnostic data generated would be included
in the Community Assessment forms accompanying subsequent claims for funding of more substantive
follow-up sub-projects under "regular" NaCSA  procedures. The recommended Environmental
Assessment reports will be disclosed (both In-Country and at the InfoShop) prior to appraisal.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
]S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



7
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of'"in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002
Date of'submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2002
Date of' distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of'"in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of'receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of'"in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/16/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2002
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of'submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Eileen Murray                               10/09/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Kristine Schwebach/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Amadou Konare/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguardis Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                    10/10/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Alexander V. Abrantes                       10/09/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAHCH  -      FEEDBACK      SITE MAP       SHOVVCA%E     z



