Report No. 23827
Report No: I051829 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SLOVAK REPUBLIC         Project ID: P051829
Project: Industrial Cogeneration Project         Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 15, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 3, 2002      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSIE     Sector: PY - Other Power & Energy Conversion; VY -
Other Environment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The major objective of the project is to decrease the emissions of
greenhouse gases (GHG) in a cost-effective and reasonably low-risk manner.
This objective would be achieved by means of displacing grid electricity
with more efficient electric generation from a CHP plant at the site of
Chemosvit a.s. (a large producer of foil packaging materials and synthetic
fibers). An associated Project objective is to demonstrate small-scale
gas-fired cogeneration in the Slovak Republic.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The energy system of Chemosvit a.s., a large Slovakian producer of foil
packaging materials and synthetic fibers, was designed primarily to meet
the demand of company plants for steam and hot water. On-site cogeneration
at the CHP plant of Chemosvit's subsidiary energy supplier, Energochem,
meets approximately half of Chemosvit's electrical needs. The rest of
demand for electricity is met by purchases from the public grid.
In line with its global objective to decrease GHG emissions, the project
will introduce investments necessary to modernize Chemosvit Energochem's
electric production capacity in a way that will ensure maximum efficiency
and a high standard of environmental compliance. Without such
modernization, the plant would most likely lose its physically obsolete
steam-turbine capacity and deteriorate into a heat-only boiler plant, with
all its electricity purchased from the grid. Under the project, some of
the most efficient technology for gas-fired on-site cogeneration will be
used.
The investment components of the project will include, first of all, the
supply and installation of 3 x 2.7 MWe gas motors. At a later stage in the
project, the existing steam turbines will be retired and replaced with a
steam turbine of 3.75 MWe capacity for a total of 11.85 MWe of electric
capacity. For heat, the gas motors will have 8.7 MWt capacity while the
steam turbine will have 17.3 MWt capacity. The existing heat-only
gas-fired boilers will cover the remaining 19 MWt of peak heat demand. In
addition, the implementation of the project will require the installation
of some new gas-supply, heat exchange and distribution systems, and



electric power transformation and distribution equipment. A new building
for the gas motors will be built. The building will have either one stack
or three stacks (one for each gas motor).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project site is located in the small town of Svit, Slovakia. The town
is situated 8 km west of the town of Poprad, in a long valley stretching
between the High Tatry mountains in the north and the Low Tatry mountains
in the south. The elevation of the town is about 750 m above sea level.
The most significant environmentally sensitive area close to the project
site is the Tatransky National Park (TANAP), which covers an extensive
territory of the High Tatry mountains spanning the Slovakian border and
continuing into Poland. In 1993, the Tatransky National Park was listed by
UNESCO in the Global Net of Biosphere Reservations as the "Biosphere
Reservation TANAP". The area of the National Park in Slovakia is about 74
kmy. Around the National Park is a protection zone (buffer zone) with an
area of 36.5 kmy. The closest point on the border of TANAP is north of
Svit at a distance of about 3.5 km from the project site.
The National Park of Low Tatry (NAPANT) is another protected area
southwest of the project site, but both the distance (about 18 km) and the
dominant wind direction make it unlikely for NAPANT to be affected by the
project.
Some level of environmental protection is also applied to the natural area
of Baba immediately south of Svit. The distance from the project site to
Baba's northern border is about 300 m. However, Baba is much smaller and
environmentally less sensitive than TANAP or NAPANT.
The origin of Svit is closely linked to the history of the Chemosvit
company. The town was founded in the 1930s when the Bata company
established Chemosvit as its subsidiary company here. Today, Svit is still
an industrial town with 7,500 residents, with about 1,600 of its people
employed by Chemosvit. Retirees from Chemosvit form another sizeable group
of its population.
The predominant wind direction is from the west to the east. Besides the
eastern part of Svit itself, the populated areas downwind (within a 5 km
radius of the project site) include the villages of Batizovce, Gerlachov,
and Spisska Teplica. The larger town of Poprad (pop. about 60,000) is 8 km
to the east.
B. Check Environmental Classification: ERROR: Invalid UNID; UNID must be
a 32-digit hex string.
Comments: The environmental category A was assigned to the project rather
as a precautionary measure mostly due to the relative proximity of the
above-mentioned protected areas. Otherwise, neither the size of the
project nor its nature would warrant this category. This is not a
green-field project but a modernization of an existing industrial facility
with a limited expansion of existing energy production capacity. The
environmental quality of the fuel used by the project entity Chemosvit
Energochem (natural gas) and the contribution of project-induced emissions
- 2 -



to the existing ambient air pollution is small and certainly within the
limits established by the Slovak authorities as well as those recommended
by the World Bank. With respect to emissions of greenhouse gases, the
project has a positive environmental impact when displacement of more
pollution-intensive electricity from the grid is considered.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The main issue from an environmental assessment point of view is whether
the operation of the expanded cogeneration plant of Energochem would have
any significant impact on the air quality in the populated areas and in
the above-mentioned national parks. In particular, NOx concentrations have
required close examination since operation of gas motors is associated
with high temperatures. NOx was focused on also because the other common
energy-related pollutants (SOx, particulates) are practically not present
in this project since the plant uses natural gas.
The existing 30-minute average ambient concentration of NOx in the town of
Svit, resulting largely from Energochem's existing heat-only boilers
(HOBs), is estimated at 17 cg/m3 (micrograms per cubic meter of ambient
air) in Chemosvit's environmental statement for the Ministry of
Environment. The project introduces gas motors as a new source of natural
gas combustion with a stack(s) currently proposed to have a height of 30
m. This is in addition to the three stacks of the existing HOBs with an
installed capacity of 3x50 tons of steam per hour. Dispersion modelling
has shown that the highest value for the one-hour-mean contribution of the
gas motors is 48 cg/m3 NO2, and the resulting concentrations are clearly
below the Slovakian standard of 200 cg/m3 NO2 for the 30-minute-mean. The
highest value of the annual mean is 1.0 cg/m3 NO2, which is far below the
Slovakian standard of 80 cg/m3 (Source: Nariadenie Vlady c. 92/1996 Z.z.
Priloha c. 6, B-1, Strana 129-130) and the EU standard (Source: Directive
1999/30/ European Community of 22.4.1999) of 40 cg/m3 NO2 for human
beings. The highest value of the 24-hour mean is 10 cg/m3 NO2, which is
clearly below the Slovakian standard of 100 cg/m3 N02. The highest value
of 99.8 percentile (max. hourly mean which may be exceeded 18 times per
-3 -



year) is 16 cg/m3 N02, which is clearly below the EU standard of 200 cg/m3
for N02.
The spatial distribution of the pollutants in the middle of the year
clearly reflect the average annual wind direction distribution. The
maximum additional pollution load lies approx. 300 to 400 m to the east of
the planned location. After approx. 1.2 km the additional pollution load
has already fallen by 50%. A secondary maximum lies to the west, which
however is already considerably less distinctive regarding the absolute
level of the values than the first maximum. To the north, in the direction
of the National Park TANAP, the additional pollution as a result of the
planned plant is absolutely unimportant. The natural area Baba will only
be affected to a very slight extent by pollutants, which means that damage
to the vegetation can be ruled out. The value here remains clearly under
the protection value for plants of 30 cg/m3 NOx, which is applicable
within the EU. Directly at the edge of the natural area Baba, the value is
0.4 - 0.5 cg/m3 NOx and falls fast to < 0.1 cg/m3 NOx. So the additional
pollution as a result of the planned plant is insignificant.
In the dispersion calculations it is presumed that the three gas motors
operate continuously over the whole year. In reality the operation time
will be lower so that the emissions will accordingly be proportionally
lower. The dispersion model is based on representative weather statistics
from Poprad Airport for the years 1993 -2000, which were made on the basis
of average hourly values and which were made available for the emission
forecasts by the German National Meteorological Service. On the basis of
these weather statistics the expected emissions can be realistically
simulated, not only for the annual mean but also for peak loads.
The cogeneration plant would operate continuously, including night time.
During plant operation, noise emissions of up to 66 dB (A) would arise in
the vicinity of the cogeneration plant if sound reduction measures were
not taken. This does not meet the night-time guidance value of 45 dB (A)
used by the German Environmental team based on the Technical Instructions
for Protection against Noise (TA Lcrm). This value coincides with the
World Bank standard of 45 dB (A) for night-time noise level in residential
areas. Thus, sound reduction measures are envisaged (see Section II.D.3
below). On the basis of a dispersion calculation with noise reduction
measures, considerable noise pollution for the adjacent residential area
as well as for the protected areas can be ruled out. In order to rule out
noise pollution during the construction period, construction work should
be carried out only during day time.
No potential large-scale, significant, or irreversible impacts have been
identified.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No potential cumulative impacts have been identified.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
In case of expanding demand for Energochem's heat (e.g., by its mother
company Chemosvit or by the town of Svit due to connection of new
consumers to the district heating system), installation of additional gas
-4 -



motor(s) may be warranted in the future. However, this is highly unlikely
to bring the ambient concentrations close to the standards in effect in
Slovakia or expected under the EU directives.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
In its Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), the Slovak Ministry of
Environment chose not to request an analysis of alternatives due to the
small size of the project. Nevertheless, in the feasibility study
implemented for the Bank by the German company Fichtner, nine project
alternatives were identified (final feasibility study is available in the
Project File). When indirect impacts of the project (namely, the
displacement of more pollution-intensive electricity from the grid) are
considered, the proposed project, along with the option of cogenerating
electricity based on combined-cycle technology, has been shown to have the
lowest global emissions of GHG into the atmosphere. It has to be
emphasized that the cogeneration of heat (or steam) and electricity is
today's state of the art for plants of comparable capacity. In addition,
the emission concentrations, which are half of the Slovakian (and German)
standards, correspond to the state of the art of emission reduction
technology.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Pursuant to the procedure under the Slovak Government's Act no. 127/94
Coll on environmental impact assessment, the Environmental Department of
Chemosvit prepared an environmental impact statement indicating the
company's intent to implement the project and describing its expected
environmental impacts. The statement, called Zamer (Intent), was sent to
the Ministry of Environment (MoE) in late October 2001. The approval from
the MoE was received on January 7, 2002, after receiving no objections
from other ministries, the public, or local authorities.
This process provides the Bank with: (i) the necessary assurance of the
"in-country" acceptance of the project, (ii) useful baseline information
on the state of the environment in the project area, and (iii) initial
analysis of the environmental impacts expected from the project.
It should be noted that the Ministry of Environment has been the major
counterpart in the selection of potential projects aimed at GHG reduction
in Slovakia. The Chemosvit project was selected through this process.
Specific measures to address the issues of environmental protection in
accordance with the requirements of OP/BP/GP 4.01 have been identified in
the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared by a group of independent
environmental experts contracted by the German Federal Ministry of
Environment (the experts have followed the Terms of Reference provided by
the World Bank). The EMP stipulates noise control measures which consist
of the installation of sound absorbers in the stack and at the inlet-air
and exhaust-air openings. According to the EA Report, this will bring the
noise levels down to 42 dB (A), which is sufficient to meet the TA Lcrm
and World Bank's standard of 45 dB (A) for night-time noise level in
residential areas. Noise emission measurements after the start of
operation at important noise sources.
For NOx control, the emission standards required in the technical
- 5 -



specifications for the gas motors will be set at 250 mg/Nm3 according to
the German 1/2 TA Luft standard, which is more stringent that the
applicable Slovak (500 mg/Nm3) and World Bank's (320 mg/Nm3) standards.
Such standards can be achieved only by low-NOx motors. As a measure to
ensure the accuracy of the dispersion modeling conclusion about low levels
of NOx, the EMP requires continuous monitoring of NOx concentrations in
the protected area of TANAP.
Environmental issues will also be revisited at the stage of obtaining the
construction permit from the local authorities. By that time (currently
estimated as August-September 2002), the 2nd stage bidding documents for
the project will be finalized, making more technical details of the
project available for the local authorities' review.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The project stakeholders are represented, first of all, by the staff of
the project implementing company Energochem (Chemosvit's subsidiary for
energy supply), the mother company Chemosvit, and its several production
subsidiaries. Energochem's staff consists of 74 persons (60 workers and 14
personnel of high technical qualifications). This staff is likely to be
kept by Energochem, although transfers of staff will be necessary -
especially, from the downsizing steam-turbine operation to the new
gas-motor operation introduced by the project.
The Chemosvit company's most important stakeholders are the staff of the
facilities receiving the heat and electricity from Energochem, as well as
the company as a whole. During project preparation, consultations were
held with representatives of Chemosvit's Social Department, during which
the commitment of Chemosvit's staff to the project was reconfirmed.
The Svit Municipality and residential consumers of heat in the town of
Svit are also important stakeholders because part of the heat from the
project will be supplied to their apartments (through building-level
substations being introduced by the Municipality). Receiving heat from
Chemosvit Energochem is the most economical option for these residents
since a substantial part of the heat they will receive from the plant will
be the waste heat from its new gas motors. At the same time, the residents
of Svit (especially, its eastern part) also represent the main recipients
of air pollution from the plant's additional stack(s), although this
pollution is not high (see Section II.D.la above) and clearly within the
allowable limits. The Municipality has been closely involved in the
discussion of project's costs and benefits, and its recent decision to
support district heating modernization was made in close consultation with
Chemosvit and with full consideration of the proposed project.
Information about the project was initially placed on the bulletin board
of the Svit Municipality in November 2001. According to the Slovak law,
this information must be available for public review and comment for one
month before the Ministry of Environment can give its official approval
for the project. During this time, a number of other agencies of the
Slovak Government, as well as NGOs such as the Center of Environmental
Information in Banska Bystrica, had an opportunity to review this
information. No objections were raised. Newspaper articles in the regional
- 6 -



press (Tatransky Dennik, November 21, 2001) have been published
highlighting particularly the 15-year heat supply agreement from
Energochem's plant to the Town of Svit.
In February 2002, the Mayor of Svit acknowledged the receipt of the EA
Report implemented by the German consultants and confirmed that the Town
of Svit would follow the established Slovak procedure for disclosure of
such information to the public, which includes placing a translated
version of the Summary EA Report on the town-hall bulleting board. The
complete version of the EA Report would be translated into the Slovak
language and made available to the public on request. The Bank will not
object to this, but will also require that public consultation meetings
are held in Svit to make sure that all potentially affected groups are
informed of the project, its benefits, as well as its environmental and
social impacts. One condition for negotiations is that the Municipality
will a) hold a public consultation on the project, clearly identifying the
actions to be taken and their anticipated impacts and obtaining inputs
from the public; and b) provide documentation to the Bank that describes
the consultations, the issues raised, and actions to be taken, if any, in
response to the inputs that are received.
Furthermore, the full EA Report will be published on the Internet site of
the Slovak Environmental Agency (www.sazp.sk). The Project Information
Document (PID) is already available to the public through the Internet
(http://www.worldbank.org/pics/gef/sk51829.txt).
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/26/2002       2/26/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 2/28/2002        2/27/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/1/2002         3/5/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        2/20/2002       3/5/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
- 7 -



Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available   Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available    Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available   Not Available
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Helmut Schreiber         07-Mar-02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Victor B. Loksha/Person/World Bank       07-Mar-02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   07-Mar-02
Sector Manager/Director:         Henk Busz        07-Mar-02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 8-



