Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC252 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 3, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Slovak Republic 
Project ID: P078414 
Project Name: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND 
Task Team Leader: Dena Ringold 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 10 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Civic engagement, participation and 
community driven development (P);Other social 
protection and risk management (P);Social risk 
coping (P);Other human development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The proposed development objective, developed jointly with the Slovak SDF Working Group is: 
improved 
inclusion of at risk and marginalized groups and communities through community development and better access 
to economic opportunities and social services
.  
 
The project will target poor communities and groups with a high risk of social exclusion, such as: (i) geographically 
isolated poor communities, and particularly Roma settlements; (ii) unemployed in disadvantaged regions; and (iii) 
other vulnerable groups including the disabled, homeless, single elderly and other groups requiring services 
traditionally provided in residential care institutions. At the end of the project the targeted communities and groups 
will have improved access to better quality and more efficient social services, as well as access to and capacity to 
make use of economic opportunities. More importantly, the SDF mechanism will be used as a tool for development 
of social capital, empowering targeted communities with the capacity to address and resolve social needs, and 
develop and maintain community based services. 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The proposed demand driven social fund mechanism was chosen among alternative interventions (e.g. sector 
investment operations) for the following main reasons: (i) the multidimensional character of poverty and social 
exclusion are best tackled through cross-sectoral interventions; (ii) experience from other Bank financed social 
funds, and particularly in ECA, has shown that SDFs are very effective vehicles for facilitating community 
participation, empowering poor and marginalized communities, promoting social cohesion and partnership at the 
community and local level; (iii) SDFs have proven to be good in targeting resources to pockets of poverty and could 
be the best mechanisms to channel European Structural Fund resources to poor and marginalized communities; and 
prepare these communities for further independent use of available EU resources by building the capacities, 
knowledge and experience, needed for competitive participation in EU funded programs. 
 
The proposed project would have the following components:  
Page  2
 
 
 
Component 1:  Economic Development and Employment.
 
The objective of this component is to improve economic 
opportunities of targeted communities
 
and stimulate
 
employment of marginalized groups and communities by 
creating micro credit schemes for target groups, providing training and advisory services for credit applications and 
follow up consulting services for the created micro-enterprises. In addition, targeted communities will be 
encouraged to develop local development plans in partnership with local and regional governments and economic 
agents. 
 
Component 2:  Basic communal services and community infrastructure.
 
The objective of this component is to 
improve access to quality and efficient communal services for target groups and poor communities. The project will 
fund, on a competitive basis, community micro-project proposals for rehabilitation of infrastructure and 
improvement of the quality of communal services. Within this component, communities will be trained and 
facilitated in identifying priority social needs, addressing problems, preparing micro-project proposals, and 
managing and monitoring services in cooperation and partnership with local authorities.  
 
Component 3:  Alternative community based social care services.
 
The objective of this component is to improve 
access to better quality and relevant community-based, and cost effective social care services for vulnerable target 
groups. The project will finance, on competitive basis, micro-project proposals presented by public or non 
government service providers, provide training in service planning, management, contracting, and evaluation to 
local authorities and service providers.  
 
Component 4. Project management, monitoring and evaluation.
 
The objective of this component is to ensure 
efficient implementation of the SDF project in targeted areas by using effective mechanisms of project management, 
proper tools of project monitoring and evaluation, and raising public awareness about project experience. The 
monitoring and evaluation system of the project will ensure a stronger development impact of the project by taking 
into account feedback about project performance from beneficiaries and stakeholders. It will also support the 
development of Government reform plans in social services by evaluating project experiences, identify and 
disseminate lessons learned.  
 
Possible co-financing and partnerships
: The Council of Europe Development Bank has expressed strong interest in 
co-financing the project. The Soros foundation and UNDP are actively cooperating in project preparation and 
committed to continuous partnership within the project. In addition, a number of Slovak and international NGOs 
have been active in community development in Roma communities and their experience and partnership are and will 
be valuable for project preparation and implementation. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
At the initial stage the project will be implemented in the 3 most disadvantaged (defined by higher long-term 
unemployment and bigger proportion of the population receiving social benefits) regions of the Slovak Republic – 
Kosice, Banks aBystrica and Presov. Within these regions however, the projects will target poor and disadvantaged 
communities, based on criteria agreed with the Government.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
This is a first SF type operation in Slovakia and will be implemented by a newly created autonomous entity, 
therefore capacity building activities for project implementation and technical assistance will be built in the project. 
A PCU has already been established and is very effectively coordinating project preparation activities and the 
implementation of the PHRD. A Steering Committee to oversee project preparation has been established and will 
grow into a SDF Supervisory Board to oversee and guide project implementation. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [] B   [ ] C   [x ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
There would be only minor civil works which are not likely to have important environmental impact. A meeting 
with environmental safeguard coordinator for the region to confirmed the environmental category and discussed 
actions during project preparation to assess safeguards and prepare mitigation measures. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [x] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
An environment safeguard staff will join the team during preparation to assess existing national regulations, help 
develop the environmental guidelines as part of the project’s Operational Manual, including if needed environmental 
checklist and criteria for micro project selection.  
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
A public consultation meeting will be held to discuss the environmental aspects of the project.  The guidelines  will 
be disclosed in country and in the info shop prior to the project's appraisal.  The guidelines will indicate who is 
responsible for their implementation and supervision. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
It was agreed that  environmental guidelines be prepared to direct the analysis of environmental impacts of the 
rehabilitation of infrastructure and micro enterprises financed by the project.  The environmental guidelines will be 
part of the Operations Manual.   
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
 
