Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Slovak Republic 
Project ID: P074930 
Project Name: Legal and Judicial Reform Project 
Task Team Leader: Lubomira Zimanova Beardsley, 
LEGLR 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): $15 Million 
Estimated Board Date: August 2004 
GEF amount ($m.): 0 
Managing Unit: LEGLR (or ECA PREM) 
PCF amount ($m.): 0 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL) / Technical Assistance Loan (TAL) 
Sector: Law and Justice (100%) 
Other financing amounts ($m.) by source: 
 
Theme: 
Access to law and Justice (P), Judicial 
and Other Dispute Resolution Mechanisms (P), 
Legal Institutions for a Market Economy (P), 
Legal Services (P), Other Rule of Law (P)
 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
 
B.  Project Objective 
[from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project’s development objective is to increase access to justice through: (a) improved capacity to 
systemically evaluate the impacts of laws and regulations; (b) the improved performance of courts; and (c) 
the increased efficiency and effectiveness of legal aid programs.     
  
The primary targeted group for the proposed project is the Slovak consumer of legal  services. The 
secondary target group is judges, court employees, judicial and public sector managers, and politicians. The 
project should produce the following direct results: (a)  improved performance and accountability of 
selected ministries through increases in their capacity to measure, and articulate to the public, the impacts 
of laws and regulations and a more efficient and transparent legislative process; (b) improved court 
efficiency and increased capacity within the Ministry of Justice and the Judicial Council to manage human 
resources in the justice sector; c) the enhanced competence and professionalism of judges and court staff; 
and (d) greater access to legal services for disadvantaged  groups.  
 
Page  2
 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
[from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The proposed project will be financed through an investment or technical assistance loan, or, even more 
likely, a combination of both types of loans.  The actual selection will depend on the specific needs for 
financing the program and available government’s funds.  The estimated costs of the program are US$13 
million.  No co-financing by other donors is expected. 
 
Justice sector reform is imminent in Slovakia and requires a significant amount of resources which are not 
fully available in the public sector budget.  The country has graduated from the assistance programs of 
most other donors, including EU PHARE. Thus, the Bank’s financing seems to be the most viable method 
to co-finance justice sector reform.  More importantly, this reform requires know-how which is not yet 
available in Slovakia.   
 
The following project components are under consideration: (a) 
Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA)
; (b) 
Court Performance
; and
 
(c)
 Legal Aid. 
 
 
The RIA
 
Component
 will include: the design and implementation of analytical methods and data collection 
and communication strategies in three areas or sectors
1
; the integration and institutionalization of RIA into 
decision-making processes; the pilot testing of RIA on selected pieces of legislation; and training.  The cost 
of the component is estimated at US$1 million. 
 
The Court Performance Component
 will include: the reconstruction of, and the optimalization of spatial 
organization within, selected courts (including the Supreme Court); the modernization of systems for 
records management (with a focus on court recording and archiving); the consolidation of human resources 
management systems; and the establishment of a training institute for judges and other court staff.  This  
includes designing education and training policies, and training curricula, as well as providing training for 
trainers.  The cost of the component is estimated at US$10 million. 
 
The Legal Aid Component
 will finance the design of efficient and effective systems for 
subsidized legal services, as well as pilot legal aid programs for the Slovak Republic’s 
most vulnerable groups, including Romas.  The cost of  the component is estimated at 
US$2 million. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and 
social characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to 
any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or 
socially sensitive areas.)  
 
While the project will centralize its activities in Bratislava, focusing there on institutional 
developments within a number of central government ministries and institutions, it will 
also direct its efforts toward other geographic areas of the Slovak Republic.  For example, 
the project will work with Slovak courts throughout the country, assisting them with 
                                                          
 
1
 Measurements of the  impacts of laws and regulations on the state budget, the labor market and the 
environment have been identified by the MOF as potential pilots for RIA reform.   
Page  3
 
 
organizational developments in court, case, document, and human resource management.  
Finally, the project will work in both urban and rural areas of the Slovak Republic to 
develop the more effective administration of legal services for vulnerable groups 
throughout the country. 
 
Two sub-components of the Court Performance component require the financing of goods and works: the 
improvement of five existing model court project sites located in areas throughout the Slovak Republic, and 
the renovation of an existing building to create a new training institute for judges.  However, while small-
scale remodeling and rehabilitation is currently planned for existing court sites and the training institute, it 
is expected that no land acquisition, nor new construction, will be needed.  In addition, any remodeling and 
rehabilitation will focus on the interiors of buildings.  Therefore, no impact on the local environments of 
the five courts and the judicial training institute is anticipated.   
 
Indeed, one of the prospective model courts, that in Banská Bystrica
, 
is a historically protected site in 
Slovakia.  While environmental damage to this structure is very unlikely, the project will take extra steps to 
ensure that safeguards are implemented to preserve the historically relevant aspects of this court. 
 
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
[from PCN] 
 
The IDF for Legal and Judicial Reform has established a PIU in the MOJ, as well as the PIU for the Bank 
Public Financing Reform Project in the MOF, and both could generate experience and capacity from which 
to build during the project’s implementation.  Project management capacity has also been created by other 
donors and could also be used for the purposes of strengthening the implementation framework for this 
project. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[very concise summary]
 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01)
Yes 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
N/A 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
N/A 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
N/A 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
N/A 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
N/A 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
N/A 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
N/A 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
N/A 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
N/A 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
!
A   
!
 B  
X
 C   
!
 FI   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
!
 S
1
   
!
 S
2
  
X
 S
3
   
!
 S
F
   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[from 
PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard 
issues and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Environmental issues are related to Component ii only.  Component ii will include the reconstruction of the 
interior and spatial reorganization of up to five selected court buildings.   No new construction is planned.  
Construction works will include small-scale remodeling and the rehabilitation of existing courts and the 
building housing the judicial training institute.  Construction practices will be followed per the country 
regulations, which are adequate to ensure there will be no negative environmental impacts.  However, 
 
in 
the event that it is determined that the cultural property safeguard policy is triggered, the project would be 
re-categorized as a "B" and a cultural property policy framework would be prepared before appraisal. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements 
be addressed? 
 
In the event that it is determined that the cultural property safeguard policy is triggered, a cultural property 
policy framework will be prepared and consultation will be held with the stakeholders.  The policy 
framework will be disclosed in the country (in the local language) and in the Infoshop before the appraisal 
mission. 
 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation  
 
It is unlikely that the Slovak Republic Legal and Judicial Reform Project will pose any 
significant threat to the environment in Slovakia.  The remodeling and reconstruction of 
buildings is limited to the interiors of courts and the building housing the judicial training 
center.   
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
 
 
Page  5
 
 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Lubomira Zimanova Beardsley  
 
 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Marjory-Anne Bromhead    Date 
Comments 
 
Sector Manager 
Helga Muller                          09-03-2003 
                                                                                      Maria Dakolias                      08-26-
2003 
Comments 
 
 
 
