ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AW%ori Fre of Poverty
-       In"Shop
,>M. W4"d ,fl,4 lA,
Report No AC25
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/10/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country. SRI LANKA                               Project ID P050741
Project Improving Relevance and Quality of       Task Team Leader. Rosita Maria Van Meel
Undergraduate Education
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 14, 2003   IBRD Amoulit ($m)
Bank Approval: June 17, 2003                     IDA Amounlt ($In): 40.30
Managinig Unit SASHD                             Sector. Tertiary education (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Themile Education for the knowledge economy (P)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Government's Long-Term Vision
The Governmenit has made tertiary education reforn a priority and is developing a long-tern strategy to
respond to national concernis that the tertiary educationi system is failing to provide the modern skills
required for Sri Lanka's development. This reform would include rationalization and restructuring of
university  and  non-unliversity institutions, improving  public-private  partnerships, introducinig
accreditation mechanisms and cost-recovery strategies, supporting inn1ovative faculties to enlliance
educational quality, and increasing access wlheni the major quality Issues are resolved.
The Governmenit started to review its major policies on tertiary education during the mid-1990s. The
Interinationlal Development Association (IDA) was invited to undertake a comprehensive study of the
education sector to develop a strategy to enhlanice the quality of education (World Bank Education Sector
Strategy Report - Sri Lanka, 1995). A constructive policy dialogue was initiated among policy makers,
stakelholders, civil society and donors through the "National Policy on University Education" (NPUE) by
the National Education Comimiissioni (NEC), 1996, and the "Reforms in University Education" by the
Presidential Task Force on University Educationi, 1998 These two documenits were widely circulated for
discussion and review among key stakeholders, including universities, academics, researchers, students,
Government officials, chambers of commerce, federations of employers, comillullity-based organizations
and development partners SUChi as IDA and the Asian Developmenit Bank (ADB) Subsequently, the
Governmenit embarked on an in-deptil analysis and review of the tertiary educationi sector. This process
was pursued in partnership with key stakeholders and supported by a techinical assistance grant from the
ADB. Based on these inlputs, the Governm1ielnt concluded that a far-reachinig transforiimation of the tertiary
education sector is urgently needed and requested support from IDA and ADB



2
ISDS
The Govermilenit reported on the results of the tertiary education reforn process durinlg the Development
Forum in Paris, December 2000, and put forward its strategy for tertiary educatioll reform  The
Government outlined its reforn priorities and requested assistance from developmenit partners to support
its reform process under the leadership of the Ministry of Tertiary Education and Training (MTE&T) and
the University Grants Commission (UGC).
The Government's Long-Term Reform Program
The Government's long-term objective is to reorient and improve tertiary education so that it is more
supportive of the country's social and economilic development needs. To achieve this goal, the
Government defined five major areas for action: (1) revising the policy framewvork to introduce
performance incentives, (2) improvinlg quality and quality monitoring; (3) financing and resource
mobilization; (4) creating a level playing field for private sector investment; and (5) increasing access
Project Development Objectives
This project would support the Governmenit's long-term tertiary education reforn program by enilancing
institutionial capacities to achieve greater relevance and quality in undergraduate programs. The project is
expected to be the first in a series of Credit operations to support the Government in carrying out its
long-term reform of tertiary education The project would contribute to bulildig humani capital which is
one of the key factors in poverty reduction (Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, currently under
preparation)
I.A.3. Project Description.
The project would comprise the following two major components
Component 1. Buildin2 institutional capacity in the tertiary ed(ucation system through:
(t)  Strengthening national planning, monitoring and evaluation syste7ns, and coordination at the
national level National-level governance bodies would set the vision1, define the policies and
develop the strategies. Implementing these funictions requires further capacity to monitor and
evaluate the sector's performance. The improved natioiial planning and monitoring system would
support tertiary education policy makers in monitorinig the implemenitationi of new policies This
sub-componenit would finance MTE&T and UGC capacity building and provide technical
assistance to introduce a Management Inforilmation System (MIS) and a Labor Market Observatory
(LMO) Financial support would be available to conduct policy studies Hicludinglter alia,the
feasibility of a voucher scheme, support to the new national policy framework to increase access,
and the introductioll of national planning, and monitorilig and evaluationi systems.
(i i)  Establishing the Board for Quallty lAssurance (BQme BQA would be responsible for
developing policies related to quality criteria and organiizilng independent peer reviews of
self-assessments by faculties and accrediting, on demand, nationial and interniationial accreditation
agencies. The BQA would develop a comprelhenisive evaluative review system, whiichi would apply
to all public and private institutions, based on techniiques and tools consistent with international
best practice. The results of quality reviews would be made available to the public via the UGC
Web site. This evaluative framework would become institutionalized in a continLIous degree
program review cycle. The BQA would (a) be established within the framework of the UGC; (b)
become an independenit body by 2004; (c) be subject to periodic reviews; and (d) be supported by
ani appropriate MIS.



3
ISDS
(iii) Strengthening management ofpublic universities andfaculties The project would finance efforts
to improve planning and management capacity at universities and othier TEls. Traiilnig and
techinical assistance would be available to help institutionls modernize their practices in strategic
planninig, finanicial management, human resources managemenit, academic managemenlt, and
managemenit of buildinlgs and equipmenit Institutional grants would be available for special
programs to strengthen management, student services, social harmoniy, improved English language
competency, and computer skills of teacher-s and graduates. Training would be provided to public
and private TEl's to prepare proposals to be submitted
(iv)  Enhancing public acwareness As part of the strengthening of MTE&T and UGC, a contilnuous
public awareness campaign and stakeholder dialogue would be supported to build consensus on the
various stages of the reform program and disseminate inforniation about achievements attained
(v)  Monitoring and evaluation Research activities wvould be implemented to moniitor and evaluate the
impact of project investments on potentially important academic, economic and social outcomes
Both the national and institutionlal levels would be covered through monitorinig and evaluation
measures. The studies would be contracted througih research institutionis and consulting firms
Component 2. Improvin_ relevance and quality of tertiarv education bv:
(i)  Establishing a Quality Enhancement Fund to allocate resources to improve undergradutate degree
studcly programs in public and private universitiThis sub-component would support quality
improvement block grants for study programs to enilance the relevance and quality of
undergraduate degree programs. The QEF would support programs selected by transparent and
objective procedures. Universities would be invited to submit developmenit plans elaborated by
degree programs. Each development plan would indicate (a) how the degree program would
improve the employability of future graduates in the coming three years; (b) additional investments
needed, (c) resource mobilization strategies to ensure the sustainability of investments; and (d)
monitorinig and evaluation of progress to access the next trancile of the grant. The review panels for
the QEF would select the proposals which offer the maximum net benefits and help accelerate the
pace of improvemenit in undergraduate programs
To promote competition amonig institutionis of comparable institutionial strengthl the potential grant
recipienits would be tiered in four categories. (1) establishied public universities; (2) regional public
unliversities, (3) conflict-affected public ulliversities; and (4) private institutions and professional
organizationis (see Annex 2)
Eligibility would be limited to existing study programs (with the first intake of students before
January 1, 2000) and whose minilum  entry requirement is passes in two nationial GCE A/L
subjects taken in the same year. A maximum of three block grants would be awarded to any one
university.
In addition to the general eligibility criteria, private institutionis receiving grants would also be
required to: (a) provide evidence that majority of the graduates found appropriate employment
within1 12 moniths after graduationi; (b) indicate how the employment record would be maintained
after increasilng access, (c) invest an amount equal to the block grant in the recipient study program
in tranches equal to the grant; (d) Litilize 5% of the grant each year for the durationi of the grant for
agreed social and inter-cultural harmony activities; (e) provide a legally registered guarantee equal
to the grant amount, and (f) require profit-making private instittiolIs to repay the principal of the



4
ISDS
grant (interest free) after a five year grace period in five equal tranches over a period of five years
Repaymenit would be to a revolving fund established by the Governmeit and managed by the
Quality Enhancemenit Technilcal Secretariat to enihance further investmenlts in private tertiary
education
(iI)  Tharluna Aruna I1 progran (Yolun?g Professional HIprogram)This sub-coin ponienit would support
training initiatives that lead to more appropriate and productive employment for currently
unlelimployed graduates The proposed program would support work experience modules and
training for unemployed graduates to become more employable in the private sector. An
unemployed graduate is defined as "a graduate from a Sri Lankan tertiary education institution,
under the age of 35 years, with less than I hour paid occupation in the previous week. An
unemployed graduate would be considered to have found "full-time employmenit" when he or she
has obtained a contract with a mniiniumi duration of one year in the private sector Unemployed
graduates entering the TharuLia Aruna 11 program would be eligible for up to 12 monthis training
under the scheme. This training would comprise up to 8 months of work experiencpduring which
a graduate would be eligible for an allowance/stipend of LKR 6,000 per month. The Government,
through the program, would provide LKR 3,000 per month and the company accepting the graduate
would match this with a further LKR 3,000 per monthi. The training componenit would comprise up
to 4 months of intenlsive courses, or 8 montils of intensive evening and weekend courses The
Government, through the proposed program, would funid a combined living/travel allowance of
LKR 5,000 per monith for up to 4 months of attendance in a training program by an approved
couirse provider. In addition, the Government would, througIl the proposed program, provide each
participating unemployed graduate with LKR 40,000 in vouchers, redeemable only with approved
course providers An ullemployed graduate would not be required to undertake tihe full twelve
month program if an employmenit opportunity became available. He/she may accept a job offer at
any time during the work experience module or course period. This would end his or her
participation in the program and allowances/stipenids would cease.
Componienlts:
1)               BLIllding            institutionial           capacity              by.
(a)        strengthening       national       planninig      and         monitoring;
(b)         establishing       Board         for          Quality        Assurance,
(c)        strengthening       managemenit        of         universities;     and
(d)                   enhancinig                 public                  awareness.
2).           Improving          relevance           and            quality          by
(a)      establishing    QEF       to       provide     block      grants;     and
(b) establishing the Tharuna Aruna 11 program to improve the employability of unlemployed
graduates in the private sector



5
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments The standard code of practice for environimental managemilenit and land purchase will be included
in the project manual. Land acquisitioll for any new or expanded facilities spoiisered under this project will
be through private purchase, not use of eminent domain, and therefore AD 4.30 is not triggered.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                                Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes * No
Pest Managemenit (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11 03)                                C Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 C Yes * No
Involulitary Resettlement (OP/BP 4 12)                       3' Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  C Yes * No
Projects in lnternational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          C Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  C Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' clalims
on the dispitted areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summnary of Key Safeguoard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions If inforomation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
N/A
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cuLImulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project componient.
N/A
I.D. Ic Describe any potential long tern impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D 2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatmienit of alternatives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangemenit for the borrower to address safeguard issues



6
ISDS
Individual EMPs would be prepared for each rehabilitated facility financed ulider the project The EMP
would contain details on1 procedures for detoxification and disposal of laboratory waste in keeping with
the requirements of the NEA, codes of practice for water supply and disposal of wastewater, sewage
disposal in accordance with the building codes of the respective Sri Lankan atithorities, and solid waste
collection and disposal in accordance with both the NEA and Sri Lankani authlority legislation. Since
none of the activities propose to be financed under the project would lead to any irreversible or
significant adverse environmental impacts, it is anticipated that the EMPs to be prepared for each
sub-activity would be adequate to ensure mininal adverse impact on the environment.
11 D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechaiisnis for consultationi and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During project preparation, IDA would adopt an extensive consultation and collaboration process The
Ministry of Tertiary Education and Training would establish a project preparation advisory committee
consistinlg of: (i) the Secretary of the Ministry of Tertiary Education and Training, (ii) a Deputy
Secretary, MOFP; (iii) the Chairman, UGC, (iv) a Senior Additional Secretary, the Ministry of Tertiary
Education and Training; (v) the Deputy Chairman, UGC, (vi) thl-ee Vice-Chancelors and thl-ee Deans of
faculties; and (vii) two senior and respected representatives from the private sector; and two
representatives from student organizations. This comimlittee would advise the the Ministry of Tertiary
Education and Training on the details of the project componenits outlined above during thle preparation
process. The project preparation advisory committee would conduct consultations witil major
stakeholders, including representatives from NGOs, the private sector and various student organizations.
The committee would be supported by technical assistance conisistinig of both internationial and nationlal
experts.
E. Sqfteguards Cl(issification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
] SI - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible Impacts; or significanit technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technilcally and institutionally manageable
[X] S3 - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Finanicial intermediary projects, social developmenit funds, community driven development or
similar projects wvhich require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessm?7ent/Analysis/Management Plan          E.pected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoSlhop
Date of distributing the Exec Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlenenl Action Placn/Framewneork.                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-counitry" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoSlhop



7
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples Developmentt Plan/Framnework               E.rpected eActucal
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submissioni to InfoShop
Pest Manage7nent Plan                                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of subrn issioni to InfoShop
Dam Safet; Management Plant                                   Expected      Actiual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documelits is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader.             Rosita Maria Van Meel                        09/26/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator Carter J. Brandon                           02/13/2003
Sector Manager/Director:       Michelle Riboud                              11/26/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
6Afv   __    ,a FEEDtACK  _   ; Sr MAP  _     HOWCASE



