Page  1
 
 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial) 
Section I - Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/19/2003 
A. Basic Project Data 
(from PDS) 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
Country:
 SRI LANKA 
Project ID:
 P081771 
 
Project:
 E-Lanka Development 
Task Team Leader:
 Nagy K. Hanna 
Authorized to Appraise Date:
 November 3, 2003 
IBRD Amount ($m):
  
Bank Approval:
 March 16, 2004 
IDA Amount ($m):
 50.00
            
 
Managing Unit:
 PA9SS 
Lending Instrument:
 Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
 
Status: 
Lending 
Sector:
 Information technology (70%);  General 
industry and trade sector (30%) 
Theme:
 Other financial and private sector 
development (P);  Other public sector governance 
(P) 
 
 
I.A.2.  Project Objectives (From PDS): 
The E-Lanka Development project proposes a multi-sectoral approach that aims to bridge the digital 
divide, bringing the benefits of the global knowledge economy to both the urban centers and rural poor 
of Sri Lanka, and jumpstarting Information and Communications Technology (ICT) diffusion.  The 
project promotes the effective use of ICT as an enabler for development throughout the key sectors of 
the economy. Achieving these objectives will facilitate the country's economic and social 
transformation, taking it closer to realize the E-Lanka vision.  The project will support key elements of 
the first phase of the E-Lanka program and lay the grounds for a sustainable e-development process, 
and help implement the CAS 2003 objective of poverty reduction by supporting peace, growth and 
equity. 
 
The E-Lanka Development project focuses on the following areas:  (i) leadership, policy development 
and capacity building; (ii) information infrastructure network and services fund, including a network of 
telecenters; (iii) e-government; and (iv) innovative societal applications.  Outlined below are some of 
the medium-term strategies proposed by the E-Lanka project in order to achieve its objectives: 
 
Developing the necessary leadership, policy and human resources for the ICT program,
 through 
the following measures: (i) establishing an ICT Agency (company) reporting to the Prime Minister and 
the Minister of ICT and developing a cadre of CIOs in other ministries in the government; (ii) 
developing various mechanisms to engage stakeholders from public, private and civil society at all 
levels and regions; (iii) creating the enabling environment for the knowledge economy through various 
mechanisms such as enabling laws for e-commerce and e-government, recruitment of ICT 
multinationals, reformed venture capital laws, and transparent public procurement of ICT services (iv) 
developing
 
ICT human resources and broad ICT literacy at all levels of education
, 
including at least 
doubling the output of software engineering and computer science graduates, and enacting policies  and 
programs to increase private sector participation in ICT education, and mobilizing the diaspora.  
 
Page  2
 
 
Building the national information infrastructure
 
Network and Services 
to ensure access and  to 
address information needs of the poor and rural areas through telecenters, by addressing  the policy, 
regulatory and incentive environment, and by establishing a rural information infrastructure 
development fund to provide smart, least-cost subsidies for licensed
 
operators to invest in rural 
connectivity. After the adoption of a National Communications Policy in July 2002 , GOSL continues  
the implementation of an ambitious sector reform program. The primary focus of the reforms is to 
increase access by implementing a competitive and liberalized market structure.  The objective of this 
project is to support this ongoing reform process by enabling private provision of the rural information 
infrastructure and services; develop capacity in ICTA and MERST to set policy and implement it in a 
timely manner. 
 
Developing electronic delivery of public services to citizens and businesses 
and use ICT to enhance 
public-private interactions by reducing transaction costs; improving effectiveness and access to 
services; and reducing the urban-rural divide in access to government through a coherent e-government 
program. 
 
Using ICT as a lever for social development through a societal applications innovation fund, 
community centers, and mass media.     
    
 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS): 
The four components of the project are discussed below: 
 
Components:  
 
(i) Leadership, Policy Development and Capacity Building Program:
  This component aims to 
develop the required institutional and executive leadership required at all levels of government for 
furthering the ICT led reform efforts. The central focus is the establishment of a single responsible, 
accountable and transparent ICT agency and  development of the linkages and human resources at 
government agencies to ensure smooth coordination between these and the ICT agency.  The project 
proposes the establishment of the ICT agency to build capacity within government for implementation 
and assure proximity to high level commitment. The older CINTEC will be subsumed into the ICT 
agency to ensure that project goals do not conflict with the government's need for a lean bureaucracy. 
Discussions have been initiated within the Sri Lankan parliament on the ICT bill and a Board 
comprising of prominent individuals from government, private sector and academia has been created 
for the ICT Agency. The project is also recommending that a Cabinet level paper which is awaiting 
clearance should include room fro the ICT agency to act with agility and speed in staffing and other 
relevant decisions, accountable to the ICT Agency Board but independent of government bureaucracy. 
A short list of international consultants has been developed who will provide immediate technical 
assistance to the ICT agency. The ICT agency will also provide e-leadership, program management, 
monitoring and evaluation; establish policies and mechanisms in order to promote private education for 
software engineering and computer science; promote and train government leaders in e-government 
programs; improve policy, institutional support and regulatory environment for software companies; 
promote the brand name of the Sri Lankan software industry overseas; and promote private sector 
investment in software and e-commerce.  
 
Page  3
 
 
(ii) Information Infrastructure Network and Services Fund:
  GOSL recognizes that rural access 
service might be associated with less attractive financial returns.  On the advice of GOSL, the ICT 
Agency is  using a market mechanism to finance a capital subsidy for a private RTN operators to 
provide services in ------ unserved villages.  The operator will serve approximately 3.0 million people.  
This approach is expected to meet the dual objectives of extending access in rural areas and 
encouraging private participation in developing the sector.  Details of the licensing process are in the 
draft RFA which was prepared in accordance with IDA's Procurement Guidelines.  The key features of 
the rural licensing are summarized in Annex 2.  In addition to the minimum rural access, the the ICTA 
agency will also finance the establishment of public ICT telecenters in rural areas.  Initially, assistance 
will be provided to ICT agency to plan and implement the first phase.  Subsequently, this will lead to 
evaluating and developing replicable models for sustainable public ICT access telecenters.  Upon the 
successful implementation of the first phase, the program will be scaled-up to cover a larger 
geographical area.   
 
(iii) E-Government
: 
 This component aims to:  modernize government operations to promote access, 
quality, efficiency, transparency and responsiveness to citizens; improve procurement of ICT to reduce 
costs and improve quality; and support the creation of a domestic market for software and ICT support 
services.  
 
It is divided into four broad subcomponents:  
E-Governance.
  
This sub-component will formulate the legal and regulatory framework for E-
Government through a comprehensive strategic planning study.  Outputs include a set of policies, 
standards and guidelines for technology selection, procurement and utilization; formulation of shared 
data, applications and service architectures across government; a human resource development strategy 
for e-government;  private sector partnership policies and models; and ICT project planning, 
management and evaluation guidelines.   
 
Client-Oriented, Front-End Applications
.
  Basically consisting of the country Internet Portal and the 
internal Government Intranet.  The Country Portal
 will be an Internet-based “entry door” and routing 
facility into Sri Lanka’s political and administrative jurisdictions, government services, country 
information, activities and people.  The Portal will thus be a host application for integrated delivery of 
progressive groups of services ranging from utility payments to issuance of certificates, identification 
documents, permits, licenses, etc. to both citizens and businesses.  The Government Intranet
 will be a 
similar portal except that it will be internal to Government.  It will offer a consistent, employee-
oriented interface to information and services from the GoSL..  The Portal will be the basic knowledge 
management system of the public sector offering a wealth of information as well as conferencing and 
electronic mail services.  It will also be the host for internal service delivery, transaction processing, or 
work flow management applications that cross agency lines, as they are gradually implemented, and the 
portal for agency-specific applications that do not.   
 
Strategic Information Systems.
 
Strategic
 
information
 
systems are a special category of systems that Sri 
Lanka must create to underpin its economic and social development. These systems are soft forms of 
national infrastructure because, like roads or power, they have major economies of scale, require 
substantial front-end investments, and underpin other economic activities.  Five and possibly six 
systems have been identified for priority implementation, namely the Citizens Services Database
 for 
citizen identification services based on a unique identification number; the National Operations Room
 
Page  4
 
 
for public sector performance monitoring;  the E- Procurement system
 for all government purchases; 
the Government Human Resources Management System;
 the Land Information System
 for land-related 
information and records, and possibly an e-Parliament System
 to empower the legislature. 
 
Electronic Networking Infrastructure.
 
Consists of a Government Wide Area Network
 linking initially 
the central and provincial levels of Government ministries through dedicated data communications and 
networking facility of at least 2 Mbs capacity; and a number of Local Area Networks
 providing 
internet-connected computer workstations to a core group of government employees using the strategic 
information systems.    
 
Four of the above systems will be initially developed as pilot systems, to test the novel concepts of data 
integration, service-oriented design, and client-oriented delivery mechanisms.  These systems are the 
two portals for country and government, the Citizens Services Database, and the National Operations 
Room.  
 
(iv) Societal Applications Fund:
  The proposed overall goal of the SAF is the provision of key 
information
 and opportunities for 
communication
 (as opposed to a focus on technology) that enables an 
improvement in living conditions in the targeted through pilot projects poorest communities of Sri 
Lanka. This will be achieved by applying low-cost technology solutions in pilot projects and evaluating 
the impact of access to information as well as to communication means;  equitably and innovatively 
building capacity in the least empowered population to use and benefit from ICT; identifying 
sustainable social or business models that can be scaled up for  broader impact.The fund would provide 
grants initially and would later enable development of other funding vehicles as well. In addition, it is 
proposed that the SAF 
promote and progressively address
: partnerships between private sector, NGOs, 
and government;  good governance; equality between women and men; inclusion of marginalized 
groups, such as people with disabilities and other minorities; environmentally sustainable 
practices.Proposals would be generated through RFP and by soliciting and refining proposals in areas 
identified as presenting opportunities or  developmental problems needing immediate attention. 
 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics 
of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural 
habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
 
The project essentially covers entire Sri Lanka.  However, the Information Infrastructure Network, 
which is the only component of the project that may have potential environmental and social impacts 
focuses on the poorest regions of the country, particularly rural areas with low connectivity in the South 
and post conflict regions in the North and East. 
 
 
B. Check Environmental Classification: 
 
C (Not Required) 
Comments:
  
Of the six components supported under the project, 5 have no adverse environmental and social impacts 
since this is a E development and ICT reform project.  The regional telephone network (RTN) that is 
proposed under the project may result in potential environmental issues that may require the project to 
be categorized as an Environmental Category B project.  This may depend largely on whether the RTN 
network is a wireline system or a wireless system.  An appropriate Environmental and Social 
Page  5
 
 
Assessment Framework Note will be prepared during project preparation to be used if the project will 
be classified as a Category B project.   
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS) 
(click on 
 for a detailed desciption 
or
 click on the policy number for a brief description) 
 
Policy Triggered 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01) 
             Yes 
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04) 
             No 
 
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36) 
             No 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
             No 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
             No 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
             No 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
             No 
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37) 
             No 
 
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50) 
             No 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)* 
             No 
 
 
 
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management 
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available, 
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data. 
 
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe 
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
 
There are no major environmental issues associated with the project.  The project is an E-
Development and ICT sector reform project, which primarily involves policy and institution building 
components.  The only component of the project that may have potential environmental & social 
impacts is the Information Infrastructure Network which will be financing the construction of 
information infrastructure network to integrate the North and East to the rest of the country and to 
connect the most remote and rural areas, particularly in the South.  It has not been pre-determined if 
wireless or wireline systems will be used.  This decision cannot be made at this stage but will depend 
on the proposals put forward by the private sector during the bidding process for the RTN networks.  
Wireless systems will have minimal environmental & social impacts, with potential impacts 
associated with the land for erection of towers and the aesthetic impacts of the towers being of 
concern.  Wireline systems would potentially have considerably more environmental and social 
impacts due to erection of the network.  These impacts will probably be due to clearing of rights of 
way and erection of poles.  Since rural road access in Sri Lanka is reasonably good, it is the rural 
telephone network will follow existing roads, thus requiring no real change in land use or associated 
impacts of land acquisition.  There may be minor environmental impacts associated with the 
construction or renovation of Telecenters.  But considering the small size of rural telecenters, these 
impacts are easily mitigated.  There will be no resettlement, damage to cultural property or adverse 
impact on indigenous people under this project. 
   
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or due 
to multiple project component.  
  
Page  6
 
 
Since it is only the environmental assessment safeguard policy that may be applicable for this project, it 
is anticipated that there will be no cumulative impacts due to the application of more than one 
safeguard policy.  As stated above, all other project components have no adverse environmental or 
social impacts. 
 
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area. 
 
 
There are no long term impacts anticipated due to future activities within the project area. 
 
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required) 
    
Bidders for the RTN project will be required to file an environmental impact assessment (EIA) 
identifying environmental impacts of their proposed networks.  The EIA will follow the guidelines 
described in the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework Note that is being prepared for 
this project.  These environmental assessments will be screened as part of the bid evaluation process 
in order to minimize any negative environmental impacts. 
 
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues 
 
Bidders for the RTN project will be required to file an environmental impact assessment identifying 
environmental impacts of their proposed networks, in accordance with the agreed Framework.  
These assessments will be screened as part of the bid evaluation process in order to minimize any 
negative environmental impacts.  Implementation of the environmental mitigation measures during 
construction will be included as part of the contract of the selected bidder.  Since EIA’s are not 
statutorily required for telecommunications projects under Sri Lanks’s National Environmental Act 
(NEA), the EIA will be reviewed by the project implementing agency (through outsourcing the 
environmental review) and by the Bank to ensure that the environmental issues are adequately 
addressed and the mitigation measures are appropriate.    
 
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard 
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The key stakeholders are the public of Sri Lanka with rural communities in the areas where the RTN 
network will be established being critical stakeholders.  The stakeholders will be consulted during the 
EIA preparation stage by the bidders.  The Framework for undertaking the EA will placed for public 
comments prior to finalization. 
 
 
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select in SAP).
 Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. 
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is 
triggered the provisions of that policy apply. 
 
 
[   ] 
S1. – Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in 
management of one or more safeguard areas  
[ X] 
S2. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are technically 
and institutionally manageable 
[   ] 
S3. – No safeguard issues 
Page  7
 
 
[   ] 
SF. – Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar 
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.  
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
 
Expected
 Actual
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
November 24, 
2003 
  
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
November 26, 
2003 
  
Date of submission to InfoShop 
November 26, 
2003 
  
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive 
Directors 
(For category A projects) 
  
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
  
 
Expected
 Actual
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
 
Expected
 Actual
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
 
Expected
 Actual
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
 
Expected
 Actual
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.  
 
Signed and submitted by 
 
 
Name
 Date
 
Task Team Leader: 
Nagy K. Hanna 
 
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: 
Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: 
 
 
Project Safeguards Specialists 3: 
 
 
 
 
Page  8
 
 
Approved by:
 
Name
 Date
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
December 5, 2003 
 
 
Sector Manager/Director 
Joseph Del Mar Pernia 
 
 
 
