ISDS
THEWORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorid F:rec ol Povert?y
InfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/28/2002                               23707
Section I - Basic Information                                     May 28, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SRI LANKA                               Project ID: P076702
Global Supplemental ID: P077761
Project: Renewable Energy for Rural Economic     Task Team Leader: Subramaniam V. lyer
Development
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 20, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 20, 2002                    IDA Amount ($m): 75.00
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 8.00
Managing Unit: SASEI                             Sector: PY - Other Power & Eniergy Conversion
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: ENVIRONMENT; RURAL
Status: Lending                                  DEVELOPMENT; ENERGY
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
This Project aims to (i) Improve the quality of rural life by utilizing off-grid renewable energy
technologies to bring electricity to remote communities and (ii) Promote private sector power generation
from renewable energy resources for the main grid.
These objectives conform to Sri Lanka's goal of making electricity accessible to at least 75 percent of its
population by 2007. That aim, if realized, would help to increase the non-farm incomes of rural
households through productive uses of electricity and improve the delivery of social services such as
health and education in rural areas (see text box 1). Consistent with the opening up of the northern and
eastern parts of the country following recent peace initiatives, the Project will also enable the
Government to give conflict-affected people living in those regions access to electricity. The Project
concept and design recognize and respond to Sri Lanka's desire to preserve its unique ecology and
bio-diversity.
Further, the Project will contribute significantly to Government measures aimed at reforming Sri Lanka's
struggling power sector. First, it promotes greater private sector investment and participation in
generating and distributing electricity, with an emphasis on the use of renewable resources. Second, it
facilitates the growth of a vibrant energy industry based on commercial principles and transparent rules.
Third, it helps Government integrate renewable energy into overall national energy policy and the
country's decentralized administrative setup. Fourth, through its emphasis on linkage of electricity with
economic growth and social well-being and the goals of the Government's new rural electrification
policy, the Project helps to amplify the "voice" of rural communities and stakeholders in designing
development solutions. Finally, the Project will enable Sri Lanka for the first time tb trade 'carbon



2
ISDS
emission reduction credits' in the global market that the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) is
bringing into existence.
Global objective
The Project's global objective is to reduce atmospheric carbon emissions by removing barriers and
reducing implementation costs for renewable energy, and removing barriers to energy efficiency.
I.A.3. Project Description:
1.     Project components
The Project will support provision of electricity and socio-economic improvements in rural areas
through: (i) grid-connected and off-grid hydro, wind and biomass renewable energy technologies; (ii)
financing and grant mechanisms for solar home systems and other solar energy applicalions in rural areas
through private companies, NGOs and MFIs; (iii) technical assistance for income generation and social
service delivery improvements based on villages' access to electricity; and (iv) technical assistance to
promote energy efficiency, development of carbon trading mechanisms and integration of renewables
into government policy, provincial council development strategies and sector reform initiatives.
(a)   Grid-Connected Renewable Energy Power Generation. This component will enable
continuation on a larger scale of the refinancing support for mini-hydro projects provided under
the ESD Project, as well as extend support to two other commercially available renewable energy
sources - wind and biomass. This component will absorb nearly 70 percent of the IDA project
financing. GEF grant fiinding is not envisaged for any grid-connected investments. This
component, successfully implemented, will result in an increase of nearly 85 MW of
grid-connected small-scale renewable energy capacity. Sri Lanka's main grid will then receive
nearly eight percent of its current installed capacity from such projects, a proportion that is
higher than for most other countries. All grid-connected renewables will come under the
purview of standardized small power agreements and tariffs developed under ESD. In order to
accommodate wind and biomass, however, the existing agreement may need some changes, that
are expected to be addressed during project implementation.
Mini Hydro Projects: it pipeline of eight projects, totaling 39 MW, is in an advanced stage of
development. It is conservatively estimated that an additional 20-25 MW of hydro projects could
come under the credit program during the second half of the Project. Since experience from prior
projects under ESD has led to a better understanding of risks, banks are now willing to explore
other, local, long term financing sources to complement the refinance available from this Project.
Wind Projects. After the successful implementation of a CEB 3MW pilot wind farm under the
ESD project, regional wiind resource measurements supported by UNDP/GEF and specific
evaluations of sites by a commercial company, the private sector now has access to adequate
information in Sri Lanka to develop and implement these projects. The Project will support
commercialization and up-scaling of wind development, including exploring the possibility of
off-shore development. The newly-opened areas of the North and East have promising potential
for wind projects. The Project will support technical assistance for business development,
feasibility studies, and off-shore resource assessment. In response to strong private sector interest
in wind power developmnent, the Government has recently issued a 'Request for Proposals,'
declaring its intent to expedite wind power development to augment much needed generation
capacity. Wind projects are expected to be an early beneficiary of carbon trade financing
opportunities, proposed to be developed under this Project.



3
ISDS
Biomass. Ad-hoc and small biomass (research) projects have provided limited experience with
grid connections to such energy sources. The Project, while taking a conservative approach to
biomass energy develolpment, will support the marketing of viable grid-connected biomass
projects. It will focus initially on small-scale co-generation/gasification projects in the coconut
and tea-industry and orn larger scale dendro projects with potential biomass plantations. It will
provide technical assistance for business development, feasibility studies, and regional trade
shows, as well as longer term financing for developers through the Participating Credit
Institutions (PCls). The necessary additional support for pilot biomass gasification investments
will be determined and implemented during the life of the Project. Subprojects anticipated are
one 8 MW project (coconut-based) and about 4-5 smaller biomass generators in the range of 1-2
MW based on wood waste (from saw mills) and/or new plantations.
(b)  Solar PV Investments. Sri Lanka currently has a good foundation for the solar home system
market to expand and gain commercial viability, and the Project will provide credit and grant
support for solar PV investments for household, commercial, and institutional use to enable the
market to become fully commercial. In particular, the Project's proposed refinance, grant, and
TA support will seek tc solidify the existing middle-range solar home system market and expand
service to other applications such as: (i) smaller systems accessible to poor households; and (ii)
community applications for health clinics, schools, street lighting, etc. These initiatives will
build economies of scale to solidify the market and also increase outreach and awareness for poor
families. Further capac[ity building in respect of micro-finance institutions and other household
financing organizations, serving limited communities is also necessary to expand credit access.,
These measures will enable Sri Lanka to achieve the indicated target of 85,000 solar systems.
(c)  Independent Grid Systems. This component would again build on experience through ESD and
other donor-funded activities and would support further commercialization of village hydro and
other community-based independent grid systems through refinancing and grant support for
investments and projeci: preparation support. Additionally, TA would address such issues as
daytime electricity use for income generation activities and mechanisms for disposition of assets
once an area served by an independent grid is connected to the national system (stranded assets).
The status of independent grids within the sector reform agenda also will be emphasized in the
broader sector technical assistance. The indicative target is access for 15,000 new households
and enterprises through independent grids - village hydro projects, as well as projects based on
biomass and other technologies, where feasible.
(d)  Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management (DSM). The project intends to provide TA
and limited credit support for further private sector development for provision of
energy-efficiency services, including a framework for integrating sustainable implementation of
such programs into sector reforms. The Government's strategy paper, "Energy E,fficiency,
Conservation and Demand Side Management Strategies for the Electricity Sector," will underpin
such support. It is envisioned that responsibility for energy efficiency/DSM-related policy and
regulatory issues, as well as implementation of public-policy type DSM programs will rest with
the government, regulalor, or utility, while private sector enterprises such as Energy Service
Companies (ESCOs) wi.ll implement commercially viable energy efficiency projects.
(e)  Cross-sectoral Energy Applications. For helping rural communities to realize the direct and
indirect economic benefits of electrification, the Project would provide rural enterprises credit
support for larger systems. It will provide service institutions TA for the development of energy,



4
ISDS
standardized energy packages to create awareness and to integrate energy provision into
improved service delivery. In addition, co-financing support will be provided for investments in
selected areas. Commercial/institutional support will include TA aimed at mainstreaming
productive applications in off-grid systems. The Project seeks to connect at least 1,000
institutional and commercial systems, spurring interventions that are critically important in
restoring economic development in the country's northern and eastern areas.
(f)  Technical Assistance. In addition to the component-specific assistance described above, TA
under the Project is projected for the following activities:
* Project administration/promotion;
*  Subproject promotion/development support;
* Technology/markel introduction/promotion/capacity building related to renewable energy
and energy efficiency;
* Cross-sectoral energy applications;
* Sustainability; and
* Monitoring and Evaluation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area essentially cov'ers Sri Lanka and any rural household or enterprise in Sri Lanka is a
potential beneficiary.
B. Chieck Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments: The project has been categorized 'Fl' considering that it is a credit line to finance private sector
development of grid connected mini hydro, off-grid village hydro, solar PV, wind and biomass energy
generation projects, where sub-projects have not been identified at present. Most of the anticipated impacts
are local, reversible and are proposed to be mitigated/minimized by addressing them through good
environment and social management practices.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
F'olicy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes    No     TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        Yes * No      TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              0 Yes    No a TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                * Yes C No    ' TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  3 Yes *No     `3 TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      C Yes 0 No    3 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes C, No   U TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                               * Yes 'T No   3TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          3 Yes * No    C' TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        C' Yes 0 No  3' TBD
*By supporting the proposed proje^t, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties 'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,



5
ISDS
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The use of renewable energy technologies will yield net positive environmental impacts. Solar home
systems (SHS) and village hydro projects will result in the replacement of kerosene and other fuels that
are currently used for lighting resulting in corresponding reductions in indoor air pollution. The
expansion of grid connected mini hydro schemes and the introduction of wind power and biomass energy
systems would likewise reduce the need for fossil fuel based power generation. The replacement of
fossil fuel based power generation plants will reduce emissions of SOx, NOx, C02, and particulates.
This would result in improved air quality, particularly in already polluted urban environments, where the
likelihood of new fossil fuel based power generation plants being located is greater due to infrastructure
constraints in Sri Lanka. Biomass energy systems have the added advantage of contributing to the
reduction of the agricultural waste disposal problem.
The use of photovoltaics for electricity generation is fairly benign from an environmental point of view.
The only potential environmental issue with regard to SHS is the disposal of lead acid or nickel-cadmium
batteries used in SHS. GOSL wvill develop standards for recycling of used batteries within two years of
Credit Effectiveness. The grid connected mini hydro as well as village hydro projects will be run-of-the
river as opposed to storage projects, therefore, the long term environmental impacts are considered to be
minor. Potential impacts could be associated with partial dewatering of a section of the riverbed from the
intake until water is returned to the river downstream of the powerhouse and consequent impacts on
aquatic life in the dewatered section, potential soil erosion caused by flushing flows discharged from
sedimentation basins and by overflows at the forebays, potential ground instability caused by canal/pipe
construction, and cutting of trees for use of power poles for village hydro projects. Commercial wind
farms could have minor environmental problems, particularly with regard to interference in migration
patterns of birds and noise caused by the aerodynamic interaction between the wind and turbine blades.
The use of biomass for power generation poses the risk of deforestation in the process of supply of
fuelwood. The Government has decided that only dedicated fuelwood plantations grown on
agriculturally marginal lands will be used to supply fuelwood to biomass energy plants. While this
would reduce the chance of deforestation, it also raises issues of current land uses of the identified lands
which may involve displacement of grazing cattle, wildlife migration routes etc., that need to be
addressed in an EA. Separate E'As will be conducted on fuelwood plantations. While biomass energy
systems pose a significant risk of reasonably high levels of air pollution, it is anticipated that the
emissions will be less polluting than fossil fuel plants, considering the poor quality of petroleum fuels in
Sri Lanka..
As specific sub-project sites are yet to be identified, project specific environmental issues cannot be
identified at this stage. The information given above identifies generic environmental issues associated
with typical renewable energy systems, proposed under this project. It has been agreed with GOSL that
the site selection criteria for sub-projects will eliminate any projects that would trigger the Natural
Habitats Policy. While the Government has determined that all biomass for sub-projects will be
harvested from designated fuelwood plantations located in agriculturally marginal lands, the Forestry
safeguard policy (OP/GP 4.36) has been identified as applicable to the project largely as a precautionary
measure. The Pest Managemen.t (OP 4.09) policy will be triggered in cases where pesticides are
proposed to be employed for developing fuelwood plantations. Based on the experience of the Energy
Services Project (ESD), it is unfikely that there will be any resettlement and/or land acquisition. In the
unlikely event that there is land acquisition and/or resettlement in a sub-project the Government has
agreed to inform the Bank and follow the requirements under the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard
policy (OP/BP 4.30). Since the project will finance only run of the river small hydro power projects of



6
ISDS
less than 10 MW capacity, it is not anticipated that Dam safety will be an issue. However, the Dam
Safety safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.37) has been identified to be applicable as a precautionary measure.
The EA safeguard policy (OP/EP 4.01) will be triggered under the project and will be fully addressed
under the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework that has been prepared, based on which
project specific EAs will be conducted once sub-projects have been identified.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential 2umulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Considering the type of sub-projects eligible for financing under the Credit Line (described above), it is
anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts. However, sub-project specific EAs will be
conducted based on the Envirortmental and Social Assessment Framework agreed with GOSL, which will
identify any cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy arid/or due to
multiple project components, and recommend mitigation measures to reduce such impacts.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Since sub-project sites are yet to be identified, it is difficult to make predictions about potential long term
impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area. Considering the use of renewable energy
technologies will yield net posilive environmental impacts, with only minor reversible adverse impacts,
in general the sub-projects should not contribute towards cumulative adverse impacts due to future
developments in the sub project areas. All development projects in Sri Lanka have to go through a "site
clearance" approval process and an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Initial E,nvironmental
Examination (IEE) prior to approval being granted for construction. This process takes cumulative
environmental impacts of existing projects into account prior to approval being granted for new
development activities, therefore, it is not anticipated that any potential adverse long term impacts will
arise in the sub-project areas due to future development activities.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The Least Cost Generation Expansion Plan of the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) has taken
environmental impacts into account in the planning model used to identify new power generation
options. The plan and the Rurail Electrification Policy of the Government of Sri Lanka clearly identifies
the role for small scale renewable energy in the power development plans for Sri Lanka. This decision
has been made after considering cost-benefits including environmental impacts of various power
generation options.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
All subprojects will undertake project specific EAs based on the Environmental and Social Assessment
Framework developed by GOSL. The Framework is consistent with the World Bank Safeguard Policies
and the National Environment Act of Sri Lanka. The subproject proponent will be responsible for
preparing the EAs with assistance from consultants. The EAs will be reviewed initially by the DFCC
Administrative Unit for technical quality and compliance with the Framework and then by the Central
Environmental Authority (CEA) or the Project Clearance Agency (PCA), as designated by the CEA for
clearance. The CEA and PCAs have a good record of environmental and social responsibility. The Bank
has experience of satisfactory performance of the CEA and PCAs (with CEA guidance), undertaking
effective EA assessments of cornplex projects. The CEA has the responsibility of moniloring EMPs.
In addition, it has been agreed with GOSL that all subproject EAs involving mini-hydro projects in
excess of 5 MWs, wind energy projects exceeding 10 MWs, biomass projects and any subproject
involving land acquisition and/cor resettlement will be reviewed and cleared by IDA prior to disbursement
from the Credit line.



7
ISDS
II.D.4. Identify the key stakehol(ders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Rural communities who are beneficiaries of the off grid electrification component are the main
stakeholders, with the local communities, the sub project proponent and Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB)
being the main stakeholders for Ihe grid connected component.
Since the off-grid electrification component will be community based, community consultations will
commence from identification of the sub-project. Since system maintenance, tariff setting etc., will be
undertaken by the community, on-going community consultations are in-built into the project design. For
the grid connected component, in accordance with the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework,
the sub-project proponent is required to commence consultations with the local community at the project
site from the initial scooping stage and during the EA preparation process. Once the EA is prepared, the
document has to be placed in the local community and in three locations (the sub-project location, the
Central Environmental Authority and the Local Authority of the area) accessible to the public for formal
review and comment prior to the CEA or PCA giving environmental clearance to commence construction
of the project. The Environmental and Social Assessment Framework was subject to public disclosure
in country for a period of 45 days commencing February 26, 2002 and comments from public
consultations were incorporated prior to finalizing the Framework.
E. Safeguards Classif cation. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[X] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/10/2002     2/20/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/10/2002     2/20/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/10/2002     2/20/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Frame work:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       ExVected      Actual



8
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dani Safety Management Plan:                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Subramaniam V. Iyer                         05/23/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Sumith Pilapitiya/Person/World Bank    05/06/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordina:or: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan          05/23/2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Penelope J. Brook                           05/23/2002
For a list of World Bank news releeses on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEACK      , SrTE MAP       SHONCASE



