Report No. 24011
Report No: I064024 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SWAZILAND       Project ID: P064024
Project: Protection of Children and Orphans      Task Team Leader: Trina S.
Haque
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 2, 2002          IBRD Amount ($m): 10.00
Bank Approval: September 26, 2002        IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: HDNVP     Sector: EY - Other Education; SA - Social Assistance
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the project is to improve the education, health,
nutrition and care of Swaziland's most vulnerable children and orphans.
The project seeks to remove the barriers to these children's access to
education, health, nutrition and care.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has five components. Many elements of these components are
currently implemented by various government agencies, donors, or NGOs on
small scale and on pilot basis in the form of various initiatives. This
project would seek to integrate these initiatives and expand them to the
national scale.
Component 1: Removing barriers to basic education
This component seeks to improve the school enrollment of orphans and other
vulnerable children through a direct school fee subsidy. Although the
overall coverage of basic education is better in Swaziland than most of
the Sub-Sahara African countries, one distinctive feature of the system is
that the financing for school operation largely depends on parents'
contributions. The household costs of sending children to school are very
high. School fees and associated costs reach $150 to $200 per child at the
primary level. As the government only pays teachers' salaries, households
take a heavy burden of financing not only textbooks, other teaching and
learning materials, and school uniforms, but also almost all the school
management costs including classroom renovation, repairs and other
building, insurance of school property, cooks if there is school feeding,
etc. Many orphans and children without families' financial support simply
stay out of school. Some communities have established basic literacy
programs for these out-of-school children, with assistance by donors.
However, these programs are not only on an ad hoc basis, but also provide
little help of taking these children out of their disadvantaged status by
providing formal education.
This component seeks to provide direct financial assistance to the
schooling of disadvantaged children so that they can be integrated into
the formal education system. Communities and school committees would be



responsible for identifying out-of-school children. Guidelines will be
developed for identification of target children and communities will adapt
these guidelines with the help of project personnel to suit their local
needs. The lists would be submitted to the Ministry of Education for
approval and direct disbursement of school fees to school accounts would
be made on behalf of these children. Schools would be responsible for
submitting these children's school attendance report on a monthly basis to
the community committees and further to the Ministry of Education.
Component 2: Improving access to health and nutrition
This component will improve access for vulnerable and orphan children to
physical and psychosocial health and nutrition. It will expand the school
feeding program by providing technical support to schools. Sustainability
will be ensured by introducing/improving the school gardens to support and
lower the cost of school feeding. The Health Promoting Schools Initiative
piloted in 21 schools will be expanded to cover all schools during the
project years. Out of school children and children under 6 years of age
will be covered through outreach to communities and families. The
Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) initiative that has
recently been introduced in the country will be strengthened to improve
caring practices at household and community levels and also for referral
to higher health facilities.
Component 3: Community response of sustainable social protection provision
This component is targeted at long-term measures of providing sustainable
social protection for orphans and other vulnerable children. Community
committees for orphans and other vulnerable children will be established,
incorporating current successful community initiatives, such as health
motivators, to manage and coordinate the overall social protection
measures for vulnerable children. The community committees will receive
training for children's education and health issues, overall social
protection programs, and in particular for improving household and
community resources, and activity management for sustainable provision of
the protection to vulnerable children.
While the capacity building activities are conducted in over 300
chiefdoms, the community-based initiatives and support grants will be
operationalized in a phased manner depending on capacity and readiness.
The committees will be responsible for the allocation of funds to needy
children in the areas of subsidizing school fees including school feeding.
The committees will also ensure that these children are able to access
existing basic health care and immunization services. Most importantly,
community committees are also responsible for identifying and implementing
sub-projects that can increase household and community assets and
resources in order to sustain these measures.
Component 4: Protecting street children
Major activities of the rehabilitation of street children include re-
integrating street children into the families, and provision of vocational
and life-skills training. These activities would be planned and
implemented in alliance with several organizations active in these areas.
Therefore, capacity building for these organizations would also be an
integral part of this component.
Component 5: Project management, monitoring and evaluation
-2 -



The key to the success of this project is the successful monitoring of
outcomes. This component will enhance managerial capacity to implement,
monitor and evaluate program outcomes.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Swaziland is the smallest country in Southern Africa, both in geographical
coverage and its population, which is about one million. The project will
be implemented in all four regions of the country. But as the project
inputs focus on provision of school fee for vulnerable and orphan children
and empowering communities to undertake sustainable interventions to
protect these children, no population group will be adversely affected.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: The project supports school fee, increasing parents/care
providers' awareness, provision of psychosocial support to children,
rehabilitation of street children and improving access of vulnerable
children and orphans to health care provided by the public health system.
The project will also empower the communities to assess the situation of
orphans and vulnerable children in the community, analyze actions needed
and to undertake sustainable interventions. No adverse environmental
impact is expected. Through the component on health promoting initiatives
in schools and awareness generation among communities the project will
have a positive impact on the environment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
None
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None
-3-



II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
NA
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Communities will participate in the project through social assessment,
identification of their developmental needs, and prioritization. At the
time of project implementation, the communities will identify the children
to benefit from the school, health, and nutrition package, and identify
households that should benefit from the sub-projects to increase household
assets and resources. Responsibility of caring and supporting vulnerable
children and orphans is increasingly falling on women whose access to
resources is constrained due to traditional land and property rights in
the African context. Additionally, there may be a bias towards accessing
the support provided by the project for boys rather than girls. The
community assessment proposed in the project design will address these
gender dimensions. Guidelines for composition of community committees that
decision making powers to include representation for women will be
provided and training for communities will also address the gender issue.
They will also monitor how the children are coping and generally monitor
and evaluate the impact of the project. Communities will be consulted
annually through beneficiary assessments, which will be a significant
input to project supervision
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
- 4 -



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Trina S. Haque  4/4/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Charlotte S. Bingham     4/8/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Dzingai Mutumbuka        4/4/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5 -



