                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/19/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: SWAZILAND                                            Project ID: P068975
Project: Swaziland Biodiversity Conservation and              Task Team Leader: Agi Kiss
Participatory Development
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 6, 2003                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 27, 2004                              IDA Amount ($m):
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.50
Managing Unit: AFTES                                          Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            sector (100%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Biodiversity (P); Other environment and
                                                              natural resources management (P); Environmental
                                                              policies and institutions (S)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
1a. Context and Background

Despite its small size, the Kingdom of Swaziland enjoys a surprising richness of biodiversity as a result
of its location and its great variations in landscape, geology and climate. It lies at a unique crossroads
between the tropical flora to the north and more temperate flora to the south and includes the extremes of
many species ranges. As a result it has the highest species diversity in southern Africa. A substantial
part of the biodiversity richness lies in the northwest, in the Barberton center of local endemism, and in
the far east, in the Lubombo mountains and the Maputaland Center of Plant Diversity. Equally
important, Swaziland contains one of the largest remaining intact altitudinal gradients of natural
ecosystems (from montane to coastal plains) in the region, and it is the only place where this continuum
is compressed into a relatively short distance of about 200 km. Such an intact gradient holds great
significance for biodiversity conservation because it allows for ecological processes such as migration
and gene flow, and because it provides the opportunity for population shifts as an adaptation to climate
change. The fact that the gradient occurs across a relatively small total area is important from a practical
perspective, making it more feasible to conserve and manage the area. The highlands of Swaziland also
hold several large river basins which supply water for agricultural, hydropower and domestic uses
downstream, not only in Swaziland but also in South Africa and Mozambique.

This unique biodiversity heritage is under serious and growing threat as a result of increasing population
and a declining economy. Only 5% of the total area of Swaziland is currently legally protected for
biodiversity (4% in formally gazetted protected areas; 1% informally protected) while almost 30% has
been fully converted either to commercial agriculture (particularly sugar cane or citrus monocultures),
plantation forestry, or urban development. The majority of the land is used for small scale subsistence
agriculture and livestock grazing, with varying degrees of loss and degradation of biodiversity and
ecological integrity. Invasive alien plant species, some of them introduced through agriculture and
plantation forestry, are also displacing indigenous species in many areas. Government policy has focused
on increasing investment in commercial agriculture and related agri-business, and surveys have been
undertaken to identify additional areas suitable for agricultural development.

The protected and unconverted areas with moderate population density are largely concentrated in the

                                                       2
                                                                                                         ISDS



northern part of Swaziland, where it is possible to outline a relatively well-defined, largely intact
corridor of natural landscape running west-to-east across the country (the "Northern Corridor"). Much of
the currently unprotected area within this corridor has been identified as "Protection-Worthy Area"
(PWA) under the national Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (BSAP), based on criteria such as
biodiversity value, socio-economic value, long-term sustainability and availability for protection. A
similar biodiversity-rich and relatively intact natural corridor can be outlined running north-to-south
along the eastern edge of the country, comprising the Lubombo mountains and part of the eastern
lowveld (the "Eastern Corridor"). Both of these corridors are anchored at either end by Transfrontier
Conservation Areas of high biodiversity significance.

In view of the high proportion of Swaziland's rural population that falls below the poverty line, it is clear
that the rural landscape must provide increasing economic benefits. In order to survive, natural areas
must compete on economic terms with further agricultural development. Natural resources and
ecosystems already make an enormous contribution to rural livelihoods (e.g., woodfuels account for 80%
of energy in rural areas, and almost 10% of the country is used for communal grazing). However, much
of this natural resource use is unsustainable and has resulted in environmental degradation, such as
overgrazing and large scale soil erosion on some communal lands. The relatively intact natural areas
within the proposed Northern and Eastern biodiversity corridors are no exception: the protected areas are
continuously threatened with encroachment and the unprotected areas are increasingly subject to
unsustainable resource use. Maintaining or restoring the biodiversity value and ecological integrity of
these areas through greater protection and improved management will only be possible and politically
acceptable if the biodiversity-friendly land uses contribute substantially to the livelihoods and economic
development of the people.

The best prospect for significant, sustainable, biodiversity-friendly economic growth in many of the
remaining natural areas is likely to be through nature-based tourism. Southern Africa is widely regarded
as a major growth area for the tourism and travel industry. A 1999 study by the World Tourism and
Travel Council estimated that the economic contribution of tourism in the SADC region could grow by
nearly 6% per year over the next decade (well above a worldwide average of 3.4%). In 1999 the industry
directly accounted for 3.3% of total employment in the SADC region (1.5 million jobs), and the WTTC
report forecasts this to rise to 2.2 million jobs by 2010. (Corresponding figures for the tourism and travel
economy, which takes into account upward and downward linkages, are for 11.4% of GDP, and a
projected 5.5 million jobs, or 8.9% of total employment, to come from tourism-related economic activity
by 2010). At present, tourism levels and revenues in Swaziland are low. Africa-wide the average
contribution of the tourism industry to GDP is 7.8% whereas in Swaziland it is only 2.6%. Swaziland is
presently known mainly as a transit destination for tourists passing from Mpumalanga to Kwazulu-Natal
or to Mozambique, with less than 30% of foreign tourists entering the country staying overnight. There
is clearly potential for a significant increase if Swaziland can position itself as a more important
destination within the southern Africa tourism industry.

While increasing its share of the SADC tourism market, Swaziland should also benefit from the rapid
growth that is expected to arise from major initiatives to develop and expand an integrated southeast
African tourism circuit linking the very popular wildlife areas inland with the spectacular Indian Ocean
coast (e.g. a proposed new Southeast African Tourism Investment Initiative, SEATII, being launched
with support from IFC, USAID and others). Swaziland holds a strategic geographic position within these
circuits and can significantly contribute to their success. At the same time, the larger regional context
provides the critical mass of invesetment opportunities and attractions which are essential for the
viability and sustainability of tourism development in this small country. This is particularly important
for community-based tourism development, as isolated small-scale attractions and accomodations rarely
can survive just on the basis of tourism flows they can attract in isolation. While not able to compete in

                                                       3
                                                                                                         ISDS



terms of wildlife (or coastal) attractions, Swaziland can define its own unique niche within the southern
Africa destination on the basis of its rich cultural heritage and beautiful landscapes. Recent studies
indicate that heritage, culture and scenic beauty represent 46% of the total motivation of foreign tourists
visiting southern Africa. Swaziland's National Development Strategy and Tourism Policy and Strategy
highlight the importance of tourism as a source of economic development for the country, and both stress
that tourism development must be driven by private sector investment, with the government creating an
attractive and supportive environment (in both a physical and business sense) to promote this investment.

The traditional approach to designing a protected area network or tourism circuit is largely "top-down"
and sectoral, with the responsible Ministries preparing and trying to implement their sectoral
development plans. However, modern development policy (including that of the World Bank) and best
practice stress the need for stakeholder participation and multi-sectoral integration at all stages, from
conception through planning through implementation. Participation and cross-sectoral coordination are
also key to the "Integrated Ecosystem Management" approach to biodiversity conservation, which has
been adopted as a guiding principle by all the major international conservation organizations and many
agencies around the world responsible for managing public lands and resources (e.g., the US National
Park Service, Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management; Parks Canada, etc.). This type of
approach is particularly necessary in Swaziland because of the diversity of land tenure and land use and
the strong role of communities, through Traditional Authorities (Chiefs) under the Tinkhundla system, in
determining the use of land and natural resources. The slow progress of SDI's in Swaziland highlights
the importance of ensuring "buy-in" from a variety of sectoral agencies and from stakeholders on the
ground. The great challenge, however, is to define an integrated and participatory planning process and
to identify or develop institutional structures to lead it. These structures must ensure effective
coordination among sectoral agencies, between central government and Traditional Authorities, between
government and non-governmental entities including the private sector, and (given the large spatial scale
of the proposed corridors) across local administrative, social and economic boundaries.

Other differences between the BTC concept and the SDI model highlight additional strategic choices
made in this project. Environmental sustainability and social equity considerations have been addressed
to a greater or lesser extent in various SDI's, but only from the perspective of seeking to reduce and
mitigate any negative impacts, rather than as central objectives and fully integrated elements of the
planning process. In the BTC model, environmental sustainability and enhancement of local livelihoods
are core objectives and lie at the center of the planning process. The ISPP process will therefore begin
with a Strategic Environmental Assessment and be built upon its outcomes and recommendations.
Another difference is that the SDIs have generally been based on a model of geographically distinct
"development nodes" anchored by large, capital-intensive "mega-projects." The mega-projects are
supposed to attract other investment, to produce a "stand-alone" centers of economic development and
growth. The BTC model emphasizes a linked chain of modest scale, community-oriented developments
(e.g., nature reserves, accomodation, craft shops, restaurants). The success and sustainability of each link
in the chain depends on its being part of the larger whole, which represents an attractive and accessible
route linking major regional tourism centers and destinations, such as the large game parks and
Transfrontier Conservation Areas, and Maputo and the Mozambique coast. This model is supported by
ongoing initiatives to establish large, integrated south East African tourism routes which aim to make the
entire region a major world class tourism destination.

1b. Project Development Objective:

The project's Development Objective is to promote environmentally, economically and socially
sustainable development and enhance incomes in the rural areas of Swaziland, based on conservation and
sustainable use of its rich biodiversity resources and local participation in tourism development.

                                                      4
                                                                                                         ISDS




1c. Global objective:

The project's Global Objective is to preserve globally significant biodiversity and a continuous altitudinal
and vegetational gradient by creating a sustainable, linked network of formally and informally protected
areas.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The BCPD is an innovative and challenging project which will introduce a landscape/ecosystem
management approach to achieving biodiversity conservation and sustainable economic development in
two broad geographic areas (a "Northern Biodiverssity and Tourism Corridor" running east-west across
northern Swaziland, and an "Eastern BTC" which runs north-south along the eastern part of the country),
                                      2
which together cover about 4800 km ,or 1/3 of the country. These BTCs represent a spatial scale large
enough to encompass important biological and ecological functions and to provide a critical mass of
tourism attractions and opportunities for private sector investment.

Each BTC would consist of a mosaic of four main types of land use that each contribute to the overall
objectives in their own way:

        Core protected areas may include both existing formally gazetted PAs and new areas under
        some form of community-based conservation scheme.
        Tourism development zones will be based on high potential for attracting tourism investment
        and contributing to local sustainable development.
        Linkage areas may serve an ecological function (ensure habitat continuity, migratory pathways,
        etc.) and/or a tourism function (e.g. creating a suitable circuit that hikers or others can follow
        between tourism development "foci").
        Support areas are the remaining areas within the corridors, where neither biodiversity
        conservation nor tourism development will be priority objectives, but where improved natural
        resource management is required to support the broader conservation and tourism objectives, and
        where communities can participate in and benefit from the conservation and tourism initiatives
        taking place in neighboring areas, for example by supplying goods and services to tourism
        facilities.

        (The first three areas are referred to below as the "backbone" of the BTCs)

The project is comprised of five components:


A. Integrated Spatial and Participatory Planning Process and Development of Integrated
Corridor Management Plans ($2.22 Million, of which $ 0.90 million from GEF)

The ISPP process provides a mechanism to bring together diverse stakeholders and provide them with the
information necessary to identify, evaluate and choose among alternative options for use of land and
resources in order to achieve sustainable economic development. Unlike conventional top-down,
sector-driven planning activities, the ISPP stresses broad participation and cross-sectoral coordination as
a means of highlighting common objectives and identifying and resolving potential conflicts. The
underlying objectives of the planning process will stress the conservation and sustainable use of natural
resources, particularly the biodiversity, ecological systems and processes, and aesthetic landscapes of the
area. To ensure environmental sustainability and positive social and local economic impacts, the ICMPs
will be based upon Strategic Environmental (including Social) Assessments and on economic analysis.

                                                        5
                                                                                                           ISDS



The latter will emphasize the economic value of the land and natural resource base and estimate the
short- and long-term costs and benefits associated with various development options.

The expected outcome of the ISPP process is an "Integrated Corridor Management Plan" (ICMP) which
will provide the framework for land use, development and investment within each proposed BTC,
applying not only to activities under this project but to all investment and development. To serve this
purpose, the ICMPs must have strong support from all the stakeholders who participated in developing
them, from government Ministries to Traditional Authorities and local landowners. They must also
receive concrete financial support from Government and donors (including, but not limited to the GEF
grant, which will target implementation of biodiversity conservation activities within the Plans). Finally,
they must benefit from some form of official recognition and formal authority for the objectives, plans
and standards they define. The mechanism for achieving this will be identified during project
preparation. It could for example involve giving legal standing to the ICMP itself, or establishing a
governing structure such as a Corridor Board tasked with overseeing implementation of the Plan
(relevant examples of each approach exist from other countries).

The ISPP process will take place on several levels:

    (i) at the regional/national level, placing the proposed BTC in the broader context of maintaining
    large-scale ecological patterns and processes and contributing to the development of multi-national
    tourism routes and circuits;

    (ii) at the level of each BTC, to ensure connectivity and complementarity of land uses within these
    broad areas; and

    (iii) at the level of specific land use areas within each Corridor (e.g., developing management plans
    for conservation areas or tourism development plans for tourism zones).

The project will support the ISPP process through three subcomponents:

         (1) Strategic Environmental Assessment (StrEA) ($0.9 million): StrEAs will be carried out for
         each BTC in order to provide the data and analysis needed to make informed decisions about
         development options and trade-offs, and to ensure the environmental sustainability and social
         soundness of proposed management and development plans. The StrEA will also provide an
         overall context and framework for later site- and investment-specific Environmental
         Assessments. This subcomponent will be implemented by the Swaziland Environment Authority
         (SwEA).

         (2) ISPP Unit ($0.62 million): the project will support the establishment of a small Unit within
         the appropriate Ministry (e.g., Ministry of Economic Planning and Development or Ministry of
         Tourism, Environment and Communications) to lead and coordinate the ISPP process. There is
         no existing government department with the mandate and capacity to undertake this task. The
         Ministry that hosts it will assign at least one senior and two technical staff to the Unit on a full
         time basis. Because the ISPP is a new approach and calls for significant re-orientation of
         traditionally sector-driven planning processes, the project will support a substantial amount of
         long- and short-term Technical Assistance and training for Unit staff and for partners,
         particularly from sectoral agencies, who will work with the Unit on a regular basis to help
         design and guide the ISPP process. The project will also fund equipment (e.g., computers, GIS
         software) and incremental operational support for the Unit.

                                                      6
                                                                                                        ISDS



        (3) Implementation of the ISPP Process ($0.7 million): Implementation of the ISPP process and
        preparation of the ICMPs will involve stakeholder meetings, technical workshops, awareness
        raising and training for the wide variety of stakeholders to enable them to participate effectively,
        studies and analyses needed to support the ISPP process, and development and implementation of
        a Communications Strategy. The project will fund technical assistance, training, consultancies,
        vehicles and equipment and operating costs associated with these activities.



B. Participatory Biodiversity Conservation and Management ($ 3.96 million, of which
$3.33 million from GEF)

    In the BCPD project, conservation of globally and locally significant biodiversity represents both a
core objective in itself and a basis for environmentally and economically sustainable tourism
development. The project will support the implementation of many aspects of the National Biodiversity
Conservation Strategy, including expanding the network of Protected Areas to encompass a number of
additional "Protection-Worthy Areas," promoting biodiversity conservation within production
landscapes outside PAs, increasing participation of rural communities in conservation action and benefits
and strengthening regional linkages through Transfrontier Conservation Areas. It addresses key
biodiversity threats identified in the BSAP, including pressure for conversion of land to agriculture and
other uses, unsustainable exploitation of biodiversity resources and the spread of invasive alien species
into both natural and agricultural areas. GEF funding is sought to support for conservation investments
on the ground (the establishment of core conservation areas to protect globally significant biodiversity
sites and linkages) and to build the technical capacity within and outside government to maintain them
over the long term. GOS and other funding will be sought for aspects such as conservation policy
development, strengthening SNTC in relation to business management and transfrontier cooperation, and
development of an invasive species eradication strategy.

        (1)      Development of a National Biodiversity Conservation Policy and Review of Legislation.
        ($ 0.21 million) The GOS and other stakeholders have identified the need to develop a National
        Conservation Policy in order to set specific conservation objectives and targets, to identify and
        support a variety of approaches (including use of economic and other incentives), and to clarify
        the roles of various actors and stakeholders. The existing legislation will need to be revised to
        harmonize across sectors and to support the National Biodiversity Conservation Strategy (and the
        BTC concept), for example by allowing for the formal establishment of a broader range of
        Protected Area (PA) types. Presently the law recognizes only IUCN PA categories 2,3 and 4, all
        of which exclude all human activity and use. While retaining the current classification for
        existing PAs, the objective is to enable formal establishment of other PA categories that allow
        for multiple use and community participation. Financing would be provided for short term
        Technical Assistance and workshops.

        (2)      Re-orientation and strengthening of conservation organizations ($1.4 million). This
        sub-component aims to strengthen SNTC's capacity in several key areas: (i) for supporting
        community-based conservation, both through its own initiatives and by working in collaboration
        with NGOs and Community-based Organizations; (ii) for conservation planning, including use
        of GIS-based systems; (iii) for improving its business management to become more financially
        viable (including strengthening its capacity to work with private sector partners through
        contracting and concessioning); and (iii) for participating in transfrontier conservation
        initiatives. It would also provide some support for NGOs and CBOs to assist communities to
        establish and manage conservation areas and enterprises, and for a Biodiversity Database Unit

                                                      7
                                                                                                        ISDS



        (currently under development) to collect and manage biodiversity data for conservation planning.
        Financing would be provided for long termand short term Technical Assistance, in-service and
        external training and secondments, targeted operating costs (e.g. for attending Transfrontier
        related activities), computer equipment and accessories for biodiversity data management, and a
        small grants fund for NGOs and CBOs to support community conservation activities.

        (3) On-ground Conservation Investments ($2.0 million). This subcomponent would
        concentrate on establishing new conservation areas within the BTC, in accordance with priorities
        identified by the ongoing Protection-Worthy Areas Survey and the ISPP process. This would
        include both formal PAs to be proclaimed and managed by SNTC, and community conservation
        areas, including. Funding would be provided on the basis of proposals submitted to a Project
        Steering Committee, with a nominal allocation of up to $200,000 per PA. The types of
        investments envisaged include direct capital investment in infrastructure (e.g. fencing, roads and
        trails, in accordance with PA management plans), wildlife restocking, etc. The project would
        also help put in place economic incentives, including support for operating costs on a declining
        basis, to encourage communities to protect high priority conservation areas. The expectation is
        that the need for this type of subsidization would decline as other types of economic benefits
        begin to materialize. Co-financing from sources will be actively sought, for example carbon
        sequestration funds for reforestation and restoration of key PA or linkage areas. .

        (4)      Development and Initiation of a Program for Alien Plant Eradication. ($ 0.35 million).
        Invasive alien plants represent a serious and growing threat to native biodiversity in many parts
        of the country, including within the proposed BTC. An actual program to eradicate (or at least
        greatly reduce) this infestation will be very expensive and will have to be supported through a
        major and sustained effort similar to the "Working for Water" program in South Africa. Under
        the BCPD project, support would be provided for Technical Assistance and associated operating
        costs to identify and prioritize invaded sites and to develop a strategy and a detailed and costed
        plan for tackling the problem.


C. Sustainable Tourism and Private Sector Development ($ 1.74 million, of which $ 0
from GEF)

        Tourism development represents both a core objective of the BTC (as a source of economic
growth for rural communities), and an essential justification and support for biodiversity conservation.
At present, Swaziland is primarily a transit destination (between South Africa and Mozambique), with
less than 30% of foregin tourists who enter the country staying overnight. The objective of the project is
both to capture a larger share of the existing southern Africa tourist flows and expenditures, and to
contribute to a significant expansion of the regional market as an important element within developing
large south east Africa tourism circuits. The European Union is currently providing some support for
the tourism sector under its Private Sector Support Program. This includes both policy level support and
a grants scheme aimed at encouraging the development of small, community-based tourism enterprises.
The current EU project is expected to close in two years, but it is anticipated that approval of the BCPD
may leverage a continuation of the program, including support to the activities described below. As
tourism development supports important national economic objectives, it is not considered to be an
incremental cost to achieve global objectives, and no GEF funding is proposed.

        The subcomponents of this component are:

        (1)      Strengthening Tourism sector policy and the associated regulatory framework to support

                                               8
                                                                                                  ISDS



the BTC concept. ($ 0.03 million) Specifically, this involves providing a policy and legal
basis for the development of Tourism Zones within the Corridors, with associated standards to
guide and regulate the types of investment and development that can be undertaken (thus
supporting the implementation of the ISPP process and the resulting ICMP). Support will be in
the form of short term TA;

(2)      Delineation and Development of Management Plans for Tourism Zones within the BTC
($ 0.17 million). The ISPP process would identify areas within each BTC where tourism
development would be most viable and most beneficial for the success of the Corridor as a
whole. The next step would be to actually delineate the sites and develop management plans to
guide investment within these target sites. As with the Corridor level ISPP, these plans should
be based on Strategic Environmental Assessments. During the course of the project it is
expected that about 5 Tourism Zones would be identified and undergo this more detailed
planning process. The project would finance technical assistance, workshops and operating
costs.

(3)      Stimulating responsible (commercial and community) tourism investment. ($ 1.48
million). This subcomponent would continue the initiative begun in community tourism
component of the EU's Private Sector Support program. This EU component aims to provide
small grants to assist communities to start up tourism-related enterprises (often in collaboration
with, or with the assistance of, local NGOs or private sector operators). Because of the need for
a great deal of awareness raising and capacity (1) building, it is unlikely that many such
enterprises will be launched by the close of the current EU project; therefore the BCPD would
step in to carry on the effort. Unlike the EU project, however, the proposed enterprises would
not be ad hoc and isolated initiatives but would be identified, evaluated and supported in the
context of the Tourism Zone plan and the broader ICMP. Small-scale enterprises and initiatives
are much more likely to succeed and be sustainable if they are part of a larger product
development which will bring in the critical mass of tourists needed. In addition to continuing
the program of support for small scale community-based tourism enterprises, this subcomponent
of the BCPD will support the development of appropriate tendering procedures and documents
for tourism investment, training to enhance community members' ability to manage tourism
related enterprises and/or to participate in joint ventures with private sector investors, marketing
and promotion of the BTC as a unique tourism attraction, and support for product enhancement
in accordance with Tourism Zone management plans (including matching grants to the private
sector). Under this component the project would support short term TA, training, and
development grants for enterprise development and product enhancement.

(4)      Development of a Strategic Tourism Infrastructure Plan. ($ 0.06 million). Strategic
infrastructure is essential for tourism development, particularly in relation to the landscape level
initiative represented by the BTC, whose concept depends on facilitating tourist flows and
linkage among sites along the Corridors. This includes both roads of appropriate design for
nature-based tourism and other elements such as walking or bicycling trails, scenic outlook sites,
improved border posts, etc. The ISPP process will identify general infrastructure needs, which
will then need to be further refined into a prioritized and costed plan. The Strategic
Infrastructure Plan will serve as a basis for re-orienting public sector investment, for attracting
private sector investment and for leveraging and channeling support from bilateral and
multilateral donors (currently donor support to the infrastructure sector does not benefit from
such a strategic framework). The Plan will also review existing road standards and make
recommendations for revisions or provisions to provide the flexibility needed to develop
infrastructure that supports the aesthetic elements of the BTC concept. Support will be in the

                                                         9
                                                                                                            ISDS



           form of short term TA.


  D. Sustainable Community-Based Natural Resource Management and Community
  Empowerment in Linkage and Support Zones ($2.07 million, of which $ 0.5 million from
  GEF).


           An essential aspect of the BTC concept is that the core conservation areas and priority tourism
  development zones are physically linked to to maintain essential ecological processes and provide an
  cohesive tourism route across the country. The core conservation areas, key tourism development areas
  and the "linkage" areas that provide essential connectivity, may be regarded as the "backbone" of the
  BTC. This "backbone" cannot stand on its own, however, but must be supported by compatible land and
  resource use in surrounding areas. For example, an attractive nature-based tourism route requires scenic
  vistas such as forested hillsides and clean rivers, and can be undermined by evidence of deforestation,
  soil erosion and pollution. Similarly, a lack of well managed and adequate wood, fertile land and other
  natural resources outside PAs often leads to encroachment and poaching by loal communities.
  Therefore, the BTC model also includes "support areas," in which the objective is to promote
  management of land and natural resources in ways that support the BTC concept, and to spread the
  economic benefits of the conservation and tourism initiatives to a larger number of local communities.

           The project will support improved natural resource management use practices in linkage and
  support zones of the BTC. The priority sites and issues to be addressed will be identified through the
  ISPP process. Implementation will be through grants provided to experienced NGOs and CBO's based
  on specific proposals. The majority of this component is expected to be funded by GOS and bilateral
  donors interested in supporting sustainable rural livelihoods. A modest amount of GEF funding is sought
  to support activities with direct biodiversity benefits, such as restoring natural habitats in linkage zones
  to facilitate gene flow. Other funding options will also be explored, such as carbon financing for
  agroforestry or for re-afforestation of degraded areas with indigenous species.


  E. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation ($1.33 million, of which $ 0.77
  million from GEF)


           Because of the multi-sectoral nature of the project and the limited experience of GOS agencies
  with implementing World Bank-financed operations, a small Project Implementation Unit will be
  established to manage and administer the project (including procurement, financial management and
  coordinating preparation of annual work plans and progress reports). This PIU will be placed within an
  appropriate Ministry (to be determined during preparation) and provided with the necessary authority to
  implement its cross-sectoral coordination responsibilities. The PIU will be responsible for preparing and
  implementing a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. This will include refining performance indicators to
  ensure that they are relevant, realistic and measurable, establishing baselines, and tracking measurable
  progress against them. Given the innovative and "learning by doing" nature of the project, the M&E
  plans will also provide the basis for adaptive management. The M&E plan will include an independent
  Midterm Evaluation. Support for this component will include vehicles and equipment, operating costs,
  training, contracting of a private audit firm and short term Technical Assistance for developing and
  implementing the M&E plan.



NOTE: The following Table mistakenly indicates 100% GEF financing, because presently no financing is being indicated
from IBRD

                                                        10
                                                                                                         ISDS



Components:



Integrated and Participatory Spatial Planning (including Strategic Environmental Assessment)
Participatory Biodiversity Conservation and Management
Sustainable Private Sector-Driven Tourism Development
Sustainable Community-Based Natural Resource Management and Community Empowerment
Project Management and M&E
Unallocated Contingency




 I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
 characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
 or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
 The project will cover a target area of approximately      km2 in northern and eastern Swaziland. (The
 "Northern Corridor" runs east-west across the northern part of the country; the "Eastern Corridor" runs
 north-south along the eastern part of the country).

 Swaziland is recognized as having the greatest species density (# species/1000 km2) in southern Africa, and
 contains almost 14% of the floral taxa recored for the entire sub-region. Its ecosystems range from open
 grassland and semi-arid savanna to forests and wetlands. Most significantly, it is only at the latitude that a
 continuum of is compressed to a maximum east-west distance of 200 km. This renders it uniquely
 valuable from a biodiversity and scientific standpoint.

 The proposed corridors encompass: (i) a portion of the Drakensberg ecoregion of Afro-montane grasslands
 and woodlands; (ii) much of the remaining Middleveld and Lowveld habitat in Swaziland (elsewhere in the
 country the Middleveld has mainly been settled by pastoralists and over 50% of the Lowveld has been
 converted to sugarcane monoculture); (iii) the Swaziland portion of the Lubombo Mountains (the South
 African and Mozambican portions are also being addressed as a Transfrontier Conservation Area supported
 in part through a separate GEF/IDA project); and (v) the Maputaland/Tongaland coastal plan between the
 eastern foothills of the Lubombo Mountains and the Indian Ocean (much of this area falls within a globally
 recognized center of floral and faunistic diversity-- theeMaputalanad-Pondoland Regional Mosaic).

 The project target area includes several officially gazetted Protected Areas, such as: Malolotja Nature
 Reserve (continguous with the Songimevelo Nature Reserve in South Africa), Hawana Nature Reserve,
 Mlilwane Wildlife Sanctuary, Mkhaya Game Reserve, Hlane Game Reserve, and Mlawula Nature Reserve,
 as well as several private nature reserves (Phophonyane, Mhlosinga, Mbuluzi, Muti-Muti).


 B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

 Comments: The project aims to preserve natural habitats and biodiversity, to improve the sustainability of

                                                        11
                                                                                                           ISDS



natural resource use and reverse existing trends of environmental/natural resource degradation, and to use
Integrated Ecosystem Management as the basis for promoting environmentally sustainable economic
development.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                           Triggered

    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes      No      TBD

    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes      No      TBD

    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes      No      TBD

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes      No      TBD

    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes      No      TBD

    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes      No      TBD

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes      No      TBD

    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes      No      TBD

    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes      No      TBD

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes      No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Safeguards issues and impacts may arise mainly in relation to: (i) proposals for infrastructure development
or rehabilitation such as roads and tourism facilities (on a small scale under the project itself, but with the
possibility of triggering larger scale secondary development), and (ii) potential negative impacts on
livelihoods of some specific groups of people through restriction of access to harvesting natural resources
(trees, wildlife, grazing, etc.) in areas identified as core biodiversity protection areas. The latter includes
both areas already formally gazetted and new areas that may become protected as a result of the project.
These potential issues and impacts will be identified through the preparation of an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP), and a Resettlement Process
Framework (RP) prior to appraisal. The ESMF will address the requirements of OP 4.01(Environmental
Assessment), 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and 4.36 (Forests), and the RFP and RP the requirements of OP 4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement).




Environmental and Social assessment will be required mainly in relation to: (i) proposals for infrastructure
development or rehabilitation such as roads and tourism facilities (on a small scale under the project itself,
but with the possibility of triggering larger scale secondary development), and (ii) potential negative
impacts on livelihoods of some specific groups of people through restriction of access to harvesting natural
resources (trees, wildlife, grazing, etc.) in areas identified as core biodiversity protection areas. The latter
includes both areas already formally gazetted and new areas that may become protected as a result of the
project.

                                                      12
                                                                                                          ISDS




II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Component B aims to create several new Protected Areas, Component C aims to enhance the attractiveness
   of areas within the BTCs for nature-based tourism by maintaining attractive natural landscapes, and
   Component D aims to reduce degradation from unsustainable natural resource use outside protected
   areas. There could be cumulative impact in that in many cases it may not be an option to relieve pressure
   on the PA or to enhance the aesthetic attractiveness of a tourism landscape by displacing exploitation of
   natural resources to other areas if these are already over-used. This issue must be taken into account
   when assessing the feasibility of creating PAs and Tourism Development Zones, and in the overall land
   use planning process.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project aims to attract tourism and related investment to the project area to support the protection
and development of the BTCs. The ISPP process aims to ensure that such investment is environmentally
and socially responsible and sustainable, by providing an overall framework agreed upon and respected
by all stakeholders. There is a risk that other, incompatible investment will be attracted as well (e.g. due
to the enhanced infrastructure), with political support that would enable it to come in in contravention to
the BTCs framework. The project aims to reduce this risk by emphasizing broad stakeholder
participation in and strong political commitment to the ISPP process, community empowerment, and
"branding" and promotion that emphasises the environmental and social aspects as a major feature of the
attraction.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The "no project" alternative will be presented, and is expected to include continuation of the current trends,
   which include declining economic indicators and increasing pressure on natural resources, little or no
   intervention to improve natural resource management in the target area, and the possibility of further
   unplanned and environmentally/socially unsound tourism development.

Other alternative approaches considered but rejected include a project supporting biodiversity conservation
   and establishment of new PAs alone, without the tourism development component, and a project focused
   on site-specific conservation interventions without attention to linkages at the landscape level. The
   former was rejected in the interests of promoting sustainability of the biodiversity conservation by
   ensuring that it provides local and national economic benefits, and the latter was rejected as it would lose
   a major part of the justification for the conservation effort, i.e. maintaining the continuous altitudinal
   gradient.

Development and implementation of the Integrated Corridor Management Plans (ICMP) for the two BTCs
   are integral project activities. Project preparation will identify and examine alternative approaches to
   addressing the issue of people living in or using existing some Protected Areas and/or areas identified as
   high priority to be protected for biodiversity purposes. Alternatives may include relocating some
   households or some economic activities (e.g. agricultural plots), or assisting them to shift from
   incompatible to more compatible economic activities.

The ICMPs will also address infrastructure development, by establishing plans and developing new
   standards for such development, to ensure compatibility with the BTC objectives. The main alternative
   would be to use existing national standards for buildings and roads, which are likely not to be compatible
   with these objectives.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

                                                        13
                                                                                                          ISDS



During implementation, the borrower will address safeguards issues through application of the ESMF, RPF
and RP (See II.D.1a above). The ESMF, RPF and RP will identify which potential project interventions and
investments would trigger environmental and social the safeguard policies, and will outline the procedures
to ensure compliance. These procedures will include, as appropriate, the preparation of environmental
assessments or resettlement action plans for specific investments supported by BCPD. The ESMF, RPF and
RP It will also review existing policies and regulations (Swaziland has strong EA legislation) to evaluate
consistency with WB requirements.

OP 4.09 may be triggered if pilot activities for control of alien invasive weeds includes the use of
herbicides. This would be identified in the strategy for alien plant control to be developed under the
project.

The ISPP process and identification of tourism areas will determine whether there is any threat to
culturally signficant sites or assets within the Corridor areas.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project is entirely built upon stakeholder participation, as is outlined in the description of the ISPP
process. A Participation Strategy was developed and is being carried out as key part of project
preparation. The Participation Strategy focuses on three objectives:

     (i) at a national level: raising general awareness and disbursing general information about the
     project's objectives and approaches

     (ii) among targeted stakeholder groups, raising more targeted awareness, disbursing more specific
     information about the project's objectives, approaches, elements, timetable, etc., confirming their
     interest in participating in the project, and registering and trying to respond to any concerns that may
     be raised;

     (iii) obtaining input from (a representative sample of) different stakeholder groups regarding key
     elements of the project design and approach -- in particular, on appropriate mechanisms for ensuring
     that they participate effectively in the ISPP process

The Participation Strategy includes a number of different approaches, including distribution of
brochures, radio messages, open consultation meetings, focus group meetings, etc.

A number of governmental and non-governmental stakeholders have also been participating directly in
project design and preparation through membership on the Project Steering Committee, Project
Management Group, and Technical Committee

(see Annex on Participation Strategy for details on stakeholders identified, participation activities and
membership of project Committees).

The Institutional Study will also address how effective stakeholder participation will be carried forward
in project implementation.

The ISPP process and Participation Strategy will ensure that all stakeholders are fully informed about BCPD
initiatives to fully comply with the Bank's Policy on Disclosure of Information, particularly in the disclosure
of any environmental assessments or resettlement action plans prepared during BCPD implementation.

                                                    14
                                                                                                        ISDS



E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.


[ ] S1.  Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
         in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2.  One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3.  No safeguard issues
[ ] SF.  Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
         similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
         safeguard issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           4/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/30/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           4/30/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by              Name                                                 Date
Task Team Leader:                    Agi Kiss                                             March 20, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:    John A. Boyle/Person/World Bank                      June 18, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:


Approved by:                         Name                                                 Date

                                                15
                                                                     ISDS



Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham    June 18, 2003
Sector Manager/Director          Richard G. Scobey       March 22, 2003

