Report No. 23170
Report No: I008860 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: TAJIKISTAN      Project ID: P008860
Project: Second Poverty Alleviation Project      Task Team Leader: Michael Mills
Appraisal Date: December 6, 2001         IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: May 16, 2002         IDA Amount ($m): 12.00
Managing Unit: ECSHD     Sector: SF - Social Funds
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project seeks to increase poor people's access to basic
socio-economic infrastructure and services by (i) financing microprojects
that are identified and managed by beneficiary communities, and (ii)
extending microcredits to poor people, especially women, for
income-generating purposes.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The proposed project has three components:
(i) Microprojects, in the form of grants to restore basic social and
economic services and infrastructure and to fund innovative microprojects;
(ii) Microfinance services in the form of funding to poor groups,
particularly women, and providing technical assistance and training to
NGOs to increase their capacity to deal effectively with clients;
(iii) Project management and organizational strengthening - funding
running costs and promoting the institutional development of the TASIF and
strengthening its management capacity through the provision of training,
technical assistance, and monitoring and evaluation of microprojects and
of partnership agreements.
Micro-projects ($ 14.0 million).
This component of the proposed SPAP would develop two kinds of
microprojects:
a) Continued micro project activities. Projects would range up to
$150,000, averaging approximately US$35,000 (in line with the experience
of the PPAP); with the possibility of several phases of implementation
leading to larger and more complete projects. The majority of the planned
400 microprojects would be civil works to rehabilitate, restore and expand
essential services using local contractors, suppliers and laborers.
These would include (but not be limited to) improvements in water supply,
sanitation, gas supply, rehabilitation of small facilities, irrigation
canals and roads. Projects proposed by local governments could be funded
after consultations with community members to ensure local demand and full



participation. When possible, community implementing agencies would be
responsible for contracting works and managing microproject implementation.
b) Financing innovative new projects, including projects for especially
poor and vulnerable people. Some microproject proposals put forward by
communities may not fall within present selection criteria, yet still
address an articulated community need (such as income-generating
activities). Other microprojects could also reach out to previously
underserved groups, such street children, people with disabilities, or the
elderly. In such cases, the microprojects might warrant special attention
in the form of increased resources for training of intermediaries,
outreach to the groups themselves to let them know funding is available,
and/or greater public awareness and community outreach efforts.
Recognizing the special nature of these projects, a portion of
microproject funding would be earmarked specifically for this component.
All categories of microprojects would continue to be targeted on the
poorest communities. To receive funding, the microproject would have to
be planned and proposed by a community or NGO based on demand from its
constituencies; and would have cost sharing and sustainability plans
clearly outlined in the project proposal. The TASIF operational manuals
are being reviewed and revised as necessary.
At the TASIF level, considerable emphasis would be placed on seeking
opportunities to work with partners, including local and international
NGOs, bilateral donors, local communities, and community-based
organizations. Jointly-funded projects will be financed if appropriate;
and cross-fertilization with projects in other countries, through study
tours, conferences, and other learning opportunities, will be funded.
Micro Finance ($1.0 million).
There would be two sub-components for micro finance:
a) Continued funding of Sitorai Najot ($0.4-0.5 million). Sitorai Najot
has established itself as an important locally-managed microfinance NGO in
Tajikistan. This subcomponent would allow Sitorai Njot to expand its
activities into new parts of the country, and to extend its activities in
the 14 rayons where it presently operates.
b) Expanding to other small grassroots organizations operating out of
different regions ($0.5 million). The Sitorai Najot program is very
successful. However it is estimated that about one in five households
(roughly 1.2 million) in Tajikistan could benefit from micro finance,
whereas less than 60,000 households presently have such access. So there
is a large unmet market for this service. While Sitorai Najot is able to
work in the south of the country, other NGOs are needed to deal with
regions in the north and east of the country. Since these NGOs are much
less experienced than Sitorai Najot, they would require considerable
training and technical assistance.
The TASIF operations manual for micro finance has been prepared, and it
is being renewed and updated. The World Bank Task Team for the SPAP is
also working with colleagues within the Bank and with other donors to
review the regulatory framework within which such programs would operate
- 2 -



in Tajikistan.
Project Management and Institutional Strengthening ($2.0 million).
This component would finance the administrative, operational and
capacity-building costs of the implementing agency (the TASIF), including
staff salaries, equipment, vehicles, and operating costs, along with
training, technical assistance and evaluations.    Through the project
support and specifically the capacity building activities, it is expected
that by the end of the proposed SPAP, the TASIF would have become fully
able to formulate and implement poverty strategy and alleviation efforts;
and that it would serve as a valuable asset to the Government as it
develops its poverty alleviation agenda.
There would be two sib-components to this component. The first would be
Project Management ($1.2 million). The TASIF would be re-structured so
that it has a more accessible and representative Board which can take a
more active part in the governance of the program. The organization chart
for the TASIF would revert to being similar to its original one, but the
roles and responsibilities of the regional offices would be reviewed and
strengthened. Links between local offices and local government would be
developed by a liaison officer for each area whose job would include
consultation and advice to local government.
The second sub-component would be Institutional Strengthening ($0.8
million), which would help to develop the skills of key staff members
through training programs (study tours, site visits, formal class learning
programs, seminars and conferences) and technical assistance. Particular
emphasis in the staff training program would be placed on training in
financial management, the MIS, and planning and evaluation. Links would
also be strengthened with other social funds active in the region, so that
there could be cross-fertilization of ideas and knowledge. Within this
subcomponent, the project's monitoring, evaluation and management
information systems would also be updated and made more operationally
relevant for the day-to-day work programs of all TASIF staff. This
sub-component would be a key part of the proposed SPAP, and would help to
ensure that TASIF has the staff capacity to undertake the challenging set
of activities with which it is entrusted, both in its day-to-day lending
activities and in the area of policy formulation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Throughout Tajikistan.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: Experience with this project's predecessor, the Pilot Poverty
Alleviation Project, demonstrates that microprojects can have a positive
environmental effect. Under this earlier project, sufficient institutional
capacity for environmental review of subprojects was developed in the PIU
which will also be responsible for implementing the proposed new project.
A number of microprojects have been for the provision of gas supply to
households for cooking and heating purposes. These have contributed to a
-3 -



decrease in the cutting of trees in a country facing severe deforestation.
Several of the microprojects have been for the removal of garbage from
streets and a systematic approach to garbage disposal. To control and
prevent any possible negative environmental situations, the wastes of
health centers, the wastewater of sewerage systems, the irrigation water
of agriculture infrastructure and water distribution networks are all
disposed in an adequate manner. The formulation of infrastructure design
and the selection of equipment for specific microprojects takes into
consideration elements to mitigate any negative impacts. Garbage and
materials used during construction are buried in authorized and controlled
places. To safeguard the environment, environmental criteria are
incorporated into microproject appraisal. Subprojects submitted for
financing would be subject to an environmental review according to the
environment section in the Operations Manual. This environmental review
would identify potential subproject environmental issues. Based upon the
significance of the environmental issues identified in this environmental
review, the sub-borrower may be asked to prepare an environmental
assessment and/or an environmental management plan satisfactory to the
PIU. Satisfactory completion of this requirement would be a condition of
subproject approval. The environment section of the Operations Manual
will be subject to review and approval by the ECSSD Environment Unit
before project appraisal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)       No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Minor impacts (dust, noise, etc.) during construction from movement of
workers and materials. Disposal of minor amounts of sludge from water
treatment plants etc.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Not applicable.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
-4-



Not applicable.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Operations Manual used by the PIU details environmental review procedures
and institutional arrangements with various authorities responsible for
environment, and worker health and safety. Any subproject, as a condition
of approval, will be required to meet all environment, worker health and
safety standards/regulations of the Government of Tajikistan, and have in
place all necessary approvals, licenses, and certificates as required by
government authorities.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
A social assessment has been carried out to improve the understanding of
the Bank and the client about the nature o poverty in the country, the
coping mechanisms of the poor, and ways in which they could be better
supported by the TASIF. A further review is being undertaken of the TASIF
operating procedures and microproject methodology to ensure that the
microprojects are fully owned by the local communities.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        Not Available
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
- 5-



Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Available
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Michael Mills   10/18/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   10/25/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Michal J. Rutkowski      10/25/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6-



