Report No. 23893
Report No: I057883 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/22/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: TAJIKISTAN      Project ID: P057883
Project: Dushanbe Water Supply Project Task Team Leader: Ede Jorge
Ijjasz-Vasquez
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 15, 2000 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 18, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 17.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE     Sector: WU - Urban Water Supply
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment & Maintenance Loan (SIM) Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Development Objective of the project is to improve the safety,
reliability, efficiency and financial viability of the water supply
services in Dushanbe. The Development Objective would be achieved
through: (a) strategic rehabilitation and efficiency improvement of
existing facilities in critical condition; (b) institutional strengthening
of the Dushanbe Water Utility (Dushanbe Vodokanal - DVK) through a
performance-based service contract (SC) with an internationally
experienced water utility operator (the Operator); and (c) strengthening
of DVK's financial capacity through improved financial management and
commercial practices.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has the following components:
Project Component 1: Immediate Investment Program. This component would
finance a small set of urgent immediate investments to improve the safety
of drinking water and the efficiency of DVK water treatment system.
Project Component 2: Repair and Rehabilitation Fund. This component would
support essential short-term expenditures (such as operational equipment,
vehicles, computer hardware and software) and a least-cost capital
investment program aimed at improving the operations of the water supply
system, reducing the water losses, improving the network operations,
implementing a metering program, improving the quality and safety of
water, and achieving the performance improvement targets in the service
contract. The Operator, together with DVK staff, will propose the
investments that are required to optimally re-structure and rehabilitate
key components of the system (such as sections of the existing water
distribution network, specific components of the existing treatment plant,
pumping stations), implement a demand management program, and set up
financial management, accounting and commercial systems.
Project Component 3: Service Contract. This component would finance the
costs related to the service contract. These costs include a base fee and
a performance-based fee to be paid to a private international operator
based on achievement of specific and measurable targets defined in the



contract.
Project Component 4: Consulting Services and Project Coordination Unit.
This component would support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) that will
supervise the Operator's performance and compliance with the terms of the
Service Contract; independent technical and financial auditors that would
support the PCU in its monitoring of the Operator's performance and
prepare the necessary project and DVK financial audits; and other
consulting services.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project area comprises the city of Dushanbe, with an estimated
population of 800,000 people. The project will support the rehabilitation
of water supply infrastructure, and is designed to improve service
delivery to the entire city population. As all project activities are of a
rehabilitation nature and there will be no expansion of systems financed
by the project, all civil works will be on disturbed rights of way owned
either by the municipality or the utility. This land is not encroached
upon for habitation, commerce or other permanent use, thus the project
will not entail resettlement of people, and will not require land
acquisition.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: A review ofpotential environmental impacts and appropriate
mitigation measures was carried out during project preparation, and
indicated that the project activities fall within Category B as per the
Bank's OP 4.01. The project is expected to bring significant environmental
and health benefits, such as improvements in public health through better
quality and availability of treated water, and improvements in the
sustainability of raw water sources through reductions in losses and
wastage. All negative environmental effects, mostly associated with
infrastructure rehabilitation practices, can be minimized through
appropriate mitigation measures basically comprising good construction and
utility operation practices. These are described in the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan for the project, and provisions for them
will be included in the works contracts.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         Yes
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
-2 -



D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is expected to bring significant environmental and health
benefits, such as improvements in public health through better quality and
availability of treated water, and improvements in the sustainability of
raw water sources through reductions in losses and wastage.
Potential impacts of the project would relate to: (i) inappropriate
disposal of water treatment sludge; (ii) safety hazards from chlorination
process; (iii) pollution by construction run-offs; (iv) disturbance during
construction including dust, noise, vibration, access restriction, closure
of roads, and increased traffic; (v) improper disposal of demolition
debris; (vi) damage to existing utility services during pipe repairs and
installation; (vii) safety hazards from construction activities; (viii)
spillage of fuel and oil from construction; and (ix) damage to trees and
vegetative cover.
The project will not entail any resettlement, expansion of existing
facilities or construction of new structures of significant size, and will
thus not require land acquisition. Construction works will predominantly
entail pipe replacement, which includes pavement demolition, trench
excavation, pipe laying, trench filling, and pavement application. Other
construction works will be limited to rehabilitation of existing
structures such as pumping stations and specific parts of treatment
plants. All works under the investment program (components 1 and 2) are
planned to be of rehabilitation nature, in properties owned by DVK or
rights-of-way assigned to municipal infrastructure. Temporary disturbance
to the population inhabiting areas adjoining the civil works sites, and
site personnel, during construction, including noise, dust, restricted
access, interruption of traffic flow, and vibration will be mitigated
through implementation of provisions in the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan, and good costruction practices to be included in the
works contracts.
Although the water supply system of Dushanbe is partially provided with
water from an international waterway, the project falls within the
exceptions to the notification requirement under Paragraph 7 (a) of O.P.
7.50 (international waters). This determination has been cleared by
Bank's management.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No significant cumulative impacts areexpected due to the implementation of
the various project components.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
No significant potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area have been identified. Further improvements
- 3-



in the water supply system would result in improved health benefits to the
population and improved sustainability of raw water resources through
reduced losses and wastage in the system.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
In order to ensure adequate implementation of the necessary measures to
minimize potential negative environmental impacts associated with the
project, which for this project are basically are standard and widely used
in internationally approved construction and utility operation practices,
an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan (EMMP), incorporating
public comments will be implemented. The EMMP will be implemented by DVK,
under the management of an international utility operator. Requirements
for the works to be performed following specific provisions in the EMMP
and good construction practices will be included in the contracts for
rehabilitation and minor works. Additionally, having an international
operator managing the utility company will ensure compliance with these
measures as well as knowledge transfer.
The Ministries of Nature Protection, and Water Resources, and the Main
Administration of Geology within the Government of Tajikistan will be
responsible for enforcement of applicable local regulations. The Project
Co-ordination Unit will maintain a water supply and environmental engineer
at all times that will be responsible for overall supervision of
compliance of the operator's activities and the project in general with
the EMMP recommendations. In addition, the Municipal Department for
Environment will have enforcement responsibilities. The key monitoring
indicators of project benefits are included in the Performance Standards
Appendix of the service contract and will be monitored and audited
independently by the Project Co-ordination Unit with the support of an
international auditing technical team.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Inter-agency co-ordination, training, public awareness, high quality
construction and monitoring are key to ensuring that the project is
managed in an environmentally acceptable way. The project was prepared in
close collaboration with the Municipality of Dushanbe, the Dushanbe
Vodokanal, the Ministries of Health and Environment, key stakeholders, and
representatives of the media. Different strategies for consultation and
participation of these stakeholders were implemented. The interaction
with government agencies and the Vodokanal was continuous throughout
project preparation.
On March 24 and 25, 2000, the project approach and the technical,
financial, institutional, social and environmental aspects were discussed
in a workshop with key stakeholders, government agencies, representatives
from the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Environment, and the media.
Multiple environmental and health-related issues and questions were
discussed at the workshop. The PCU and DVK will continue the cooperation
with all stakeholders, concerned public interest groups and NGOs.
- 4 -



The final draft of the EMMP has been made available in public libraries of
the city of Dushanbe. An announcement was published on August 4, 2000 in a
local newspaper informing about the EMMP availability and requesting
comments from the general public (a copy is available in Project Files and
in the Bank's Public Information Center). Comments received from the
public and various Government agencies were incorporated in the final
version of the EMMP.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              9/13/2000
Date of "in-country" disclosure          8/4/2000
Date of submission to InfoShop           10/5/2000
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)                1/28/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez         02/24/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
-5-



Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   03/13/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Motoo Konishi; Hossein Razavi    03/20/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



