Report No. 23503
Report No: I075256 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/19/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: TAJIKISTAN      Project ID: P075256
Project: Tajikistan - Pamir Private Power Project         Task Team Leader:
Raghuveer Y. Sharma
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 15, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 23, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 10.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE     Sector: PP - Electric Power & Other Energy Adjustment
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Through private sector involvement, to improve the reliability and enhance
the quantity of supply of electricity in the Gorno Badakshan Autonomous
Oblast (GBAO) in a financially, environmentally and socially sustainable
way.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project Setting
Tajikistan's Gorno Badakshan Autonomous Oblast (GBAO) is one of the
poorest and most remote areas of the world. Situated in the heart of the
Pamir Mountains, GBAO is a region sparse in population and natural
resources. The majority of its 250,000 people is rural combining
subsistence agriculture with animal husbandry. A socio-economic survey
conducted as part of the environment and social assessment of the project
estimated an average annual income for the typical project area family of
six at US$216. Winter temperatures in the region average minus 50C. As a
result, the average family spends between 8 to 17 percent of its
disposable income on energy (fuelwood, kerosene and electricity)
notwithstanding the opportunity cost of labor used to gather fuelwood and
other forms of biomass. With forest cover largely depleted, the majority
of rural households rely on cattle dung, agricultural residues and root
stock as heating and cooking fuel. Affordable electricity provides one of
the only alternatives to continued natural resource depletion in the
region.
Current power capacity in the GBAO region is composed of thirteen
recently-constructed micro-hydroelectric plants and several small
hydro-electric plants, two of which account for 70 percent of installed
capacity - Pamir with 14 MW and Khorog with 7 MW. No functioning diesel
power generating capacity remains. The transmission system of GBAO is in
poor condition having been largely destroyed in the civil war of the
1990s. Of the 435 km of 35 kV lines, only about 15 percent is still in
service. There are about 990 km of 10 kV lines, and only a similar
percentage is believed operational. All villages outside the capital
Khorog receive no electricity from early November to late March or April.
Load shedding only applies to Khorog.



The Government has adopted a strategy for the energy sector to expand and
diversify Tajikistan's energy system to supply reliable, efficient, and
affordable energy to more people, support poverty reduction, improve the
standards of living, and bring economic development to rural areas. To
that end, the Government has initiated a package of policy and
institutional reforms, and rehabilitation and adequate maintenance of the
existing power systems.
Project Description
The proposed Project is for a private concessionaire to take-over and
operate all existing power facilities, currently operated by the national
electrical utility Barki Tajik in GBAO under a 25-year Concession
Agreement, complete the Pamir I hydropower plant to its original design
capacity of 28 MW from the current 14 MW, and rehabilitate other assets
including other small hydroelectric stations, substations, transmission
and distribution lines.
Project Components
The cornerstone of the project is the completion of the 28 MW Pamir 1
run-of-river hydroelectric plant near Khorog. This component of the
project consists of:
upgrading and completing the Pamir 1 power plant by installing the two
additional turbines and bringing the installed capacity of the plant to a
total of 28 MW.
completing the originally planned regulating structure at Lake Yashilkul,
which will allow to release water to the river during winter to ensure a
sufficient discharge for energy production.
In addition, the project comprises the following additional components,
which are not directly related to the completion of the Pamir 1 plant:
rehabilitation and upgrading of the 9 MW Khorog Hydropower Plant, the 1.2
MW Vanj Hydropower Plant and the 2.0 MW Namangut Hydropower Plant;
erection of a new 35 kV line between the Pamir 1 power station and the
substation in Khorog on an existing transmission line alignment.
rehabilitation of the 35 kV line between Khorog and Andarbak.
general rehabilitation of critical sections of other 35 kV and 10 kV lines
within the Khorog area.
rehabilitation of the distribution network within the Khorog area as
required.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Project Location and Geophysical Features
Gorno-Badakhshan is a very mountainous area, consisting of two main parts:
(i) the Pamir mountains and high plateau, and (ii) the valleys at the
western fringe of this high plateau, draining into Pianj valley. The
highest elevation of the Pamir is Peak Somoni (formerly Peak Kommunism)
with 7495 m; the high plateau has an elevation of generally between 3700
and 4200 m asl. The Pianj River forms the border between Tajikistan and
Afghanistan. After its confluence with Vaksh River, about 550 km
downstream of Khorog, the Pianj becomes the Amu Darya, which is one of the
two main tributaries of the Aral Sea.
- 2-



The project region is the valley of Gunt, one of the rivers originating on
the high plateau and draining into Pianj River. Khorog lies at the
confluence of Gunt with Pianj, at an elevation of about 2075 m asl. Lake
Yashilkul, from where Gunt River originates, is situated at the edge of
the high plateau, at an elevation of 3720 m asl. There are three
floodplains in the Lake Yashilkul area totaling 477 hectares (ha) and two
of them, totaling 207 ha, could be affected by the project.
The climate of the project region is of the extremely continental mountain
climate type. Temperatures are characterized by very marked seasonal and
daily fluctuations. In Khorog, average temperature is 23.7 C in August
and -6.3 C in January; in Bulunkul, a small village near Lake Yashilkul,
average monthly temperature varies between 11.2     C   in July and -25.5   C
in January. The whole region is rather dry (annual precipitation in
Khorog 235 mm, in Bulunkul only 86 mm), with the major part of the
precipitation falling as snow in the period between November and April.
This climate also determines the discharge pattern of the rivers. Winter
discharge is very low, summer discharge is high, augmented by water from
melting snow.
With the exception of river alluvial plains in the generally narrow
valleys, the vegetation is very sparse. The flanks of the mountains are
covered with a low, very patchy steppe vegetation. Trees and bushes grow
up to an altitude of about 3000 m asl, but only along the rivers or on
irrigated land. Forests are almost non-existent in the project area.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: As a condition of financing the Project, IFC and IDA require
that the project proponent comply with applicable World Bank Group (WBG)
social and environmental safeguard policies and guidelines in the
construction and operation of the project's facilities. This compliance
includes the mitigation of any potentially adverse social and
environmental impacts of the project. General guidance on compliance is
provided in both World Bank's and IFC Operational Policy 4.01 on
Environmental Assessment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       Yes
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          Yes
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
-3-



II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The environmental and social assessment has identified the applicability
of the following WBG policies and guidelines:
Natural Habitats (OD 4.04) - The construction and operation of the Pamir
power plant will require the seasonal draw-down of Lake Yashilkul, a
natural reservoir that feeds the Gunt River, which is the water source for
the Pamir power plant. This draw-down may have an adverse impact on the
lake's fisheries and on the floodplain vegetation surrounding the lake.
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30) - The floodplain vegetation of Lake
Yashilkul provides grazing and hay for livestock maintained by farmers
living in and around the Gunt River Valley. A depletion of water
resources may have an adverse impact on floodplain vegetation, reducing
the amount of grazing and hay available for livestock and forcing the
reduction of herds. Such reduction could cause economic hardship to the
farmers dependent on the floodplain resource.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) - Lake Yashilkul was formed by a landslide
that dammed two tributaries to the Gunt River many hundreds of years ago.
During their technical assessment of the project, the consultants
determined that the rubble and boulder dam is stable. Nevertheless, at
the recommendation of the World Bank Safeguards Committee, expert opinion
has confirmed the safety of the lake's natural dam.      Monitoring of the
dam will be included in the overall operation and maintenance of the
project.
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) - With the exception of two Kyrgyz graves,
successive environment and social assessments have identified no cultural
property of any significance in or near areas that may be temporarily
affected by project construction activities. Nevertheless, at the
recommendation of the World Bank Safeguard Committee, expert opinion is
being sought to confirm these findings. That opinion will be available
after the winter allows a further site visit and appropriate measures to
protect cultural property will be incorporated into the HSE plan as
required.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50) - The review of the
potential environmental impact of the completion of Pamir 1 by Electrowatt
in 1999 has shown that the effect on Pianj River, of which the Gunt is a
tributary and which forms the border with Afghanistan, is marginal and
well within natural fluctuations (minor reduction in summer and small
increase in winter flows). To the extent that all diverted water is
returned to the Gunt from the power plant after use, the project will have
no impact on the river's downstream use and no detectable impact on
international waterways.   Formal confirmation has been issued by IDA
management that notification of riparians is not required. Such
confirmation would be a condition of IDA Board presentation.
The above safeguards issues and their impacts have been analyzed for both
construction phase and operation phase of the project. Appropriate
mitigation measures for these impacts have been identified and agreed with
the beneficiary (PamirEnergy). Detailed analysis of the impact is
provided below.
-4-



Assessment of environmental and social impacts
1. Identification of Relevant Impacts
The original EIA for the project was prepared in 1986. All the relevant
aspects (landscape, climate, hydrology, soils, vegetation, fauna, water
quality, hydrobiology) were addressed in this report. The main conclusion
of the report was that with the exception of effects on Lake Yashilkul,
environmental impacts are either non-existent or of very minor importance,
and that no specific mitigation measures are required. This view was
confirmed during the project evaluation in 1999.
As far as Lake Yashilkul is concerned, the EIA focused exclusively on the
impact on fisheries and on specific impact mitigation measures. These
included measures for increasing fish productivity in the lake, with a
view to commercializing this resource. However, while the fish stock
should certainly be maintained, such measures, at least at the present
time, are not justified.
The potential impact of the project on the floodplains at Lake Yashilkul
was not addressed at all in the original EIA. Nonetheless, this impact is
now considered the most important negative effect of the project and
requires mitigation measures.
2. Project Construction Phase
The following paragraphs describe potential environmental and social
impacts and mitigation measures focusing on Lake Yashilkul. However,
where the most important potentially affected receptors, namely, the
fisheries and floodplain vegetation, are concerned, biophysical data is
not sufficient to accurately forecast the impacts. Therefore, monitoring
of these impacts has been initiated and will continue into the operations
phase of the project as described in Section 6.
2.1 Hydrology
In order to minimize the construction risk and to reduce costs for
draining the construction pit required for completing the regulation
structure at the outlet of Lake Yashilkul, it is planned to draw the lake
down by about two meters during the two summers required for the
construction. This drawdown will increase river flow during the period of
its implementation. Once the construction period over, a similar amount
of water will have to be retained in the lake, thus reducing the flow in
the rivers during the first post-construction spring and summer. This
reduction, however, will be less than the one which will in the future be
required for compensating for the operation of Pamir 1, which will entail
a yearly lake drawdown in winter of up to 6 m. This issue is dealt with
in the section on impacts during operation (see below).
Other than this, the project will not change the river regime. The intake
structure for Pamir 1, a weir across Gunt, is already in place and
operating, and neither the structure nor its operation pattern will be
changed by the present project.
2.2 Dam safety
-5-



Lake Yashilkul has been formed by a natural dam as a result of a massive
landslide, which occurred in prehistory. Unlike Lake Sarez, located in
the next valley to the north of Yashilkul, which was formed by an
extremely large landslide fewer than a hundred years ago, the natural dam
of Yashilkul is stable and can be considered safe. A separate Dam Safety
Study has been carried out to confirm this assessment.
2.3 Floodplain vegetation
Lowering of the lake level during summer may have an effect on the
groundwater level in the two floodplains adjacent to the lake, which will
also be lowered. This in turn could negatively affect the vegetation in
the floodplains, which depends entirely on ground water. A reduction in
floodplain productivity would negatively affect the people who depend on
these floodplains for feeding their livestock. The areas of possible
impacts, the number of people that could be affected and measures to
mitigate any economic hardship are discussed below:
There are three floodplains in the Lake Yashilkul area totaling 477
hectares (ha) comprising: Somon with an area of 157 hectares (ha),
Marijinoy which covers 50 hectares, and Bulunkul floodplain which covers
270 ha. Of these, only the Somon and Marjinoy floodplains could be
affected, i.e., totaling 207 ha (43%) of the available floodplains.
In terms of population, about 190 people from the Bulunkul Goskhoz (state
farm), and about 300 people from Pamir Goskhoz could be affected. The 190
people whose livelihood depends on the Bulunkul Goskhoz include 50
employees in this farm and their 140 dependents. The 300 people whose
livelihood depends on Pamir Goskhoz include 95 employees and their 205
dependents.
In terms of hay production/availability, about 79 tons in Somon floodplain
and another 25 tons in Marjinoy floodplain could be lost due to the
project's construction.
In the event that indeed the floodplains are affected as mentioned above,
the PamirEnergy would compensate the people affected, with cash and/or hay
actually supplied. (See para.4 in section II.D.3 below for more details on
compensation).
In addition, the Pamir Goskhoz farmers would receive improved electricity
supply from the Project, since they are connected to the main grid of
GBAO. In other words, they get compensated for loss of grazing and also
benefit from the project. However, the farmers of Bulunkul Goskhoz are not
connected to the main grid and therefore would only get compensated for
loss of grazing, but would not benefit from the Project as currently
envisaged.
To address this concern, the finalized Concession Agreement includes the
provision to route any savings in the project costs as presently defined,
to enhancing power supplies in remote areas to people of GBAO that now do
not enjoy electricity supply. Efforts will be made to ensure, that in the
event of any cost savings, the people in the Lake Yashilkul area not
connected to the main GBAO grid at present, would be the first ones to
benefit from any savings in project costs, perhaps by building the
- 6-



integrated small hydro plant into the regulating structure. In addition,
efforts are underway to raise additional financing for such remote area
electrification.
Furthermore, the sponsors will be encouraged to initiate programs in the
Lake Yashilkul area to initiate a pilot assistance cum enterprise
development program that seeks to: improve livestock holdings of
individual herders (via improved grazing and fodder inputs, improved
breeding techniques, etc.); and find improved markets for their stock.
While there is a risk of the above-mentioned negative impacts, it is not
possible to calculate its magnitude given the available data. For this
reason, the project's main mitigation measures consist of setting up a
monitoring program that will detect an influence of the project on
floodplain productivity, and to budget compensation payments to the users
if this should be required.
Once construction is complete, the summer lake level will be restored to
its natural level, and any potential negative effects on the vegetation
should not persist. Here again, the monitoring program will help to
verify this assessment (see below).
2.4 Lake fisheries
Drawing down the lake can affect the fish population in two ways: (i) by
reducing the amount of benthic organisms which form the main food basis
for the fish, and (ii) interfering with reproduction by means of
destroying spawning grounds. The latter could mainly happen if the lake
level was to be lowered during June, which is the spawning period of the
fish species which is the highest in numbers in the lake.
For this reason, the fish population in the lake has to be monitored,
although it is presently not exploited by the local population. This
monitoring will have to be carried on beyond the construction phase of the
project in order to detect potential impacts on fisheries of the operating
regime (see below).
2.5 Impact of construction activities
The completion of the regulating structure at lake Yashilkul can have
adverse environmental impacts. Although these are limited in duration and
area of impact, efforts need to be made to minimize them, as follows:
Water contamination: Construction work in a river invariably leads to an
increase in turbidity and in the sediment load of the river. This,
however, is not of a major concern since baseline quantities of suspended
solids are usually high, especially at times of high flows.     Furthermore,
the existing weir at Pamir 1 also serves as a sediment trap. However,
there is a risk of water contamination with fuels and lubricants used at
the construction site. Measures for reducing this risk are taken normally
at a construction site and include proper storage of these substances, at
a safe distance form the water, and a general prohibition to refuel,
maintain and wash cars, lorries and construction machines in or near the
water. These measures will have to be a condition for the contractors,
and it will have to be controlled and enforced as a part of the
- 7 -



environmental monitoring during the construction activities. With these
measures in place, the risk of water contamination is very low.
Site access: Presently, access to the construction site is a track or road
leading from the main road Khorog - Murgab to Bulunkul and then onwards to
the future construction site at the outlet of Lake Yashilkul. Vehicle
drivers typically drive outside the track as soon as it deteriorates. This
practice damages the vegetation in this semi-desert environment, where
regeneration is very slow. In order to prevent such damage, the
road/track will have to be maintained, and where required improved, in
order to make it suitable for any kind of traffic to and from the
construction site. Off-track driving will have to be prohibited. Between
the village of Bulunkul and the future construction site, the road crosses
three small lateral streams. Here, appropriate structures - small bridges
or culverts - will have to be put in place for allowing an easy crossing
of theses streams. Preparing and maintaining access will be the
responsibility of the contractor, and will also have to be controlled
during the entire construction phase.
Construction sites: Temporary land use (e.g. for storage of material, for
excavating construction material, or for dumping of unused excavation
material) will have to be restricted to the absolute minimum required. A
rehabilitation of such sites at the end of the construction period is
required. This concerns mainly the cleanup of installation and storage
sites and the removal of all material no longer used.
Worker health and safety: At all construction sites, worker health and
safety rules will have to be observed by the contractors.
Local economic benefits: The construction activities for Pamir 1 will
generate a considerable amount of income through the labor required for
its implementation. Most, if not all, construction work will be carried
out by local contractors. However, efforts will have to be made to ensure
employment of inhabitants of villages near the construction site. This
employment will contribute to an improvement of the local economic
situation.
2.6 Impact of power disruption
The completion of the regulating structure will not affect the functioning
of existing power plants, since it will interfere only marginally with
river discharge, increasing it at least during a part of the summers
required for construction. No change in the natural regime will take
place in winter. However, rehabilitating and upgrading of the power plant
itself will require to shut it down during one summer, thus reducing the
available amount of electricity during this period. Since energy demand
is especially high in winter, and this has to be seen in the light of a
permanent considerable improvement of the supply situation, this temporary
inconvenience is considered acceptable.
2.7    Rehabilitation works
The rehabilitation of the existing hydro plants at Khorog, Vanj and
Namagut and of the power distribution system comprises limited scale works
on existing sites or transmission line alignments. The details of the
- 8 -



rehabilitation works will be defined in the audits of existing facilities
which will be carried out by PamirEnergy under the project. All of these
works will be carried out in conformity with WBG environmental and social
guidelines.
3. Project Operations Phase
3.1 Hydrology
Since the natural river regime does not guarantee a sufficient amount of
water in Gunt River for an optimal operation of Pamir 1 HPP in winter, the
regulating structure on Lake Yashilkul will release an additional 10 m3/s
during this period. This release will result in a drawdown of the lake
during the winter months. To compensate, and to have the required amount
of water in the lake for the following winter, the same total amount of
water will have to be retained in the lake during the summer months.
The effects of this planned regime on the lake level are illustrated in
Figure 1. While the project, as conceived originally, planned to draw
down the lake by about 2 m and to operate it from there. Rather, the
revised project design maintains the lake level during summer close to its
historic levels and within its natural range of fluctuation, mainly for
preventing permanent damage to the vegetation of the floodplains.
The operation of the regulating structure on Gunt River will allow the
purpose of the project - an increase in winter flow - to be achieved.
These augmented winter flows have to be compensated by retaining a similar
total amount of water in the lake during the summer months, thus reducing
the river discharge in this period. Analyses carried out for design show
that the resulting reduction in summer flow is rather small in relative
terms (less than 10%), and even in Gunt River it is within the natural
fluctuations. Most importantly, the project does not change the seasonal
flow pattern, of high discharges in summer and low ones in winter.
Figure 1: Lake level fluctuations with and without the regulating
structure in place. The project as planned now prevents the permanent
drawdown of the lake by about 2 m.
At Khorog, Gunt flows into Pianj River, which forms the border between
Tajikistan and Afghanistan. The changes caused by the project in Gunt
discharge values will also affect Pianj. However, Pianj is far bigger
than Gunt (average annual discharge in Gunt at Khorog: 104 m3/s; Pianj at
Shizd: 435 m3/s). Its annual discharge pattern is also very seasonal,
with summer flows of over 1000 m3/s. Here, the change brought about by
Pamir 1 is a reduction on flow of around 1%. This is far less than any
natural, even short time fluctuation, and can be determined only
mathematically. Therefore, it can be said that the impact of Pamir 1 on
Pianj is negligible.
Figure 2: Effects of the project on Pianj river, at about 100 river km
downstream of its confluence with Gunt. For this river, no long term flow
data are available. However, the two years on record (1967 and 1970) show
-9-



that variation form year to year can be rather marked, and that the
changes caused by Pamir 1 (increase in winter, reduction in summer) are
marginal.
The "with project" curves in the figures above are calculations based on
the assumptions that there will be: (i) a continuous release in water from
the lake of 10 m3/s from November to April; (ii) no change in May and
October; (iii) a retention of 10 m3/s in June and September; and (iv) a
retention of 20 m3/s in July and August. The optimal regime will have to
be found in the first years of operation. It is therefore recommended to
start retention earlier and/or with higher values, e.g., starting in May
and retaining more in June, in order to reach the high water level in the
lake at an earlier date. The monitoring program (see below) will provide
important input for this decision.
3.2 Floodplain vegetation
Productivity of floodplain vegetation depends entirely on the availability
of water, i.e., on the ground water level in these alluvial floodplains.
This in turn is influenced very directly by the lake level. A lowering of
the lake level would lead to a lowering of the ground water table in the
floodplains and in this way to a reduction of the productivity.
Therefore, the two mitigation measures for preventing this effect are: (i)
the modification of the project in a way that allows to keep the summer
water level within the range of its natural fluctuations; and (ii) to find
an operating regime which allows to bring the lake level up as quickly as
possible. If this is achieved, the project should not cause any long term
adverse impact on the vegetation and on the productivity of the two
floodplains. Here again, the results of the monitoring will be important.
3.3 Lake fisheries
The fisheries of lake Yashilkul are not exploited presently, but they
constitute a potentially valuable resource for future use. Drawing down
the lake, and changing the pattern of its level fluctuations can interfere
with fish populations, namely with its food base and the reproduction
pattern.
For maintaining the fish population in the lake, mainly liseosman
(Schizopygopsis stolizkae), the most numerous species, it will be
important to find the optimum operating regime for the outlet structure.
The best regime would probably be to opt for a quick rise in lake level as
early as possible, in order to prevent too strong a change during the
spawning period of this species. This strategy would proceed in parallel
with the recommendations made for maintaining the floodplain vegetation.
The results of the monitoring program will be essential for defining the
best operation pattern.
3.4 Worker health and safety
PamirEnergy will establish a Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) unit at
project headquarters in Khorog to implement the project's Environmental
Monitoring and Management Plan (see below) The HSE Unit Engineer will
monitor the compliance of all PamirEnergy generation and transmission
facilities to the relevant WBG environmental, health and safety guidelines
on a regular basis. PamirEnergy will appoint and train an HSE manager to
- 10 -



each facility who will be responsible for enforcing workplace safety and
good housekeeping in compliance with the guidelines on site. PamirEnergy
will provide the Unit Engineer and other relevant personnel with
participant training in prevailing international standards for
occupational health and safety as required. The Engineer, in turn, will
provide preliminary and refresher training to all facility HSE managers
annually.
The Unit Engineer will inspect all generation facilities on a quarterly
basis and meet with the HSE manager at each facility to discuss his
findings. Violations of guidelines will be noted and persistent
violations will be reported to the PamirEnergy General Manager, who may
take disciplinary action against the management of the facility.
The Unit Engineer will also regularly inspect all transmission facilities,
including transmission lines, sub-stations and transformers to ensure that
they are safe and maintained in accordance with WBG guidelines. As part
of its public education efforts, the HSE Unit will raise public awareness
about electricity safety and encourage consumers to report problems to the
Unit.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The revised project design maintains the lake level during summer close to
its historic levels and within its natural range of fluctuation, mainly
for preventing permanent damage to the vegetation of the floodplains.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
To mitigate the adverse impacts, a detailed environmental monitoring and
management plan has been proposed, including compensation arrangements as
described in Section II.D.3.
As a part of the project evaluation in 1999, a short assessment of energy
alternatives was made. This study confirmed that the proposed expansion
of the Pamir hydroelectric plant is the most economic and the most
environmentally acceptable. The following options have been addressed:
Fossil fuels: Coal and diesel oil were used before, for heating and for
operating generators. All fossil fuels have to be imported; Tajikistan
does not have any oil, and the coal found so far, although said to be of
good quality, is located in regions with difficult access. Transport
costs for importation from Osh, in the Kyrgyz Republic, are prohibitive,
with about 100 US$/t. Kerosene is used mainly for lighting, but is not an
alternative for other uses.
Biomass: Wood is scarce, and the existing resources are heavily exploited.
Availability of other plant biomass (steppe plants) is also limited, and
is also overexploited. Cotton stalks are an important fuel in other parts
of Tajikistan, but this, like other agricultural waste, is not available
here. The general scarcity of biomass also excludes biogas as an option.
Animal dung: This is a very important fuel, but it is fully utilized,
- 11 -



without potential for expansion. Furthermore, burning animal dung
deprives the farmers form their most important fertilizer.
Hydropower: There is a considerable additional potential for further
hydropower development, especially for small and micro hydro plants for
supply to isolated villages. The problem here is that these small
installations tend to freeze in winter, when energy demand is highest.
Other renewables: Wind speed is limited, especially in winter; this
excludes wind as an alternative. Solar power might be an option;
irradiation is high, even during winter, mainly thanks to the dry
climate. However, available solar systems for electricity generation are
still too expensive to be a viable alternative to hydropower under the
given circumstances. Geothermy could be an option in a few places. In the
project area, as in other parts of GBAO, there are a few hot springs, some
of which are being used (thermal baths, heating of greenhouses). However,
this can be used only very locally.
In addition, the regional agency of the national utility, Barki Tajik, has
allowed the generation and the grid system to fall into an advanced state
of decay. It did not, therefore offer a good basis as a power purchaser
on which to base a project financing for the increased generation. IFC
and the Project Sponsor - Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development (AKFED),
therefore proposed a 25 year concession, under which responsibility for
running the electricity service of the region will be taken over by the
project company (PamirEnergy) which in addition to its commitments to
certain new investments, will also commit to meet certain performance
standards.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Monitoring and Management Plan
The EMMP for the Pamir Energy Project will have six interrelated
components: 1) Health, Safety and Environmental Monitoring; 2) Yashilkul
Lake Level Monitoring; 3) Floodplain Monitoring; 4) Compensation
Distribution and Monitoring; 5) Yashilkul Fisheries Monitoring; and 6)
Community Outreach. A description of each of these components follows.
1. Health, Safety and Environmental Monitoring
PamirEnergy will establish a Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Unit at
project headquarters in Khorog to implement the project's Environmental
Monitoring and Management Plan (EMMP). The HSE Unit will be a permanent
office within PamirEnergy. The Unit will be established as soon as
PamirEnergy is established and its personnel will gain additional
experience by working together with the Project Consultant
(Electrowatt-Ekono) in monitoring PamirEnergy's construction and operation
activities. The HSE Unit will have three principal functions:
To undertake an environmental audit of all project facilities and
recommend to PamirEnergy remediation of those facilities to achieve
compliance with WBG social and environmental safeguard policies and
guidelines as necessary.
To administer research activities undertaken by contractors on behalf of
the project (e.g., Lake Yashilkul fisheries and floodplain monitoring) and
coordinate the results of those activities with the impact mitigation
activities to which the project is committed (e.g., compensation payments
to herders for possible diminished floodplain pasture - see below); and
- 12 -



contribute to defining the operating regime for the lake, and
To monitor the compliance of PamirEnergy and all contractors employed by
PamirEnergy with WBG social and environmental safeguard policies and
guidelines.
The HSE Unit Engineer will monitor the compliance of all PamirEnergy
generation and transmission facilities to the relevant IFC environmental,
health and safety guidelines on a regular basis. PamirEnergy will appoint
and train an HSE manager to each facility who will be responsible for
enforcing workplace safety and good housekeeping in compliance with the
guidelines on site. PamirEnergy will provide the Unit Engineer and other
relevant personnel with participant training in prevailing international
standards for occupational health and safety as required. The Engineer,
in turn, will provide preliminary and refresher training to all facility
HSE managers annually.
The Unit Engineer will inspect all generation facilities on a quarterly
basis and meet with the HSE manager at each facility to discuss his
findings. Violations of guidelines will be noted and persistent
violations will be reported to the PamirEnergy General Manager, who may
take disciplinary action against the management of the facility.
The Unit Engineer will also regularly inspect all transmission facilities,
including transmission lines, sub-stations and transformers to ensure that
they are safe and maintained in accordance with IFC guidelines. As part
of its public education efforts, the HSE Unit will raise public awareness
about electricity safety and encourage consumers to report problems to the
Unit.
2. Lake Level Monitoring
Lake level monitoring is currently being carried out by the government
Meteorological Observatory in Khorog. According to the information
obtained on the occasion of the expert's visit to Khorog in early April
2001, this monitoring has been resumed recently, after a number of years
of interruption of the program. However, at that time no recent data were
available.
The plant itself will require a reliable lake level monitoring, and for
this purpose the necessary device will be installed at the outlet control
structure. It is suggested that such a monitoring program is started as
soon as possible by PamirEnergy.
3. Floodplain Monitoring
The potential impact of the project on the two floodplains at lake
Yashilkul (Somon and Marjinoy) could negatively affect the livelihood of
the local population. If so, PamirEnergy will have to provide compensation
to the farmers dependent on the floodplain resources. In order to
determine if, and the extent to which, such compensation is required, a
floodplain monitoring program has been initiated, which includes
floodplain productivity and groundwater monitoring, to be carried out
until the impacts have stabilized. If a reduction in productivity has been
detected, it is important that compensation payments be made before the
onset of winter, since hay will have to be bought in time. The floodplain
monitoring will continue until the impacts have stabilized.
4. Compensation
The HSE Unit will coordinate the research and monitoring activities of the
Flood Plain Monitoring component and assess the need to purchase hay
stocks to compensate herders for diminished production of the Yashilkul
floodplains. This assessment will take place after the hay harvesting
- 13 -



season in August during the project construction period and for at least
two years after construction is complete. The HSE Unit will provide cash
compensation directly to the cooperative farms that utilize the
floodplains for grazing and hay production. The compensation payments
will be calculated on the basis of the number of head of livestock
maintained by the members of each cooperative farm (including animals that
they own independent of the farms) and any short-fall in hay production
estimated by the Floodplains Monitoring component.
The HSE Unit will audit each cooperative farm receiving compensation to
ensure that the requisite hay stocks are purchased, and the Unit will
monitor the distribution of hay stocks throughout the winter to ensure
that needs of the cooperative members are met.
At present, it is not possible to estimate the impact of the project on
the productivity of the floodplains until the drawdown of the lake is
undertaken. For this reason, a compensation contingency fund of $50,000
to cover a five year period has been proposed as part of the HSE Unit
budget. This amount is based on a "worst-case" scenario calculated
according to current livestock holdings and an average current price of
hay per ton as reported by the managers of cooperative farms surveyed in
March/April 2001.
While the impact of the project is expected to stabilize within five years
from the commencement of construction, the company will ensure that any
enduring or unforeseen adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the project
area population will be addressed through direct compensation targeted
developmental initiatives.
5. Fisheries Monitoring
A survey of Lake Yashilkul fisheries is currently underway by a team from
the University of Khorog. As with the proposed floodplain monitoring, it
is important that the fisheries monitoring starts ahead of the
construction works to establish reliable baseline data against which
project impacts can be assessed. Since the population living in the
project area does not fish in Lake Yashilkul, there will be no
compensation associated with any decline in the lake's fisheries. However,
the data produced can be used later on in order to decide whether there is
actually a potential for developing the fisheries as an economic resource.
6. Community Outreach
The principal activity of the HSE Unit Community Outreach component is to
promote safe and responsible energy use (including electricity, kerosene,
wood fuel and other biomass) and payment of electricity tariffs through
public education efforts including mass media and public meetings.
In addition to public education, the HSE Unit may take on a more
developmental role in promoting electricity use and creating linkages with
ongoing community and enterprise development initiatives in GBAO through
the Community Outreach component.
As part of its regular interaction with consumers and its liaison with
developmental organizations, the HSE Unit staff will explore opportunities
for promoting improvements over the current patterns of energy use in GBAO
to help make electricity more affordable to consumers. Through
collaboration with AKFED, for example, PamirEnergy could support the
development of enterprises that manufacture more efficient cooking and
home heating devices or the marketing of compact fluorescent light bulbs.
The HSE Unit would, in turn, promote the use of these technologies among
- 14 -



electricity consumers. Such promotion efforts could be linked with
ongoing rural development programmes that provide credit for domestic
improvements such as sanitation and water supply.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Between July 1999 and October 2000, the Consultant undertook a
comprehensive technical, economic, social and environmental assessment of
the Project leading to a detailed project design and impact mitigation
strategy. This project preparation had already involved a high number of
meetings and discussions at various levels throughout the project area,
with special emphasis on the small village located near lake Yashilkul.
Following this assessment, a series of 17 public hearings was conducted by
representatives of the Sponsor (AKFED) and the Consultant in October
2000. These hearings engaged a wide range of the GBAO population
including townspeople, rural villagers, school teachers and hospital
workers. Minutes of these hearings indicated widespread public agreement
that improvements in the electricity supply are needed to improve general
living conditions and to support economic growth in GBAO, and that
improvements are needed in the management of the utility.
During these public hearings, the details of the project were explained
(improvement and expansion of the Pamir plant, construction of regulating
structure in Lake Yashilkul, improvement, especially rehabilitation) of
the transmission and distribution net). The problems to be dealt with were
also explained (construction time of two years, shutting down the plant
during the first summer of construction). No doubt was left about the
fact that the price for electricity would increase very substantially, and
that a strict policy of cutting off consumers who do not pay their bill
would have to be introduced, particularly for industrial consumers.
In accordance with IFC Environmental and Social Review Procedures, a
written summary of the project detailing its potential environmental and
social impacts and the planned mitigation measures will be translated into
Russian, Tajik and Shugni - the predominant language of the Gunt River
Valley - and posted in publicly accessible places throughout the project
area in advance of project approval by the IFC Board of Directors. In
preparation for presentation to the IDA Board, this EA is also being made
publicly available in the project area and in Washington, in English and
Russian. AKFED will facilitate a number of public hearings to consult
with stakeholders on the final details of the project prior to IFC and
IDA Board consideration of the project.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
- 15 -



I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              12/17/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 3/11/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop 2/28/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              2/4/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Raghuveer Y. Sharma      03/13/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Bernard Baratz   03/13/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Peter D. Thomson         03/13/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 16 -



