Report No. 23706
Report No: I075173 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: THAILAND        Project ID: P075173
Project: Highways Management     Task Team Leader: Alain L. Labeau
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 10, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m): 192.10
Bank Approval: September 5, 2002         IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASTR     Sector: TH - Highways
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objective of the project is to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Department of Highways (DOH) to deliver, maintain and
manage its road assets. Furthermore, the project will reduce traffic
crashes and fatalities on the national highways and enhance private sector
participation in road operations. New methods of maintaining roads through
long term performance-based contracts with the private sector will be
introduced on a pilot basis.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Highway Rehabilitation and Maintenance: This component comprises: (a)
periodic maintenance of about 3000 km of priority national highways; (b)
three long term (5 years) pilot contracts for performance based
maintenance of about 900 km of national highways; (c) supervision of
periodic maintenance, road safety improvements, and roadside amenities;
and (d) the study, design and supervision of performance based
maintenance. Periodic maintenance will include seal coats, overlays, minor
rehabilitation, concrete pavement repairs etc. on about 3,000 km of
priority national and trunk roads, but largely located in the poorer
Northeastern region of the country - thereby contributing to poverty
reduction. Implementation will be decentralized to the districts with
contracts let out to the private sector under national competitive bidding
procedures. The contracts for the pilot program of performance-based
maintenance would be packaged into four lots of about 300 km each and
requiring rehabilitation and periodic maintenance works on about 50 km
followed by routine maintenance for five years on the 300 km. The
contractor would be required to also monitor axle loads and right-of-way
encroachment, ensure road safety, and regulate traffic. Supervision of
works including financial and technical audits, will be done by
independent consultants and course correction and gradual scaling up of
the pilot program will be undertaken as appropriate.
Highway Upgrading and Intersection Improvement:       This component
comprises: (a) widening of four selected sections (108 km total) of
priority national highways from two to four lanes; (b) construction of



five overpasses at critical intersections; and (c) supervision of the
widening and overpass projects. Three of the four road sections selected
for widening are in the Northeastern region and one is in the Southern
region. Average annual daily traffic flows on the sections to be widened
range from 7,500 vpd to 11,200 vpd. Traffic flows on the planned
overpasses range from 12,000 vpd to 116,700 vpd.
Road Safety Improvement: This component comprises: (a) improvement of
hazardous locations; (b) construction of roadside amenities; and (c)
support for implementation of the road safety action plan in collaboration
with the Global Road Safety Partnership (GRSP). Improvement of hazardous
locations will be achieved through minor interventions such as provision
of guard rails, improving traffic flow at critical locations,
channelization and signalization of intersections, removal of bottlenecks
at narrow bridges, provision of pedestrian crossings and bridges, etc. The
roadside amenities will involve construction of rest areas along the road
including bus and truck stops and parking areas and utilities
infrastructure; construction of booths for sale of local produce and
products such as handicraft, baskets and other household items and repair
shops run by local communities; a kiosk for provision of public health and
social awareness services for HIV/AIDS, other sexually transmitted
diseases, drug and alcohol abuse, etc. Support for the road safety action
plan will comprise financing of selected activities from the agreed
National Road Safety Action Plan, particularly activities that involve the
private sector in enhancing public awareness, education and training, and
improving medical services to crash victims.
Institutional Strengthening: This component consists of: (a) development
of a centralized road database, road asset maintenance and management
system and a bridge management system; (b) development of a framework and
a case study in public-private partnership (PPP) in highways; (c)
technical assistance (TA) for project coordination; (d) TA for enhancing
capacity in social and environmental assessment; (e) TA for external
audit; and (f) purchase of specialized equipment (including computers,
software and survey equipment) for traffic operations, maintenance and
bridge management systems, environmental unit and other Divisions of the
DOH.
Components:
1. Highway Rehabilitation and Maintenance - periodic maintenance of about
3,000 km, pilot program of long term performance-based maintenance of
about 900 km, and supervision of works.
2. Highway Upgrading and Intersection Improvement - widening to four
lanes about 108 km, construction of overpasses at five critical
intersections and supervision of works.
3. Road Safety Improvement - improvement of hazardous locations,
construction of roadside amenities and support for the national road
safety action plan.
4. Institutional Strengthening.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
- 2 -



The road sections to be upgraded or maintained are located in various
parts of the country but largely in the poorer Northeastern region. Since
the proposed widening of selected road sections and construction of
overpasses on some road junctions will only be carried out within the
established Right of Ways (RoWs), no significant acquisition of private
assets & displacement of population, including any impact on ethnic
minorities and indigenous peoples in the northeastern region is foreseen.
Background of the project area and potential stakeholders are briefly
given in paragraphs below.
Thailand is a tropical country with a total area of 514, 000 sq km, a
3,220 km of coastline, and a total population of nearly 62 million (in
year 2000) of which 75t are Thai, 14t Chinese, and 11    of other
nationality. The country can be divided geographically into four regions
i.e. the Central, the North, the Northeast, the South and comprises 76
provinces. The central region including Bangkok metropolitans and the
eastern seaboard and is characterized by a flood plain and coastal area
where the major land uses are relatively large urban and industrial
development, rice paddy field, fisheries, and aquaculture. The northern
region comprises a combination of flat land and mountainous areas and the
major land use are agriculture and forest and a number of indigenous group
can be found. The northeastern region is considered the poorest region in
the country. The area is characterized by a high plateau (Khorat Plateau)
comprising flat land and rolling terrain inclining towards the Mae Kong
River and the major land use is agriculture (low value crops mostly). The
south region is located along a coastline and the major land uses are
urban development, rice paddy, aquaculture, and tourism.
Rapid development during 1990-97 demanded for an extensive construction
and development of road networks, including widening of the national
highways and construction of motorways and interchanges. However,
inadequate allocation of budget for road maintenances and weak enforcement
of truck overload has resulted in rapid degradation of road conditions,
and in many places have caused serious problems with traffic and safety of
road users. Public complaints on the quality of road (especially during
rainy season) and safety have increased both in the urban and rural
areas. Limited funding for investment after the 1997 financial crisis has
also disrupted the completion of the widening program causing traffic
congestion and safety problems in many places.
Given the main objectives of the project, many sections of the national
highways will improve the efficiency and safety of road transportation.
However, during construction phase, some negative impacts on the local
environment and communities are inevitable, but most of them would be
temporary and could be reduced through adaptive engineering design,
careful planning, good management practice, and close supervision of the
contractors. The major environmental impacts of the project will include
vegetation clearing, dust, noise, and traffic during construction and
vehicular emissions and noise due to increased traffic flow. The impacts
after completion of the construction would be mostly positive since the
safety problems and traffic congestion due to poor road conditions and
bottlenecks would be improved. However, increasing traffic volume and
speed may cause negative impacts to local communities, but the impacts
should be mitigated through other Government policies and programs. It is
expected that improving DOH's concern for and its capacity to prevent the
-3 -



environment and social issues would also contribute to reducing the
negative impacts during operation of the roads.
The local authorities and communities would be the key stakeholders for
the project. Based on the proposed sections and preliminary information,
it is unlikely that the project would involve any indigenous or cultural
heritage sites. However, these assumptions will be confirmed during the
later phase of the project preparation when a number of field visit will
be carried out by the project team in close cooperation with DOH to verify
the findings of the IEE studies and to finalize the EMP for the project.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:      This is a typical highway strengthening and maintenance
project that Bank normally finances. The level of analysis is
straightforward and not complex.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environment:     The environmental impacts associated with the project
include - vegetation clearing, dust and noise during construction and
vehicular emissions and noise due to increased traffic flow. During
project preparation, it will be verified whether any of the road
alignments are in close proximity to cultural properties, archeological
sites and protected areas. If so, the required analysis will be
undertaken to determine alternatives. It is anticipated that the
potential impacts can be mitigated through adaptive engineering design,
and are not expected to irreversible.
Resettlement and Indigenous People:      Since the proposed widening of
selected road sections and construction of overpasses on some road
junctions will only be carried out within the established Right of Ways
(RoWs), no significant acquisition of private assets and displacement of
population, including any impact on ethnic minorities and indigenous
- 4 -



peoples in the northeast region is foreseen.
Natural Habitats:      Preliminary analysis of the road alignments,
indicate that no protected areas will be affected by the project.
However, this will be further verified during project preparation.
Cultural Property:      Preliminary analysis of the road alignments,
indicate that no protected areas will be affected by the project.
However, this will be further verified during project preparation.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
The cumulative impacts caused by the application of OP4.01, OP4.012 and
OD4.3 will be localized to the respective road alignments and communities
in the immediate vicinity and are expected to be positive. Improved road
access is expected to stimulate the local economy of local communities,
raise their income levels and quality of life.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Improved road maintenance will provide smoother and quicker travel for
motorists, and therefore will attract additional traffic. Higher vehicle
use and intensity will increase air pollution, but levels are expected to
be within the ambient standards of the government given the rural settings
of the project location. Although the overall impact of the urban
over-passes will be to reduce congestion, delays and air pollution due to
smoother flows at the specific locations, they could attract additional
traffic in some streets. Hence, there could be some instances of
increased congestion.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
All road alignments are existing 2- or 4-lane highways, and as such no
alternatives are being considered. However, for urban over-passes
alternatives will be considered in the context of the overall
transportation plan for the urban area.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Despite the lack of significant impacts on social and the environment, an
Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) will be prepared and
applied to the project to ensure that the Bank's safeguard policy and
procedures will be considered throughout the implementation phase of the
project, especially on O.P. 4.01 Environmental Assessment; OD 4.20
Indigenous Peoples; and OD 4.30 Involuntary Resettlement. The ESSF will
form an integral part of the Operational Manual and would cover: (a)
screening criteria to identify key issues or trigger the safeguard policy
of the sub-projects; (b) norms, standards and procedures, including land
acquisition assessment, resettlement framework and safeguards policies;
(c) review and appraisal procedures and criteria; (d) monitoring and
evaluation framework; (e) participation and consultation; and (f)
- 5-



institutional arrangements. More details on social issues is provided in
Section 6.1.
The EMP (responding to the ESSF) will be prepared for each sub-project
and will comprise a proposed mitigation plan to reduce negative impacts
during construction of the project activities, include those requirements
and/or code of good practices that need to be included as part of the bid
and/or contract documents. Cost for mitigation measures will be estimated
and included in the project cost. The TOR for supervision engineer will
include supervision and reporting of the environmental compliance of the
contractors. For large contract, the contractor may be required to assign
specific person to be responsible for the mitigation of the negative
impacts.   DOH guidelines will be applied and monitored by concerned units
within DOH and ENV.
Under the project, an effort to increase DOH capacity to deal with the
social and environmental issues, which was initiated under the previous
highway sector loan, will be continued and expected to create a more
positive impact on the environment.
During supervision, a number of field visits would be made by the Bank
and DOH to evaluate adequacy of the implementation and the EMP. The
findings and lessons learned will be used to improve/revise other EMPs
before the actual implementation.
As part of the preparation of the ESSF and EMP, a number of field visits
will be made to potential project sites to ensure that potential negative
social and environmental impacts are identified at an early stage and
appropriate mitigation actions are taken during the preparation and
implementation of the project. In 1998, the Ministry of Finance approved
the Guidelines for Resettlement and compensation for the Social Investment
Project (Loan 4373 TH dated July 13, 1998). These guidelines conform to
the objectives and principles of OP 4.12. The mechanisms to implement
these guidelines would be further elaborated to address any possible
social impacts on people, particularly on vulnerable groups; in terms of
loss of community resources, private assets, incomes and businesses in the
sub-projects and to facilitate their implementation. In case of any
adverse impacts on people, including any impact on ethnic minorities and
indigenous people, DOH will carry out necessary studies and prepare
appropriate documents in accordance with the provisions of the ESSF and
the guidelines.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Participation of and consultation with the beneficiaries groups would be
carried throughout the project preparation and implementation. Key
stakeholders would be consulted through focus group discussions on a
continuous basis to get feedback on any problems and issues that may arise
during the project preparation and implementation and to address them
adequately.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
- 6 -



Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I Si. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Alain L. Labeau February 8, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Patchamuthu Illangovan/Person/World Bank
February 8, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Manida Unkulvasapaul/Person/World Bank   February
8, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:        Teck Ghee Lim/Person/World Bank February 11, 2002
Approved by:    Name     Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan February 14, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Jitendra N.Bajpai       February 8, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 7 -



