Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC579
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/21/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: THAILAND                                Project ID: P075173
Project: Highways Management Project             Task Team Leader: Imogene R. Jensen
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 22, 2002       IBRD Amount (Sm): 84.29
Bank Approval: December 9, 2003                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASTR                             Sector: Roads and highways (80%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (20%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other
trade and integration (P); Public expenditure,
financial management and procurement (S); Small
and medium enterprise support (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the project is to enhance the sustainable and productive use of a more
efficient road network. Furthermore, the project will support the restructuring of the sector initiated
recently by the government and prepare the Department of Highways (DOH) to fulfill its future roles and
duties of managing the road network, regulating an increased involvement of the private sector in the road
business, and administering private road concessions.
l.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Highway Rehabilitation and Maintenance:  This component comprises: (a) periodic
maintenance of about 2000-3000 km of priority national highways; (b) three long term (5 years) pilot
contracts for performance based maintenance of about 900 km of national highways; (c) supervision of
periodic maintenance, road safety improvements, and roadside amenities; and (d) the study, design and
supervision of performance based maintenance. Periodic maintenance will include seal coats, overlays,
minor rehabilitation, concrete pavement repairs etc. on about 2,000 to 3,000 km of priority national and
trunk roads, largely located in the poorer North and Northeastem regions of the country - thereby
contributing to poverty reduction through job creation. hnplementation will be decentralized to the districts
with contracts let out to the private sector under national competitive bidding procedures. The contracts for
the pilot program of performance-based maintenance would be packaged into three lots of about 300 km
each, with potential 10 km requiring rehabilitation and 15-20% per annum requiring periodic maintenance
works followed by routine maintenance for five years on the 300 km. The contractor would be required to
also monitor axle loads and right-of-way encroachment, ensure road safety, and regulate traffic.
Supervision of periodic maintenance works will be combined with supervision of road safety and road
amenities works and will including financial and technical audits. The supervision will be carried out by
independent consultants and course correction and gradual scaling up of the pilot program will be
undertaken as appropriate.
Highway Upgrading and Intersection Improvement:  This component comprises: (a) widening
of three selected sections (73 km total) of priority national highways from two to four lanes; (b)
construction of three overpasses at critical intersections; and (c) supervision of the widening and overpass



Thiland Highways Management (TH-P075173)        Page 2 of 6                              ISDS
projects. Two of the three road sections selected for widening are in the Northeastern region and one is in
the Southern region. Average annual daily traffic flows on the sections to be widened range from 7,600 vpd
to 11,300 vpd. Traffic flows on the planned overpasses range from 12,000 vpd to 116,700 vpd.
Road Safety Improvement:     This component comprises: (a) improvement of hazardous
locations; (b) construction of roadside amenities; and (c) support for implementation of the road safety
action plan in collaboration with the Global Road Safety Partnership (GRSP). Improvement of hazardous
locations will be achieved through minor interventions such as provision of guard rails at 11 locations,
improving traffic flow, channelization and signalization of intersections at 53 selected locations and
provision of pedestrian crossings and bridges at 15 locations. The roadside amenities will involve
construction of rest areas along the road including bus and truck stops and parking areas and utilities
infrastructure; construction of booths for sale of local produce and products such as handicraft, baskets
and other household items and repair shops run by local communities; a kiosk for provision of public health
and social awareness services for HIV/AIDS, other sexually transmitted diseases, drug and alcohol abuse,
etc. Roadside amenities will be built in 26 selected locations owned by DOH for the past 20-30 years of
which 10 are in the Northeastern region, 6 each in the Northern and Southern regions, and 3 in the Central
region. Support for the road safety action plan will comprise financing of selected activities from the
agreed National Road Safety Action Plan, particularly enhancing public awareness, education and training,
and improving medical services to crash victims. In parallel, the project will support - in collaboration with
the private sector - the establishment and operation during the project life of a Road Accident Research
Center within the facilities of the AIT. This Center will benefit from the free technical assistance of Volvo
experts for a period of 2-3 years under a GRSP program.
Institutional Strengthening:  This component consists of: (a) development of a centralized road
database, road asset maintenance and management system and a bridge management system; (b)
development of a framework for and a case study in public-private partnership (PPP) in highways; (c)
technical assistance (TA) for project coordination; (d) TA for enhancing capacity in social and
environmental assessment; (e) TA for HDM Advisor to DOH; (f) external audit; (g) introduction of
e-procurement; and (h) purchase of specialized equipment (including computers, software and survey
equipment) for traffic operations, maintenance and bridge management systems, environmental unit and
other Divisions of the DOH.
Components:
1. Highway Rehabilitation and Maintenance - periodic maintenance of about 2,000 to 3,000 km, pilot
program of long term performance-based maintenance of about 900 km, and supervision of works.
2. Highway Upgrading and Intersection Improvement - widening to four lanes about 73 km, construction
of overpasses at three critical intersections and supervision of works.
3. Road Safety Improvement - improvement of hazardous locations, construction of roadside amenities
and support for the national road safety action plan.
4. Institutional Strengthening.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key enviromnental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
01/21/2004



Thiland Highways Management (TH-PO75173)       Page 3 of 6                             ISDS
The road sections to be upgraded or maintained are located in various parts of the country but largely
in the poorer Northeastemn region. Since the proposed widening of selected road sections and construction of
overpasses on some road junctions will only be carried out within the established Right of Ways (RoWs), no
significant acquisition of private assets & displacement of population, including any impact on ethnic
minorities and indigenous peoples in the northeastemn region is foreseen. Background of the project area and
potential stakeholders are briefly given in paragraphs below.
Thailand is a tropical country with a total area of 514, 000 sq km, a 3,220 km of coastline, and a total
population of nearly 62 million (in year 2000) of which 75% are Thai, 14% Chinese, and 1 1% of other
nationality. The country can be divided geographically into four regions i.e. the Central, the North, the
Northeast, the South and comprises 76 provinces. The central region including Bangkok metropolitans and the
eastern seaboard and is characterized by a flood plain and coastal area where the major land uses are relatively
large urban and industrial development, rice paddy field, fisheries, and aquaculture. The northern region
comprises a combination of flat land and mountainous areas and the major land use are agriculture and forest
and a number of indigenous group can be found. The northeastern region is considered the poorest region in
the country. The area is characterized by a high plateau (Khorat Plateau) comprising flat land and rolling
terrain inclining towards the Mae Kong River and the major land use is agrculture (low value crops mostly).
The soutlh region is located along a coastline and the major land uses are urban development, rice paddy,
aquaculture, and tourism.
Rapid development during 1990-97 demanded for an extensive construction and development of
road networks, including widening of the national highways and construction of motorways and
interchanges. However, inadequate allocation of budget for road maintenances and weak enforcement of
truck overload has resulted in faster than nonmal degradation of road conditions, and in some heavily
trafficked places have caused serious problems with traffic and safety of road users. Public complaints on
the quality of road (especially during rainy season) and safety have increased both in the urban and rural
areas. Limited funding for investnent after the 1997 financial crisis has also disrupted the completion of
the widening program causing traffic congestion and safety problems in many places.
Given the main objectives of the project, many sections of the national highways will iinprove the
efficiency and safety of road transportation. However, during construction phase, some negative impacts
on the local environment and communities are inevitable, but most of them would be temporary and could
be reduced through adaptive engineering design, careful planning, good management practice, and close
supervision of the contractors. The major environmental impacts of the project will include vegetation
clearing, dust, noise, and traffic during construction and vehicular emissions and noise due to increased
traffic flow. The impacts after completion of the construction would be mostly positive since the safety
problems and traffic congestion due to poor road conditions and bottlenecks would be improved. However,
increasing traffic volume and speed may cause negative impacts to local communities, but the impacts
should be mitigated through other Government policies and programs. It is expected that improving DOH's
concern for and its capacity to prevent the environment and social issues would also contribute to reducing
the negative impacts during operation of the roads.
The local authorities and cominunities would be the key stakeholders for the project. Based on the
proposed sections and preliminary information, it is unlikely that the project would involve any indigenous
or cultural heritage sites. However, these assumptions will be confinned during the later phase of the
project preparation when a number of field visit will be carried out by the project team in close cooperation
with DOH to verify the findings of the IEE studies and to finalize the EMP for the project.
01/21/2004



Thiland Highways Management (TH-P075173)       Page 4 of 6                             ISDS
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.    This is a typical highway strengthening and maintenance project that Bank nonnally finances.
The level of analysis is straightforward and not complex.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on WV for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a bri f description)
7   -                      Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Ycs 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Ycs * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issiues. Please fill in all relevant qiuestions. Ifinformnation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environment: The environmental impacts associated with the project include - vegetation
clearing, dust and noise during construction and vehicular emissions and noise due to increased traffic flow.
During project preparation, it has been confirmed that the road alignments for the three highway widening
and the three intersection improvement subprojects are not in close proximity to cultural properties,
archeological sites and protected areas. It has also been confirmed that this condition applied to the
subprojects to be carried out under the highway rehabilitation and maintenance component. However, to
ensure this, a screening process is included as part of the environmental and social safeguards framework
(see II D3). The potential negative impacts of these subprojects can be mitigated through adaptive
engineering design, and are not expected to irreversible. The contractor will be required to carry out
specific requirements for mitigation of the potential negative impacts and these requirements will be
included in the bidding documents.
Resettlement and Indigenous People:  Since the proposed widening of selected road sections
and construction of overpasses on some road junctions will only be carried out within the established Right
of Ways (RoWs), no significant acquisition of private assets and displacement of population, including any
impact on ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples in the northeast region is foreseen.
II.D. l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The cumulative impacts caused by the application of OP4.01, OP4.012 and OD4.3 will be
01/21/2004



Thiland Highways Management (TH-P075173)        Page 5 of 6                              ISDS
localized to the respective road alignments and communities in the immediate vicinity and are expected to
be positive. Improved road access is expected to stimulate the local economy of local communities, raise
their income levels and quality of life.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Improved road maintenance will provide smoother and quicker travel for motorists, and therefore
will attract additional traffic. Higher vehicle use and intensity will increase air pollution, but levels are
expected to be within the ambient standards of the government given the rural settings of the project
location. Although the overall impact of the urban over-passes will be to reduce congestion, delays and air
pollution due to smoother flows at the specific locations, they could generate additional traffic in some
neighboring streets.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Not applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Participation of and consultation with the beneficiaries groups were carried out during the
preparation of the project. The EMP requires DOH and contractors to provide adequate infonnation to the
local authority and the local public throughout the construction phase.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intenmediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
01/21/2004



Thiland Highways Management (TH-P075173)        Page 6 of 6                            ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environnmental Assessmnent/Analysisv/Management Plan:         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  6/28/2002      7/11/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                           Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of"in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                         Expected       Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted bv        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Imogene R. Jensen                             11/3/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Patchamuthu Illangovan/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Manida Unkulvasapaul/Person/World Bank   11/4/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank        11/5/2003
Approved bv:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                            12/2/2003
Comments
Regional Safeguards Director  Maria Teresa Serra
Sector Director               Jitendra N. Bajpai                            11/4/2003
01/21/2004



