Report No. 23347
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/10/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: TUNISIA         Project ID: P074398
Project: TN-MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT III    Task Team Leader: Charles Henri
Malecot
Appraisal Date: February 25, 2002        IBRD Amount ($m): 75.00
Board Date: June 27, 2002        IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF     Sector: UM - Urban Management; US - Urban Environment
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)     Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To strengthen the institutional environment for the delivery of municipal
basic services and infrastructure through: (a) increasing institutional
capacity of both local governments and related central agencies, and (b)
enhancing the financial and institutional capacity of the Municipal
Development Fund (Caisse des Prots et de Soutien des Collectivites
Locales, CPSCL) that provides financing for municipal investments.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The priority municipal investments during the project period (2002-2007)
are expected to total US$773 million. These would be financed by the
municipalities from a combination of sources including their own
resources, national subsidies, national agencies participation up to an
amount of US$535 million, and CPSCL for US$238 million. The resources
required by CPSCL are expected to be covered by a credit line from the
Bank (US$70 million), a credit line from AFD (Agence FranQaise de
Developpement) (US$35 million), bonds issued on the national capital
market (US$56 million), and CPSCL autofinancing (US$77 million). The
Government, in addition to its subsidies to municipalities, will finance
half of the institutional strengthening of governmental departments
(US$3.5 million over US$7 million), and CPSCL will finance half of its own
institutional strengthening (US$1.5 million over US$3 million).
Components:
1. INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING OF GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC ENTITIES:
1.1 CNPRCRM (TA): institutional reform of t the training center and
products and mode of delivery of training program.
1.2 Municipalities (TA and equipment): assist the municipalities to
strengthen their managerial and financial capacity and to provide
computerization for tax collection purposes.
1.3 DGCPL (TA): provide technical assistance for reforming their working
procedures and relations with municipalities.
1.4 DGAR (TA): provide technical assistance for reforming their working
procedures and relations with rural communes and regional districts.
2. CPSCL:
2.1 Credit line to CPSCL to finance priority municipal investments.



2.2 Provide technical assistance, training and studies to support its
transformation into an autonomous and financially-viable institution.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project will cover all urban areas of Tunisia. CPSCL will ensure that
each sub-project will not have any negative environmental or social impact.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: PDM-III is a category FI project. The World Bank will support
municipal developments by making funds available through CPSCL, the
financial intermediary (FI) for the investments. This project fully
adheres to the requirements of OP-BP 4.01 and Tunisian Law No.115 of
1992. The EIA Directorate of ANPE is the body responsible for
environmental impact assessment (EIA) in Tunisia. ANPE is responsible for
administration, reviewing, and monitoring EIAs.
During project implementation and following the updated CPSCL's
Operational Manual Guidelines, assurances will be sought that CPSCL has
the adequate institutional capicity to screen the sub-projects regarding
environmental aspects. The administration, company or individual carrying
out a subproject financed by CPSCL is responsible for the project EA, if
necessary. CPSCL must verify, through in-house staff, that subprojects in
which they invest must meet the environmental requirements of Tunisia, and
are consistent with the Bank's environmental policies. The FI must screen
sub-projects and ensure that any legally required EA report has been
prepared and approved by the appropriate authorities, before approving any
loan or investment, if necessary.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)        No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)      TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
- 2 -



significant and/or irreversible impacts.
EA requirement as imposed in OP 4.01 will be taken care of through the
preparation of an EMP and environmental guidelines/procedures which will
be included in CPSCL's Operational Manual.. In particular, the EMP will
include appropriate strengthening activities towards CPSCL.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No cumulative negative impact is expected at this point in time.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Idem.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Experience in the two previous projects indicates that the kinds of
small-scale municipal investments that may be financed under PDM (through
a financial intermediary) do not incur involuntary resettlement or
physical cultural property issues. The OM will ensure that any such case
would be screened through appropriate environmental assessment, and dealt
with under the provisions of Tunisian law which provide for due process,
compensation for any land acquisition, and protection of cultural
heritage. An EMP will be prepared and will address issues regarding
screening supervision and monitoring of environmental aspects of the
Project.
PIC 4 will be examined for types of municipal projects to be financed.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
A small, localized and experimental community participation component was
included in PDM-II (with provision for participatory micro-projects at
quartier level, too small to be included in the municipal investment
program (PIC)). Provision was made for training in participation at the
CNPRCRM, the training institute for local government personnel. It was
also envisaged that institutional arrangements to promote and coordinate a
greater level of citizen participation in municipal affairs would be set
up in selected governorates. This component needs to be evaluated in
respect of its achievements, the difficulties it faced, and its potentials
(including its administrative and financial montage) in order to formulate
appropriate and realistic objectives and recommendations for this Project.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
-3-



[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      2/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 2/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   3/1/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Charles Henri Malecot    12/04/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Hocine Chalal/Person/World Bank
12/05/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Paloma Anos Casero/Person/World Bank
12/05/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     12/05/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Hedi Larbi      12/07/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 4 -



