Ac i 11
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/10/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: TUNISIA                                Project ID: P069460
Project: Tunisia: GEF: Gulf of Gabes Manne & Coastal Task Team Leader: Allan Rotman
Res. Prot.
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 3, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 27, 2004                IDA Amount ($m)
Global Supplemental Amount (Sm): 6.19
Managing Unit' MNSRE                            Sector: General water, sanitation and flood
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)  protection sector (50%); General agnculture, fishing
Status: Lending                                 and forestry sector (30%); Sub-national government
administration (20%)
Theme: Biodiversity (P); Environmental policies and
institutions (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main objective of the Project is to protect biodiversity of Mediterranean-wide and international
importance and promote more harmonious economic development based on the sustainable
management of the marine and coastal natural resources.
The specific objectives of the Project are.
a) to develop mechanisms for the integrated biodiversity management of the Gulf of Gabes at six (6)
pilot sites and implement them on three (3) priority pilot sites; and,
b) to identify the long-term institutional and technical resources required to reverse the current trend of
biodiversity' degradation through involvement of the communities concerned within a framework of
promoting sustainable participatory development.
I A 3. Project Description (From PDS)
The Project consists of four main components The cost of implementing this project is estimated at
US$ 8 440 670 of which US$ 6 186 328 would be funded by the GEF.
Component 1: Institutional strengthening for improved biodiversity management in the Gulf of
Gabes Estimated cost of component. US$ 1 966 640 including US$ 650 278 contributed by GEF.
The basic framework for implementation involves' a) Management Committee at the national level, ii)
Project Management Unit (PMU) at the regional level, which will be housed within a government agency
(APAL or ANPE) or directly within a ministerial directorate, iii) local development committees
representing the interface between the target populations and the Project.
The main activities for this component are. 1) to set up a Project Management Unit, to be staffed by four
key permanent employees from the Tunisian civil service, 2) to set up specialized technical assistance
to assure the quality of the scientific, technical and participatory planning tasks, and 3) to develop a
long-term strategy for biodiversity conservation for the Gulf of Gabes region, that incorporates lessons
learned from the Project and incorporated into mechanisms for the replication of the pilot activities.



2
ISDS
Component 2: Training, capacity-building and dissemination Estimated cost of component. US$ 1
211 280 including US$ 1 038 139 contnbuted by GEF.
The aim of this component is to strengthen human resources for technical, scientific and participation
issues for biodiversity management in the Gulf region. The component will consist of i) the preparation
and implementation of a training program aimed at Project staff (both part-time and full-time) on
Mediterranean and international experience in marine and coastal biodiversity management, in an
inter-active capacity building manner to enhance the Project objectives, ii) a participatory strategy and
awareness program for the target communities, local stakeholder groups and the general public
concerned by the Project, with well defined participatory tools and mechanisms, for application to
biodiversity management plans, iii) the preparation and implementation of a capacity building program
to strengthen biodiversity protection in marine and coastal regulations, iv) an Information Exchange
Center which is functionally linked to the PMU, will gather all existing technical, scientific and social
information concerning the Gulf of Gabbs, set up user friendly filing (archiving) system, enter regular
updated information, and supplement the basic filing system with a Geographical Information System
(GIS), v) preparation and implementation of a dissemination program for the scientific and technical
groups at the Project, national, Mediterranean and international levels.
Component 3: Baseline data acquisition and applied biodiversity monitoring. Estimated cost of
component. VS$ 1 961 645 including US$ 1 887 144 contributed by GEF.
The aim of this component is to update or acquire technical, scientific and social data required as basic
inputs for the biodiversity management plans (see Component 4 below).  The activities of this
component include the following studies and inventories: i) baseline hydrodynamics and water quality
studies in generally for the Gulf of Gabes, but focussed on Jerba-Zarzis area in particular; ii) inventories
of terrestrial flora and fauna at the priority sites so as to prepare the management plans, iii) an inventory
of the marine plant cover and mapping of Posidonia sea grass beds; iv) creation of a sea grass bed
monitoring network; v) an inventory of marine and lagoon species of regional or global interest and the
definition of monitoring methodologies; vi) an inventory of alien species and their distribution within the
Gulf, and definition of monitoring methodologies, vii) socio-economic surveys of the target populations
and other stakeholder groups, viii) identification of biodiversity impacts caused by the fishing fleet,
monitoring of impacts within and adjacent to the sea grass pilot area and recommended changes to
fishing practices.
Component 4: Participatory Biodiversity Management Plans and mainstreaming biodiversity
protection . Estimated cost of component US$ 3 301 105 including US$ 2 610 689 contributed by
GEF
The main aim of this component is to prepare sustainable biodiversity management plans for the six pilot
areas, and implement the plans for the chosen three priority areas. All the plans will be prepared based
on a participatory approach. This component includes. I) preparation of a general methodology for
participation mechanisms and biodiversity management, to be based on the existing legal framework ii)
preparation of biodiversity management plans with implementation activities for the three priority pilot
sites (Kneiss Islands, Gulf of Bou Ghrara and the sea grass pilot area) (iii) preparation (only) of
biodiversity management plans for the three other sites, (Kerkennah Islands, El Bibane lagoon, Gabbs
Oasis), based on lessons learned from the first three pilot sites (iv) implementation of a pilot Strategic
Environmental Evaluation (SEE) to evaluate impacts on biodiversity of the mid-to-long term Tourist
Development Plans for the Gulf of Gabbs; (v) preparation of regional ballast water management strategy
that would address alien species, and (vi) preparation of a strategy to protect biodiversity areas from
accidental petroleum and chemical spills
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, informnation about the key environmenltal and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites



3
ISDS
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover the full Gulf of Gabes area, with attention focused on 6 areas that will benefit from
biodiviersity management plans, including a sea grass pilot area. The six pilot areas are: Kneiss Islands,
Gulf of Bou Ghrara, a sea grass pilot area (location to be determuned), Kerkennah Islands, and Bahiret
(lagoon) El Bibane Preparation and implementation of management plans will be undertaken for the first
three sites listed. Only the preparation of management plans will be undertaken for the last three sites.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on E1 for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                   Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)            Y Yes (9 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                 U  Ycs 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                  (9 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    (9 Ycs * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                (9 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                U( Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         0 Ycs U No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           T(  Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  (9 Ycs * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*      (9 Yes * No
Section IT - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sumnnary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant quiestions. If information is not available,
clescribe steps to be taken lo obtain necessaty data
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
This project is composed of mainly technical assistance activities, and only a few small scale physical
structures will be constructed to assist in the biodiversity protection at the three priority sites chosen for
implementation of the management plans. The proposed physical structures consist of a visitor reception
building for the Gulf of Bou Ghrara area, observation platforms for Kneiss islands area and anti-trawling
structures and/or artificial reef structures at the perimeter of the sea grass pilot area. These final site
locations and final designs for these structures will be detailed during the preparation of the management
plans for each pilot area to avoid potential environmental impacts.
As the potential impacts are negligible, this project does not require a separate Environmental
Assessment report. Any issues of concern will be addressed by the biodiversity management plans, and
appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures will fully developed in conjunction with the
management plans for the biodiversity pilot areas. A short 1-2 page summary of the environmental
mitigation and monitoring measures incorporated into the project will be prepared. This will be in the



4
ISDS
format of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component
Although the direct impacts of project activities are minimal, the key extemal threats and impacts to
biodiversity have also been carefully taken into account in the design of the project. In particular, the
impacts of industrial and urban water effluents on biodiversity have been reviewed during the site
selection process for the 6 areas for which biodiversity management plans will be prepared. Based on the
existing information, impacts to the 6 biodiversity sites from degraded water quality due to industrial and
urban effluents is also considered to be minimal. The impacts from these effluent sources show high
impacts locally (within 5-10 kms), and all of the proposed biodiversity pilot sites are over 30-40 km
distance from major effluent sources.
Furthermore dunng the project implementation, the major phospho-gypsum plant at Gabes is scheduled for a
full renovation of its production process that will eliminate industrial liquid effluents into the Golfe de
Gabes. Secondly two major urban wastewater plants are becoming operational on lie de Djerba to reduce
existing urban impacts in the Golfe de Bou Gharra. The project includes mitigation measures during
project implementation to assure that water quality threats to biodiversity are monitored, relevant
indicators are identified and mid-long tenms in water quality impacts are established.
IT.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities In the project area.
There is the potential for long term restrictions of access to the pilot areas, with the biodiversity
protection measures to be developed in the management plans. This issue will be clarified during the
appraisal stage of the Project, and during Project implementation as the management plans are developed
through participatory mechanisms. Any potential restrictions of access will be resolved through use of
the Process Framework in accordance with Operational Policy (OP) 4.12.
ll.D 2 In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
n/a
Il.D.3 Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
OPN 11.03. During the development of the management plans for the biodiversity pilot areas, issues
related to physical cultural property will be reviewed and any potential locations will be appropriately
screened to assure the absence of significant cultural property. At this time no issues of concern have
been identified. Particular attention will be focused to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this
policy due to the diverse human uses of the Gulf of Gabes region
OP/BP 4.12 At this time the possibility of restriction of access to resources that are the basis of
livelihoods has not been determined, and will not be detenmined until the management plans are prepared
during Project implementation. To ensure that the Project will be prepared in accordance to the Bank's
policy provisions so that, economic livelihoods are not diminished through the Project, a Process
Framework will be prepared prior to the PAD stage of Project preparation and prior to the preparation of
the management plans.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The initial studies identified as key stakeholders those whose sources of income are from tourism,



5
ISDS
fisheries (i.e.traditional as well as commercial fishing), artisanal industries, and other local industries.
Participation is seen as one of the essential building blocks to ensure the protection of degraded
biodiversity resources, and balance the interests of long-term biodtversity conservation with other
investments in the national interest. Initial steps towards the formulation of a participatory strategy are
based on two key concepts: (a) that the stakeholders must understand the Project objectives and social
development outcomes and in order to take an active part in the decision-making process, and; (b) that
their ideas, approaches and solutions must be taken seriously and incorporated into the design of the
Project, and in particular into the design of managment plans.
While there are institutional and technical measures proposed by the Project, these must be validated and
tailored to the specific social realities of each of the pilot sites jointly with the stakeholders. With this
approach, no management plans or other measures will be implemented without the appropnate
consultation and participation of the key stakeholders. The target populations will participate to: (i) act
as sources of up to date information on the local conditions (fishing, production, etc) which will also
serve as an initial mechanism of raising awareness about threats to biodiversity; (ii) react to proposals for
management in order to leam what measures the population is willing to enact towards a responsible and
sustainable management of the biodiversity resources; (iii) jointly formulate the final agreed mechanisms
necessary to ensure protection of ecosystem biodiversity. Included in the participation will be measures
to address possible temporary restriction to resources used by the population for their livelihood so that
the future benefits (gains) made will be measurable in economic terms and beneficial to the population.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is detennined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts, or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediaiy projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessmenit/Analysis/Maniagement Plan-        Expected      Actuial
Date of receipt by the Banik                               9/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            9/3/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             9/3/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Achtal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                9/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            9/3/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             9/3/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable



6
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Darn Safeto Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted bv       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Allan Rotman                                June 2, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Stefanie Brackmann/Person/World Bank   June 4, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2.  Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour/Person/World Bank  June 5, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3.
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Sherif Arif                              June 9, 2003
Sector Manager/Director       Letitia A. Obeng                           June 10, 2003



