ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                              AWorld Frec of Poverty k§V
lInfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2002                               24550
Section I - Basic Information                                     July   18, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: TURKEY                                    Project ID: P077324
Project: KOYKENT DEVT                              Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 13, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 300.00
Bank Approval: November 28, 2002                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSIE                               Sector: General education sector (20%); Health
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  (20%); Roads & highways (50%); Water supply
Status: Lending                                    (10%)
Theme: Other social protection and risk management
(S); Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other rural
development (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objectives are to (i) improve infrastructure services;  (ii) improve social
services; and (iii) support income generation activities. The project will be targeted towards rural
communities and will contribute towards sustainable rural development in Turkey
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would be participatory in nature. A social assessment will be used to identify the needs of
the villagers, their, proposed solutions to identified problems and their willingness and ability to
contribute towards the project. Based on a needs assessment, a Community Commitment Charter (CCC)
will be prepared to demonstrate the Community's commitment to the project. Special emphasis will be
placed on gender issues in the social assessment to ensure that the views of women are incorporated
into project design and implementation. It is envisaged that the project will have three main components
to support the development objective.
Component 1: Improvement in Infrastructure ServicesGiven the Koykent concept to bring a
cluster of villages together, roads will be a key component of the project and is expected to account
for most of the costs.  The infrastructure component will mainly include development and
rehabilitation of rural roads, water and sanitation systems.
Component 2: Improvement in Social Services. The connection of the villages in a cluster througlh
roads will create economies of scale that would make investments viable to establish a central health



2
ISDS
and educational facility serving multiple villages. The component will include relhabilitation of rural
schools and provisions for vocational training. Health facilities will be upgraded to be a fully
serviced center with resident doctors and support staff and ambulance facilities.
Component 3: Promote Income GeneratioiThe project will support extension services to
increase income levels in a community. The extension services would typically pertain thuit and
vegetable production, animal husbandry, market development, bee-keeping etc. The project will
also support temporary employment opportunities for the local communities during the construction
period.
Component 4:   Rural Development Strate&echnical assistance will be required for the
preparation of the Rural Development Strategy as well as for preparation activities related to the
above components.
Project Costs
Project costs and the financing plan have not yet been finalizedit is estimated that the Bank loan
size will be finalized during appraisal. A Project Preparation Facility (US$900,000) has been provided to
the Government to help with project preparation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will focus in rural areas. In selecting sites, the project will use indicators such as access to
infrastructure such as roads, water and electricity as well as health, education and economic indicators.
These indicators will be compared with the UNDP's Human Development Indicators, which are available
at the provincial level for Turkey. Preparation activities have started in two sites in the provinces of Van
and Duzce.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments: The project has been assigned an Fl rating.
The Bank is providing funds to the Government of Turkey for eligible sub-projects and investmenits. The
details of sub-projects will be developed during project preparation and EA will be conducted following the
methodology developed and agreed during appraisal.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                               Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes    No _   TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      CYes     No   * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                Yes    No   *TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  Yes *No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    Yes    No   *TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        Yes    No   *TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes    No     TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                  Yes    No   *TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          - Yes    No   * TBD



3
ISDS
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)            Yes * No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determnination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If infornmation is n?ot available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The key environmental issues are expected to be related to the infrastructure investments. These
investments may entail new construction and natural resources exploitation (for example, new water
intake for irrigation), and may result in cumulative and secondary environmental impacts (for example,
involuntary taking of land for construction or rehabilitation of roads and other public infrastructure), as
well as induced developments with associated environmental implications. On the other hand, the project
will also rehabilitate or upgrade existing infrastructure facilities, and provide social services that are not
likely to have significant environmental impacts. The subproject pipeline is therefore expected to form a
mix of category A, B and C projects, covering a range of different sectors. Both the individual and
cumulative impacts within a cluster will be identified and addressed.
The safeguard policies triggered are Environmental Assessment and Involuntary Resettlement. A number
of other policies may or may not be triggered (for example, cultural property, safety of dams, natural
habitats). These have been indicated as TBD in Section C and will be assessed during project screeninig.
Specific project sites and investments are not known at this stage. Eligible subprojects will therefore be
selected based on procedures and criteria that will be established in the Operations Manual. The
Operations Manual will outline the procedures and institutional arrangements for environmental
screening, consultation and disclosure of sub-projects.  The project will be designed to meet the
environmental assessment requirements of Financial Intermediary operations outlined in the Bank's
Operational Policy, OP 4.01. The process that will be followed is outlined below.
* The implementing agency will screen proposed sub-projects during project preparation to ensure that
they meet national, local and world bank environmental requirements. They will also ensure that
appropriate environmental assessments are conducted for each sub-project. The Project Management
Unit (PMU) will monitor the compliance of each sub-project with government and World Bank
social and environmental requirements.
*   Prior to appraisal, an assessment will be conducted of the environmental regulatory framework and
the existing institutional capacity to implement this framework. The assessment will build upon the
draft EA capacity review that has been prepared by the Bank for Turkey.
*   The draft EA capacity review identified a number of specific aspects that require further attention:
quality of EA reports, the review process and the qualifications of consultants; coordination between
authorities; screening; scoping; monitoring and enforcement; public participation and land use
planning. These issues will be further explored and mechanisms will be proposed to address them
prior to appraisal. Institutional capacity will be assessed to assure that the environmental aspects of
sub-projects are addressed in a manner that is acceptable to the Bank.
* The institutional arrangements for sub-projects including the mechanisms and responsibilities for
environlmental screening, classification, review, disclosure and consultationi will also be developed



4
ISDS
and reviewed prior to appraisal. The need for an EMP and any other environmental assessment
requirements will be determined during project preparation. All EA activities will be in line withi
Bank requirements for Environmental Assessment (BP/ OP 4.01) and will be detailed in the project's
Operations Manual. The institutional arrangements for sub-projects will include mechanisms for
Category A projects. This will be reviewed by the Bank prior to appraisal.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
During project screening, an initial assessment will be made of the nature of environmental and social
issues and any potential cumulative impacts. National requirements and Bank policies will apply.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area will be determined
during site selection and project preparation. The requirements for Financial Intermediary Operations,
described in OP/ BP 4.01, will be met.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
This will be determined during site selection and project preparation in line with the requirements for
Financial Intermediary Operations described in OP/ BP 4.01.
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Overall, the PMU will be responsible for ensuring that the project meets World Bank environmental
assessment procedures for financial intermediary lending projects and that EAs are conducted for
sub-projects as necessary. The PMU's staff will include an environmental specialist with specific
responsibility for environmental issues. The Environmental Specialist will:
*   provide advice and assistance to the PMU Director and implementing ministries and agencies on
environmental assessment and management procedures;
*   supervise the screening of proposed sub-projects to ensure that they meet national, local and world
bank environmental requirements;
*   monitor activities conducted by implementing ministries, agencies and their consultants/
contractors;
* coordinate the development of appropriate environmental management plans for the project
The Project Implementation Plan will outline the process for environmental screening, consultation and
disclosure of sub-projects.
A social scientist will assist with project preparation and implementation. A participatory approach is
being taken to the overall sub-project design and members of local communities and other key
stakeholders will be consulted through the planned social assessment. Early in project preparation a
consultation plan for the preparation and implementation phases will be developed and agreed with the
Borrower. This plan will include the environmental review process. It will be consistent with the Bank's
policies and procedures and will be detailed in the project's Operations Manual.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



5
ISDS
The Social Scientist in the PMU, assisted by other experts and a trained facilitator, will organize a
series of community meetings that will engage households in the project area in a non-threatening,
focused discussion of the household survey results. These meetings will be used to elicit a complete
and ranked census of problems (real and perceived) of individual households, villages, and
communities as a whole, and the community's proposed solution to these problems.
The Social Scientist will also implement a stakeholder consultation plan during the feasibility study.
The purpose of these consultations is to solicit community feedback on the design of project
interventions at key stages of the feasibility study. For example, these consultations might address the
final design and location of infrastructure such as roads, schools, and health clinics. The consultations
will also identify appropriate areas where community members can participate in the implementation
of the project. For example, community members may want to participate in the construction and
maintenance of roads.
For each selected Koykent pilot site, the site/ community social assessment will include the following:
*   a description of the socioeconomic conditions of households in the project area and an assessment
of their development priorities,
*   consultative activities that enable beneficiaries and other stakeholders to inform project design,
*   social impact analysis including a description of potential vulnerable groups and identification of
mitigating measures,
*   identification of stakeholders and institutional analysis; and
*   design of social monitoring and evaluation arrangements.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[X] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         E.rpected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable



6
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigen7ous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
NOTE:
The project will be designed to meet the environmental assessment requirements of Financial
Intermediary operations outlined in BP/ OP 4.01 and the requirements of BP/ OP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement. As this is a Financial Intermediary project, the timelines for sub-project appraisal will be
defined in the Environmental Assessment (EA) Framework and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
Framework. These frameworks will be finalized prior to project appraisal (estimated 30th August, 2002).
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Sudipto Sarkar                              07/16/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Jane Olga Ebinger/Person/World Bank    07/16/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Julian A. Lampietti/Person/World Bank  07/16/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Anproved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Adriana Jordanova Dam ianova             07/18/02
Sector Manager/Director:      Lee Travers                                 07/16/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
'SEARCH         FEEDBACK     . SITE MAP     -NOWCASE



