Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: AC337 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 25, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P078359 
Project Name: Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and 
Emergency Preparedness Project (ISRMEP) 
Task Team Leader: Christoph Pusch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2005 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 400 
Estimated Board Date: May, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Multisectoral 
Theme: Social Protection and Risk Management – 
Natural Disaster Management 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Stan Peabody 
Other financing amounts by source:  
  Government   
 
 
100 
  European Investment Bank  tbd 
  Government of Japan      tbd 
  Beneficiaries 
 
 
  40 
($m.) 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The overall objective of the ISRMEP project is to assist the Government of Turkey in mitigating 
the seismic risks facing the municipality of Istanbul and to further strengthen the capacity for 
emergency preparedness in order to save lives and reduce social, economic and financial impacts 
in the event of future earthquakes. This is expected to be achieved through: (i) strengthening the 
institutional and technical capacity for disaster management and emergency response; (ii) 
implementing a comprehensive program aimed at reducing the existing vulnerabilities in 
Istanbul’s residential buildings; and (iii) strengthening lifelines and critical public facilities 
structures for better earthquake-resistance.  
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
It is envisaged that the project would include the following components:  
(A) Strengthening of Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Management (US$ 30 million)
. This component 
will finance activities to enhance Istanbul’s emergency response effectiveness by upgrading technical 
Page  2
 
 
capacity in the delivery of emergency services, establishment of a comprehensive disaster information 
management system, strengthening of communication between the emergency response units and enhanced  
preparedness of the local population through increasing public awareness in seismic risk mitigation;  
(B)  Reducing the Seismic Vulnerability of Istanbul’s Residential Stock (US$ 105 million).
 This component will 
provide funding for: (i) introduction of a private residential retrofitting pilot program involving a financing 
scheme for the private home-owners (US$ 100 million), (ii) strengthening of building code enforcement 
(US$ 3 million), and (iii) strengthening of urban planning capacity in risk mitigation (US$ 2 million); 
(C) 
 
Seismic Risk Mitigation for Lifelines and Public Assets (US$ 252 million)
. This component will finance: (i) 
technical and economic assessment of risk mitigation investments in lifelines and public assets (US$ 7 
million), (ii) retrofitting of pre-identified, high priority lifelines and public assets such as schools, hospitals 
and public safety facilities (US$ 240 million), (iii) long-term mitigation planning for public utility systems 
(US$ 5 million); 
(D) Project Management (US$ 9 million).
 This component will finance a specialized Project Implementation 
Unit responsible for implementing and coordinating the project activities.  
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project would be implemented within the Istanbul region
.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
The Government of Turkey is aware of the critical need to develop and to implement a comprehensive disaster risk 
mitigation and risk management strategy, and has demonstrated that it is willing and able to implement policies in 
this area. With Bank support through the Marmara Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction (MEER) project, a risk 
transfer mechanism through a disaster insurance scheme was successfully launched, and has received significant 
international recognition. In addition, efforts are underway to establish an efficient decentralized disaster 
management and emergency response system. Although the administrative changes currently underway in Turkey 
have slowed progress in upgrading the newly established Turkey Emergency Management Agency (TEMAD) as an 
efficient national disaster coordination agency, considerable effort and resources have been invested at the regional 
and local levels to better prepare at-risk-communities against future disasters. The Istanbul municipality in particular 
has demonstrated a high level of commitment and ownership in disaster mitigation efforts, and has initiated 
numerous valuable seismic risk assessment and planning activities in collaboration with national and international 
experts, with some support from international donors. 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
Applicable 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
 
N/A 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
N/A 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
 
N/A 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
N/A 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
N/A 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
Applicable. In cases with regard to the retrofitting 
of public assets. 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
N/A 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
N/A 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
Overall, the environmental assessment of the proposed ISRMEP project is categorized positively 
as it helps minimize the potentially disastrous environmental impacts, and assure the existence of 
public infrastructure and major utilities networks in the event of an earthquake disaster. 
Considering that the retrofitting works would be performed on buildings that are already in 
existence and the use of innovative, minimally intrusive technical retrofitting solutions would be 
promoted, there is no major negative environmental impacts foreseen. An environmental 
management plan that incorporates institutional capacity assessment, identification of potential 
negative impacts along with their mitigation measures, and monitoring system will be developed 
during project preparation. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
There are no major safeguard issues expected to arise under the project. The applicability of the 
Involuntary Resettlement policy in regard to the private residential retrofitting program will be 
determined during the project preparation based on the program design and social assessment to 
be carried out at that stage. The safeguard policy on the Cultural Property will apply in cases of 
the retrofitting work on the selected public assets in Istanbul.   
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
A comprehensive social assessment and an environmental management plan will be prepared 
during project preparation. Potential negative and positive environmental impacts of the project 
will be identified along with the required mitigation measures. Key criteria and guidelines would 
also be developed to ensure practices that are culturally preserving. Meanwhile, the social 
assessment will help identify social issues that may arise under the project, develop measures to 
address those issues, as well as feed into the design of project, particularly the private residential 
retrofitting program. Funding from PHRD Trust Fund is currently being requested to support 
these activities.  Moreover, the  Bank team will review the Turkish regulations concerning the 
cultural property, and the appropriate mitigation plan will be prepared and incorporated in the 
EMP, specifically for the cases of the public assets which have a cultural and historical value. 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
As part of the environmental and social assessments, field surveys and public consultation workshops will be carried 
out to ensure a participatory approach and that the project is tailored to the needs and characteristics of the Istanbul 
community. Disclosure requirements would also be agreed upon to ensure a clear and transparent process of the 
investments made under the project. Through the consultation process it is expected that the constraints and needs of 
the different project stakeholders would be well understood. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
At the PCN review meeting the following were agreed: 
 
1. Category B was confirmed due to the rehabilitation nature of the works and the limited social and environmental 
impacts expected from the project. An environmental review of the project and an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) will be prepared and cleared by the Bank prior to appraisal. 
 
2. Most of the private buildings will be identified only after the project begins. However, the nature of interventions 
is known in advance and therefore it is expected that the EMP prepared by appraisal will be applicable to the works 
carried out in sites selected after the project begins. The project will develop an Operational Manual (OM) or similar 
manual governing the selection and appraisal of the sites to be financed under the project. The OM will describe the 
implementation arrangements including the responsibilities for environmental screening and monitoring of the 
proposed sites. The OM will also include a section on the proposed arrangement for chance finding (Cultural 
Property OP). 
 
3. The applicability of the Involuntary Resettlement policy will be determined during preparation. 
 
4. The cultural property OP could apply for public buildings. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
August, 2004 
 
Page  5
 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader:  
Christoph Pusch  
August 23, 2003  
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator (Acting) 
Emilia Battaglini 
August 23, 2003  
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Marjory-Ann Bromhead  October 2, 2003  
 
Comments 
 
 
