Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC412 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 19, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P077328 
Project Name: RAILWAYS RESTRUCTURING 
Task Team Leader: Michel Audigé 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: January 4, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Stan Peabody 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: $m.200 
Other financing amounts by source: Government of Turkey 
$m.150 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The overall objective of the project is to improve the financial viability, productivity, and effectiveness of railway 
operations. This will be achieved through separation of infrastructure from operations, increasing accountability and 
competitiveness in rail operations, restructuring and rationalization of passenger services, labor rationalization, as 
well as corporatization and privatization of non-core activities.
 
 
 
More specifically, the project aims at: (a) setting up a new legal framework for unbundling ports and railways and 
allowing TCDD to operate on a commercial basis and receive public service obligations (PSO) payments for 
services rendered to the government for social and/or political reasons; (b) increasing the transparency and 
accountability of TCDD operations through the separation of the infrastructure and operating (freight, passenger) 
entities; (c) adjusting TCDD work force through a acceptable gradual reduction of staff and unjustified services; (d) 
modernizing TCDD’s core infrastructure and operating assets; (e) decentralizing the system devolving 
responsibilities for local passenger services to Istanbul, Izmir and Ankara municipalities; (f) developing and 
implementing a system of access charges for the use of infrastructure in accordance with EU standards; (g) divesting 
from all non-core services; and (h) involving the private sector in freight operations. 
 
At the same time, it is expected that the project will contribute to increase the competitiveness of the Turkish 
economy by reducing the logistic costs associated with the inefficiencies of the railway and port sub-sectors; and to 
support Turkey’s accession process to the European Union. The benefits of restructuring to the national economy 
and to the national budget are expected to be quite substantial. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
Project cost and components
    The total project cost is expected to be US$350 million. Bank financing would be 
around US$200 million. The components are likely to be the following:   
 
(a) financially sound program of rehabilitation of infrastructure and operating assets (US$265 million);  
(b) TCDD staff adjustment and social mitigation plan (US$75 million); 
 
(c) technical assistance (US$5 million); and 
 
Page  2
 
 
(d) staff training and re-training (US$5 million).
 
 
 
D.  Project location 
 
The project will not have any particular physical location with the exception of the rehabilitation/modernization of 
the existing rail infrastructure in different sites to recover the backlog resulting of deferred periodic maintenance. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Due to the nature of the project, i.e., rehabilitation of infrastructure and operating assets, the only 
applicable Safeguard Policy is related to Environment Assessment.  Borrower’s institutional 
capacity for safeguard policies is generally assessed as satisfactory. 
 
In Turkey, Environmental Impact Assessment are subject to procedures and requirements which are incorporated in 
the Republic of Turkey's regulatory requirements for Environmental Review (Regulation on Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) published in Official Gazette No: 24777 and dated June 6th, 2002, as supplemented by Article 10 
of Environmental Act No: 2872 dated August 9th, 1983) and World Bank policies. In addition Expropriation Law 
(no: 2942), Resettlement Law (no: 2510), Foundation of General Directorate of Rural Services (no: 3203) and 
Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP/BP 4.12) are taken into consideration. 
 
The current Turkish EIA Regulation classifies projects into two categories: (a) projects which have significant 
potential impacts and require an EIA, and (b) projects which may have significant potential impacts and require 
further analysis. For the latter projects, a pre EIA report is prepared by the private sponsor and submitted to local 
authorities (governor) for a determination as to whether or not a full EIA report is required. Under current Turkish 
Regulations projects, which do not fall into these two categories, are not required to take any further action with 
regards to the environment. 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01).  
Rehabilitation/Modernization of existing railways 
infrastructure will imply for each different site the preparation on an EIA and EMP.
 
 
 
[No] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[No] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[No] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[No] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[No] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[No] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[No] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[No] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [x] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory):  The project EA category will result from the identification of the various rehabilitation/modernization 
investment operations included in the project. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
A mini QER was held on October 20, 2003. Comments were reflected in the PCN.  A second QER is expected to 
take place before the project decision meeting in May/June 2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
6 months 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Michel Audigé 
Nov. 19, 2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer 
Nov. 25, 2003 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Motoo Konishi 
Dec. 22, 2003 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
