Report No. 23794
Report No: I077406 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UGANDA Project ID: P077406
Project: UGANDA LVEMP II Suppmental      Task Team Leader: William Leeds Lane
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 19, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 25, 2002    IDA Amount ($m): 4.50
Managing Unit: AFTR1     Sector: VM - Natural Resources Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Supplemental Credit will be totally directed at continuing the
existing LVEMP program. As such, the Project Global and Development
Objectives will remain the same. Nothing will be added or modified from
the original work plan. The following description of Project Objectives
is copied from the Staff Appraisal Report for the LVEMP, as the objectives
remain valid for the work supported by the Supplemental Credit.
"The LVEMP is a comprehensive program aimed at rehabilitation of the lake
ecosystem for the benefit of the people who live in the catchment, the
national economies of which they are a part, and the global community.
The program objectives are to: (a) maximize the sustainable benefits to
riparian communities from using resources within the basin to generate
food, employment and income, supply safe water, and sustain a disease-free
environment; and (b) conserve biodiversity and genetic resources for the
benefit of the riparian communities and the global community. In order to
address the tradeoffs among these objectives which cut across national
boundaries, a further project objective is to harmonize national
management programs in order to achieve, to the maximum extent possible,
the reversal of increasing environmental degradation".
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project and the proposed supplemental credit that would extend Project
activities for an additional 18 months is the first phase of a longer term
program whose aims are as outlined above. This first phase provides the
necessary information to improve management of the lake ecosystem,
establishes mechanisms for cooperative management by the three countries,
identifies and demonstrates practical, self-sustaining remedies, while
simultaneously building capacity for ecosystem management. The project
consists of two broad sets of activities. The first set of activities,
which are designed to address specific environmental threats, takes place
in a series of selected pilot areas. The second set of activities improve
information on the lake and is building capacity for more effective
management and is lake-wide in scope.
The main activities to be supported by the Supplemental Finance will be
continuation of environmental baseline data collection and specific



pilot-level activties in the Lake and its catchment. The largest cost
items to be funded by the Supplemental would include:
a) Whole Lake Water Quality and Physical/Chemical/Biological
Limnology sampling program - This is a harmonized sampling program
conducted over a 1-2 week period every month by all three countries. The
Lake (second largest in the world) has been by divided into sampling grids
with specific sampling sites (found by GPS). Three large vessels, with
teams of up to 20 scientists/technicians on each vessel, sample at each of
the stations in the Lake. There are also moored monitoring equipment
placed in the Lake that are serviced during these cruises (thermistor
chains etc);
b) River Water Quality and Discharge, Lake Littoral, and Lake
sediment sampling- Also done on a monthly basis. This also requires
servicing of data loggers and taking discharge measurements;
c) Wet/Dry atmospheric deposition sampling, Soil erosion
estimation/mapping through soil erosion plots, remote sensing and GIS;
d) Wetland sampling program- Locating, undertaking digital baseline
mapping, water quality assessment and nutrient stripping within, and uses
of products from natural wetlands;
e) Identifying, locating and quantifying effluent characteristics of
all major point-source pollution in the catchment
Identifying agrochemicals used in the basin and making an initial
assessment of the fate of the most important of these once applied;
f) Continuing with community-managed hillside vegetation protection,
community-based water management programs, microprojects, on-farm soil
conservation/water harvesting and sustainable wetland products utilization
pilots;
g) Biological and manual water hyacinth control;
h) Biodiversity sampling and protection of satellite lakes in the
catchment (the Project has discovered that satellite lakes to Lake
Victoria are actually more important as refuge for biodiversity than the
main Lake and these need much more study and protection;
i) Continued support to village co-management units established at
fishing beaches for the purpose of managing the fishery resource of the
Lake;
j) Conduct a second, whole-lake, fishing pressure survey in
association with Tanzania and Kenya;
k) Information dissemination- there is a comprehensive program to
provide information collected during the LVEMP to stakeholders at all
levels. Dissemination occurs through radio and TV, handout and pamphlets,
public meetings, scientific journals, newspaper articles, etc.
The LVEMP is an environmentally beneficial project and is recognized by
stakeholders as being the main proponent of biodiversity protection and
environmentally/socially sustainable development in the Ugandan portion of
the Lake catchment.
The proposed supplemental credit would be limited to continued support to
the following, existing, LVEMP regional and national program of
activities: (a) management of fisheries, including the establishment and
operations of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organizations (US$2.3 million),
improvement of fisheries research and the information base for fisheries
(US$13.3 million), strengthening extension, monitoring and enforcement
capabilities of national fisheries administration (US$14.1 million), and
studying and implementing a Fish Levy Trust (US$2.0 million); (b)
-2 -



management and control of water hyacinth (US$8.3 million); (c) management
of lake pollution and water quality, including strengthening and
harmonizing national regulatory and incentive frameworks and enforcement
capabilities, and establishing a lake-wide water quality monitoring system
(US$9.6 million); improvement of research and the information base for
pollution control and water quality (US$4.3 million), pilot investments in
industrial and municipal waste management (US$ 1.7 million), and priority
waste management investments (US$ 4.0 million); (d) management of land use
in the catchment, including improvement of research and the information
base for pollution loading from catchment, assessment of agro-chemicals,
and pilot investments in soil conservation and afforestation (US$ 9.2
million); (e) wetland management, including improving the information base
(US$ 3.4 million), and pilot investments in sustainable management of
wetland products (US$ 1.5 million); and (f) support for institutions for
lake-wide research and management, and pollution disaster contingency
planning (US$ 4.0 million).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located entirely within the Ugandan portion of Lake
Victoria and its catchment. Project activities occur throughout the
catchment and the Lake itself.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The environmental classification for the original LVEMP
remains. The proposed Supplemental Finance will not result in any new or
expanded activities (only covering project activities that would have been
undertaken had unforseen circumstances not resulted in a delay of 18
months in project implementation). The Environmental Classification
remains a "B" as determined during project preparation in 1995-1996.
The Project was rated as category "B" under OD 4.01 by the original
preparation/safeguard team in 1996. The OD in place at the time required
"something less" than a full Environmental. On the basis of this
requirement, and clearance of the Project rating by the African Regional
Environmental Department, an environmental analysis was prepared as part
of project preparation in November 1995. The Project also underwent full
evaluation by the Africa Regional Environmental Department at Appraisal
and SAR Yellow Cover review, as required under OD 4.01. The Staff
Appraisal Report (June 1996) summarized the 30-page environmental analysis
as follows:
"The [Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project] is in effect a
regional environmental action plan for Lake Victoria, having as its
central objective improving the environmental conditions of Lake Victoria
and its catchment. However, the program will encompass a wide range of
different interventions and investments, and has been designated as
Category B for environmental analysis to ensure that adequate attention
will be given to the many overall positive impacts as well as to
individual components which might have adverse local environmental
effects." The main areas where activities undertaken in the Project might
have had negative environmental impacts were the following:
n Measures to try and restore and stabilize the fish ecology in the Lake
- 3 -



might have unforeseen effects;
n Attempts to develop innovative aquaculture might have unforeseen effects
on the ecosystem;
n Biological agents used as the main line of long term control of water
hyacinth might have unforeseen effects on other parts of the ecosystem;
n Attempts to reduce the inflow of pollutants into the Lake might result
in their having negative effects in other environments.
In fact, we are looking at the environmental assessment from "hindsight".
The LVEMP has, at its core, a scientific monitoring program of air, water
and biota. No indication of any negative impact from the LVEMP has been
seen. In fact, the Project has produced quantifiable positive impacts on
Lake Victoria and its catchment.
The preparation of the LVEMP involved innovative (for the time) approaches
to community participation in Project preparation. Review of the LVEMP
during the IDA/GEF Midterm Review suggested that additional community
involvement was needed. The Project Secretariat (managers of the Project)
in Uganda, Tanzania and Uganda were strengthened through hiring a
dedicated Community Participation Specialist to work with the various
components to improve public involvement/information dissemination.
Stronger links were also established between the various Project
components and the NGOs working in the Lake Basin. This even extended to
including NGOs as observers in Project Supervision Missions by IDA/GEF
The Project Staff Appraisal Report described the positive impacts of the
project, concluding with the observation that "the area in which the
project would make the most economic difference would be in heading off
developing instability and possible serious collapse of the valuable lake
fisheries."
In addition to triggering the Environmental Assessment safeguard, the
LVEMP is also on an international waterway (Nile River). However, the
initial paragraph of BP 7.50 (International Waters) specifically limits
safeguard triggers under the BP to Projects that have "potential
international water rights issues". The LVEMP (and by definition, the
proposed supplemental credit, as it only supports existing Project
activities) is a scientific assessment and has no impact on either water
quality or quantity. No water rights issues are therefore present.
The LVEMP also addresses natural habitat issues which triggers OP 4.04.
However, the entire LVEMP is targeted at identification and preservation
of biodiversity and ecologically sensitive areas such as wetlands, rocky
shores of lakes, preservation and where possible improvement of water
quality, forest reserves, etc. No additional action is needed under
OP4.04 because of the nature and design of the LVEMP (and since the
proposed supplemental credit only supports existing Project activities,
this also holds true for the supplemental credit).
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    Yes
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
-4-



Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         Yes
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Ongoing activities already shown to be environmentally positive. Not
applicable.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Ongoing activities already shown to be environmentally positive. Not
applicable.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The Project is mainly baseline data collection aimed at identifying
impacts of economic development on Lake Victoria and its Basin. The
Project is therefore designed to detect harm associated with development
in the catchment, and is not likely to have long-term negative impacts.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
N/A
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The project has an ambitious public dissemination plan to reach all
stakeholders at all levels (local, national, regional and international).
NGO's are partners in implementation of most components and the local
communities are involved through microproject implementation. Project
reviews by QAG, the GEF, and various bilaterals (SIDA and NORAD) have all
been positive.
The Project-wide environmental analysis is described in paragraphs
5.25-5.31 of the Staff Appraisal Report (June 18, 1996).
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
-5-



I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        William Leeds Lane       02/28/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Serigne Omar Fye         02/28/02
Sector Manager/Director:         Karen Brooks     02/28/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



