                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/11/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: UGANDA                                                Project ID: P079925
Project: Sustainable Management of Mineral Resouces            Task Team Leader: Leo Maraboli
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 15, 2002                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: November 18, 2003                               IDA Amount ($m): 22.00
Managing Unit: COCPD                                           Sector: Mining and other extractive (60%); Central
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             government administration (40%)
Status: Lending                                                Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);
                                                               Decentralization (P); Analysis of economic growth
                                                               (S); Environmental policies and institutions (S);
                                                               Other public sector governance (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The overall objective of capacity building in the proposed Mineral Sector Development TA (MSDTA)
project is to assist the Government of Uganda (GOU) to conduct: i) comprehensive reform of all mineral
sector frameworks, with emphasis on regulatory and fiscal setups and institutional development, to
encourage the expansion of socially and environmentally sound private investment in exploration and
mining development (Annex 1); and ii) targeted interventions to alleviate poverty in rural areas with
significant small-scale and artisanal mining activity. Proposed project activities include: a) implementation
of legal and regulatory reform to promote private investment in exploration and mine development, ensure
real and sustainable contributions to economic growth, and foster economic diversification; b) capacity
building to develop institutional capabilities for effective mineral sector administration, particularly
enforcement of compliance of mineral laws and regulations, administration of mineral rights, and
monitoring of activities and sustainable development in the sector, with emphasis on the orderly evolution
of small-scale and artisanal mining; c) acquisition and processing of geo-scientific data; d) development of
information systems and geological maps, to enhance the GOU's capacity to provide basic geo-scientific
and natural resources information to potential investors; e) institutional strengthening of Uganda's capacity
management of mineral-related environmental issues and social impacts; f) identification and adoption of
mechanisms, including establishment of legal rights, to increase revenue, improve miners' and
communities' quality of life, and provide extension services to improve technical, social, welfare, health,
safety and environmental conditions in areas with considerable artisanal mining activity.

The project was designed by Uganda's Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD) to provide
an enriching learning experience to the country, stakeholders and potential investors in the implementation
of mineral sector reform, attraction of private investment, and pursuit of sustainable growth and
development of the sector. The focus of knowledge and skills transfer will include: a) investment promotion
activities and contract negotiations, including community, public and private sector interfaces; b)
interactions with and meeting needs of investors, particularly foreign investors; c) understanding of
cross-sector and inter-agency dynamics in the context of rural and regional development and
decentralization; d) establishment of effective inter-relationships with environment agencies; and e)
completion of baseline environmental studies and social assessments prior to initiation of exploration or
mineral activities.

                                                        2
                                                                                                          ISDS




I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
A) Framework Reform, Investment Promotion and Capacity Building. The project would assist in: i)
strengthening MEMD's policy making, regulatory and sector management capabilities; ii) transitioning the
State's role from owner and operator of mining assets to regulator and administrator; iii) preparing and
implementing a legal and regulatory framework to promote private exploration and mine development
activities, with explicit criteria and non-discretionary procedures for granting and foreclosing mining rights;
iv) strengthening, modernizing and developing capacity at DGSM to: 1) develop sound capabilities to
compile, develop and interpret basic geological information, and 2) conduct efficient mining sector
promotion, with adequate capabilities and resources to carry out technical and investment promotional
programs; v) decentralizing DGSM's field functions to main regional areas, principally in Kabale,
Mbarara, Kasese, Mbale, Moroto, Gulu and Arua; vi) establishing computer-based administration systems
for cadastre, mine-reporting and sector information; and vii) strengthening DGSM laboratories and
geological sample storage. Assistance would be provided for training and procurement of equipment and
material, to improve the administration and regulatory role of the mineral sector institutions.

During recent assessments of overall institutional reforms, GOU gave lengthy consideration to divesting
DGSM's activities and creating an autonomous National Mineral Authority with a minimally staffed
Geological Survey and Mines Liaison Unit operating under MEMD. Subsequent examinations resulted in
the decision to restructure DGSM, which is being analyzed with inputs from the Ministry of Public Service.
DGSM anticipates maintaining some traditional functions of a Geological Survey and a Mines Department
as well as policy and regulatory formulation and related monitoring, administration and enforcement in
respect of mineral rights and mining sectoral activity. A structure based in four main divisions is under
initial consideration:

Geology, with sections for economic geology, regional geology, and geophysics.

Geo-data, with sections for documentation, cartography, Geological Information System (GIS) and MIS.

Mines Division with sections for licensing and administration; mining inspectorate; environmental and
social management; mineral statistics; small-scale mining; and mineral engineering.

Laboratory with sections to assist small-scale miners in chemical assays; petrography and mineralogical
services; and mineral preparation and development.

Sub-component A.1: Modernization of the Regulatory Framework.
Draft mining law revisions under consideration include mining-specific environmental stipulations and
procedures. The completed legal reform process will incorporate social dimensions, put in place adequate
mineral, environmental and social regulations, and reinforce GOU's capacity to negotiate mining
investment agreements with the private sector on larger mining projects.

Sub-component A.2: Institutional Reform/Capacity Building.
This component mainly aims to better define DGSM's functions and adapt DGSM to its new role as a
referee rather than a player, with well defined mandates and functions, and with an enhanced and
modernized administrative capacity. The detailed design of the modernized institutional structure, including
mandates, organization, staffing, training, infrastructure, equipment and operational budget, will be
executed as part of this sub-component.

Sub-component A.3: Mining Cadastre and Registry System.

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


One GOU objective for the mining sector is to establish a well-informed, uniform and interactive cadastral
system to process and administer mineral rights. The proposed project will support the transformation of
DGSM's physical registries into an adequate mining cadastre, which will provide accurate information
about the precise location of mining rights. The procedures required to apply the cadastre process will be of
general application, transparent, public and non-discretionary.

Sub-component A.4: Investment Promotion.
A focus of the proposed project is the promotion of private investments in Uganda's mineral resource
development. This sub-component will establish a promotion unit within the DGSM, and will support staff
training, preparation and publication of promotional material, and MEMD and DGSM staff participation
in international mineral congresses, events, and investment promotion venues.

Sub-component A.5: Intranet Network.
The proposed project will establish several information systems to ensure the proper collection, storage and
retrieval of the sector information. These will include a Mining Cadastre System (MCS), MIS, GIS,
Environmental Management System (EMS), and Social Management System (SMS). The decision to
establish these systems underscores the importance of accurate, timely information to MEMD's
administration of the mining sector, the definition of mining policy, follow-up on policy impact, and the
sector's enacted legal framework.

Sub-component A.6: Geological Storage.
Geological sample storage is poor. The destruction caused by past political turmoil has not been redressed
due to budgetary constraints at DGSM headquarters in Entebbe. Under the proposed project geological
material storage will be reinstated and technical assistance will enable that display and retrieval be brought
to conformity with modern storage standards.

Sub-component A.7: Reinforcement of DGSM's Laboratory Network.
DGSM laboratories are Uganda's sole facilities for sample identification and analysis to support basic
geological and geo-chemical mapping programs and for tests on mineral processing, but budget constraints
have left most equipment obsolete and non-functional. The project will fund the replacement of basic
instruments, equipment and related facilities, to restore sample preparation, assay and identification
capabilities at facilities in Entebbe and selected regional offices.

B) Development of Geological Infrastructure. The focus of this component is to provide basic, reliable
geological information to support the promotion of private investments in the mining sector, and
socio-economic development planning. As geological infrastructure development is integral to Uganda's
socio-economic progress, geological information is also central to inter-sectoral infrastructure development
(including roads, land use, urban development, and management of environmental resources) in line with
international practice.

Uganda's existing modest geological and geophysical survey coverage was initiated in colonial times and
extended somewhat in the 1960s, but the majority of reports, maps and data remain unpublished.
Moreover, some geological maps are based on aerial photography supported only by limited fieldwork,
which makes them insufficiently reliable for mineral exploration purposes. Surveys by Hunting Geophysics
and Geology in 1961 covered selected areas of northeastern and western Uganda, but are outdated and were
conducted with now-obsolete technology equipment. Subsequent surveys executed by Kenting in 1983 and
Intera-Kenting in 1992 covered areas in northwestern and northeastern Uganda, respectively. However,
they were for oil exploration and used flight characteristics with high altitude and wide spacing (3.5 ­5.0
kilometers), which made them inadequate for geological mapping and mineral exploration. A survey was

                                                        4
                                                                                                         ISDS


conducted by Geosurvey International GmbH during 1979-80. It covered areas south of parallel 1o N
aimed to delineate targets for mineral exploration and information that could assist regional geological
mapping, but its wide spacing of 1.0 kilometer rendered them inadequate in density and quality of
information for promoting mineral exploration. Other airborne geophysical surveys offer limited coverage
in exploration license areas in western and eastern Uganda, but an extensive area in northern and central
Uganda has not yet been surveyed.

Thus, Uganda is only partially covered by existing geological mapping, and almost all available maps
present nonconformities at the boundaries and discontinuity of geological formations from one map to
another. Most maps prepared in the past need to be updated and homogenized, particularly on aspects
related to stratigraphy and regional structures, to enable them to serve promotional purposes. Past mapping
programs generated a large number of documents (maps, reports, laboratory results and samples) at risk to
be lost due to inadequate infrastructure and cataloguing.

The proposed project will support efforts to: i) complete the regional airborne geophysical coverage of the
country, and support a denser coverage over selected promising areas; ii) update and improve existing
coverage of geological maps at 1:250,000 scale and support detailed coverage of selected areas of high
mineral potential; iii) compile existing geo-chemical survey data, sample analysis, and some
complementary sampling; iv) establish a modern and computerized MIS to compile and catalogue data and
modernize DGSM's documentation center; v) prepare an inventory of Uganda's industrial minerals and
construction materials to promote investment opportunities to the local private sector; and vi) provide
DGSM with assay and sample storage facilities to enable the satisfactory development of basic geological
information and the provision of extension services. Main sub-components will include:

Sub-component B.1: Component Supervision and Coordination:
The specialized nature of technical activities in the project's geological infrastructure component will
necessitate external coordination and supervisory assistance. The project will support "twinning" of
"supervisory services" from a foreign geological survey with experience contracting and executing
geological mapping, geophysical airborne surveys, and establishment and operation of MIS. This group
will provide the required owner-representative oversight, coordination with consulting firms and
contractors, evaluation of product quality, and other advisory services.

Sub-component B.2: Geophysical Airborne Survey:
The Survey's objective is to acquire high quality geo-science data to expand DGSM's databases and
promote geological information and understanding of Uganda's geology and mineral potential to private
investors. The project will support completion of airborne geophysical coverage in central and northeastern
regions of Uganda as well as higher density surveys in selected areas of high mineral potential in the
southeast, southwest, northeast and northwest regions.

Coverage will consist of reconnaissance airborne geophysical coverage over the northern and central
regions with: a) 220,000 line-kilometres with line-spacing of 500 meters, and 100 meter elevation; and b)
380,000 line-kilometres of higher density surveys with line-spacing of 250 meters, and 80 meter elevation,
over areas with higher mineral potential. The surveys will be based mainly on gamma-ray spectrometry and
magnetic surveys. The project will also support: i) the digital compilation, processing and interpretation of
some data from previous airborne geophysical surveys, including the digitalization of analog records, on a
case-by-case basis; and ii) the related technology transfer required including provision of hardware and
software, and capacity building of selected Ugandan technical staff for the digital compilation, processing
and interpretation of data accruing from the geophysical surveys.

                                                        5
                                                                                                         ISDS


Sub-component B.3: Geological Mapping of Uganda.
The project will support the urgent need to compile, scan, catalogue and interpret mapping information for
analysis, promotional and preservation purposes. This sub-component would also support the geological
mapping of selected areas previously unmapped and the execution of fill-in mapping in selected areas
inadequately mapped. Additionally, it would support the publication of map packages whose quality of
interpretations will be of investment promotional caliber.

Sub-component B.4: Geo-chemical Sampling.
Activities under this sub-component will include preparation of an inventory with all available information,
sample maps, analytical results, and sample material; document scanning; and digitization of sample
locations and respective analytical results in a GIS format. This information will be incorporated into a
MIS and, for promotional purposes, will include regional geo-chemical surveys needed to confirm areas of
high mineral potential identified during geological mapping.

Sub-component B.5: Documentation Center.
The wealth of information at DGSM comprises geological, geo-chemical and geophysical maps, technical
reports, analytical protocols, rock samples, and a collection of thin sample sections dispersed through
various DGSM regional offices and mineral agencies. Little information is computerized; most comprises
original documents or map drafts. This sub-component will support upgrading facilities; organizing a
documentation center where all documents can be classified, indexed, and preserved; providing technical
assistance for classification, retrieval and preservation of documents; and stocking the DGSM library with
geo-scientific publications and periodicals.

Sub-component B.6: Minerals Information System (MIS).
Basic geological information is an essential tool for the development of private investments in the mining
sector, especially in high-risk exploration activities. The MIS sub-component will establish a computerized
DGSM information system based on GIS technology and relational databases. The MIS will also provide
access to information through Internet and e-commerce facilities.

Sub-component B.7: Industrial Minerals Survey.
DGSM has accumulated a substantial amount of general documentation on industrial minerals and building
materials potential. This sub-component will support the compilation and analysis of available information,
and the strengthening of extension services of DGSM, for the further development and use of industrial
minerals and building materials.

C) Sustainability of Small Scale and Artisanal Mining. Artisanal and small-scale mining activities
represent an important source of direct and indirect income for a relatively large rural population.
However, such activities usually involve numerous technical, legal, environmental and socio-economic
issues. Additionally, artisanal mining is often a seasonal occupation that provides supplementary income
for rural inhabitants, and can constitute a source of massive "rush" migration of population responding to
the discovery of bonanza type deposits. The human settlements and living conditions associated with
artisanal mining are generally very precarious and can be socially disruptive if not addressed in timely and
pragmatic manners. Further, it can generate health hazards beyond those inherent to mining. Accordingly,
from a regional perspective, their medium-term socio-economic balance could be easily and superficially
perceived as negative, with costs greater than benefits, in terms of the use of non-renewable resources,
environmental impacts, health conditions, or sustainability of economic activities after the mineral deposits
become depleted.

Other mining countries' experience demonstrates the value of assistance programs that promote small-scale

                                                        6
                                                                                                             ISDS


and artisanal mining development on a technically, environmentally and socially sound basis and provide
for sustainability. This component aims to enhance small-scale and artisanal miners' awareness of their
options to improve their technical and environmental performance and the overall impacts of their activities
in nearby communities. It will support: i) formulating and undertaking integrated management, technical
assistance and capacity building programs to enhance technical yields, reduce serious adverse impacts on
health, safety and the environment, improve miners' living conditions, and increase revenue; ii) designing
and implementing a DGSM program to provide field technical support, geological information and
extension services for miners and establish a pilot training center; iii) strengthening of assay facilities for
providing extension assistance to miners; iv) backing for health-hazards campaigns to improve conditions
small-scale and artisanal mining communities; and v) building MEMD capacity to address and managing
social issues in the mineral sector. This will also include preparation of a generic framework for mine
closure that incorporates resettlement and compensation matters. The project also will support education
campaigns to raise population awareness among those engaged in small-scale and artisanal mining, with
respect to health hazards and particularly on HIV/AIDS pandemic and poor sanitation. Project activities
will focus on health hazards awareness and prevention and will be executed in close cooperation with the
Ministry of Health, NEMA, MGLSD and other organizations active in the mining areas. In this respect, the
Uganda AIDS Commission (UAC) is assisting MEMD in preparing a sector strategy to fight HIV/AIDS.

D) Environmental and Social Management. A primary objective of this component will be to develop
within DGSM an environmental protection, preventive and monitoring unit for mineral activities and a
social monitoring, safeguarding and development unit for mining areas and nearby communities impacted
by mining. Both units will function in close coordination with GOU environmental institutions and
agencies. Equipping them to deal with sector environmental and social issues and ensure that mining
operations are conducted in compliance with sound environmental and social practices will involve
considerable capacity building and linkages between MEMD, NEMA, MGLSD and other relevant entities.
The project will support: i) preparation of a mineral sector environmental and social assessment to help
determine the location of protected areas, including important biodiversity zones to remain restricted for
mineral activities, as well as prospective locations for the development of mining operations, where
environmental and social baseline studies should be carried out; ii) definition of sector specific
environmental and social policies, regulations and standards, including procedures for rehabilitation of
areas, and resettlement after mine closure; iii) development of adequate procedures and guidelines for the
preparation of environmental and social impact studies for mining; iv) establishment of capacity for
DGSM's Mineral Environmental Management and Mineral Social Management Units to monitor and
enforce compliance of environmental and social regulations, respectively; v) preparation of socio-economic
baseline studies at selected mining districts, to serve as a basis for methodology and capacity development
to assess and monitor social, cultural and economic impacts of mineral activities on the local communities,
vi) formulation and implementation of public consultation and participatory procedures; and vii)
establishment of environmental and social management systems and related databases, with linkages to
relevant environmental and social databases in other institutions and agencies, to enable efficient
monitoring, administration and enforcement activity.

E) Project Coordination and Management. During the execution of the proposed project, MEMD will
establish and maintain a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to coordinate project implementation and to
manage: (a) procurement, including purchases of goods, works, and consulting services; (b) project
monitoring, reporting and evaluation; (c) contractual relationships with IDA and other co-financiers; and
(d) financial record keeping, accounts and disbursements. The PCU will ensure efficient coordination
among different elements of MEMD that participate in the project and with other main stakeholders,
including, but not limited, to NEMA, MGLSD, involved Ministries and agencies, Uganda Chamber of
Mines, Uganda Quarry Operators Association, private enterprises, and NGOs. The CPU will also

                                                        7
                                                                                                          ISDS


constitute the operational link to the IDA and other co-financiers on matters related to the implementation
of the project.


Components:


A. Framework, Reform, Investment Promotion and Capacity Building
A.1: Modernizatioon of the Regulatory Framework
A.2: Institutional Reform/Capacity Building
A.3: Mining Cadastre and Registry System
A.4: Investment Promotion
A.5: Intranet Network
A.6: Geological Storage
A.7: Reinforcement of DGSMs Laboratory
B. Development of Geological Infrastructure
B.1: Component Supervision
B.2: Geophysical Airborne Survey:
B.3: Geological Mapping of Uganda
B.4: Geo-chemicl Sampling
B.6: Minerals Information System (MIS)
B.7: Industrial Minerals Survey

C. Sustainability of Small Scale and Artisanal Mining

D. Environmental and Social Management

E. Project Coordination and Management




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Nationwide


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project will contribute to the improvement of management of the mining sector, with emphasis
on small-scale and artisanal mining and sustainable mining development. Torwards this end, an Environmental
Management Plan being prepared will identify measures to ensure that mining activities are conducted in
environmentally and socially sustainable manners. To ensure that the appropriate measures are incorporated in
the proposed project, it has been classified as a B.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered

                                                        8
                                                                                                          ISDS


   Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                        Yes       No      TBD
   Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                Yes       No      TBD
   Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                 Yes       No      TBD
   Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   Yes       No      TBD
   Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               Yes       No      TBD
   Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                Yes       No      TBD
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       Yes       No      TBD
   Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                           Yes       No      TBD
   Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                Yes       No      TBD
   Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                     Yes       No      TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project itself does not raise new safeguard issues. Its potential environmental and social issues
have been addressed effectively in the Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
recently completed by the Government, which includes comprehensive recommendations for the
design and implementation of the project, to ensure that reforms planned for the sector are
successful. On the environment, it provides an instrument to help ensure that project activities are
environmentally sound and sustainable, and thus to improve decision making, while taking into
account the particular conditions of Uganda. This is particularly applicable in the case of
assessments to design, implement and operate surface mines, tailings disposals, and activities of
small-scale miners. On social aspects, it is also directly applicable for assessments to improve the
organization, structure and living conditions of small-scale miners, as well as the inter-phases of
existing communities with expanding activities of artisanal mining. Overall, the SESA will enable
to strengthen individual assessments at the project level, advancing sustainability impacts, and
addressing cumulative and integrated effects, with the anticipated consequence of facilitating the
avoidance of adverse impacts and situations with safeguard issues.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The main positive long term impact anticipated in the project area would be the evolution towards
diversified activities, with a core consisting of orderly mining and development of agriculture in
rehabilitated areas, and ensuing improvements in living conditions, health and education. Main
anticipated impacts include a better utilization of natural resources, through adoption of improved
mining practices, including respective regulations and enforcement, with associated positive
effects on the working conditions of artisanal miners, and resulting positive social outcomes on
related communities, currently threatened by closure.

                                                       9
                                                                                                           ISDS




II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
The alternative of leaving as is, without reform, would have serious consequences. At the
small-scale and artisanal mining level, it would result in the continuation of the existing disruptive
situation, with disordered and non-systematic mining of non-renewable resources, which is
unacceptable. It would also result in environmental degradation around small-scale mines, which
is an important concern due to the significant overlap of the areas with mining potential and areas
with environmental assets. At the large-scale mining level, it would evolve into significant social
issues related to mines that may be facing closure in the future. Such conditions would likely
induce the development of dire-living conditions and growing social strain between miners and
established communities, and a lack of focus towards improving rural health and education. It
would result in the evolution of abrasive relationship with stakeholders, with corporate fragility in
situations of environmental accidents. It could also result in growing community emphasis and
likely disputes for sharing in the benefits of mining activities.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues




II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Other mining countries' experiences indicate that, owing to the present small size and current status of
Uganda's mineral sector, results of baseline surveys, focus group discussions and participatory workshops
designed to translate the current circumstances and perspectives into recommendations and action programs
could be rendered obsolete rapidly, when superceded by reforms conducted under project implementation,
and by the actual growth of the mineral sector. To mitigate such situation, the project will incorporate
sensible approaches from other countries to optimize the development, quality and use of actual field
information while ensuring stakeholder commitment and GOU support. The focus will be on executing
comprehensive, integrated social and environmental assessments to be conducted sector-wide shortly after
project initiation and repeated at a mature stage of project implementation

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

                                                     10
                                                                                                    ISDS



Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/25/2003       4/25/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/30/2003       5/6/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           4/30/2003       5/15/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              3/14/2003       4/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          4/30/2003       5/5/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           4/30/2003       5/5/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Leo Maraboli                                       08/09/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Kristine Ivarsdotter                               09/11/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Isabelle Paris                                     09/11/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas Walton                                           09/11/03
Sector Manager/Director               Peter A. van der Veen                              08/21/03

