Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  AC203 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  September 2, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P077738 
Project Name:  Education Reform 
Task Team Leader:  Ana Maria Jeria 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD: 80 
Estimated Board Date: September 21, 2004 
GEF amount ($m.):   
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
PCF amount ($m.): 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (70%); Primary 
education (30%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S) 
Other financing amounts ($m.) by source: 
 
 
 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
 
B.  Project Objective 
[from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The development objective of the project is to support Ukraine efforts to provide equal access to 
quality education. The project would improve student learning, and enhance efficiency and management in 
the education system.  Bank support would focus on general education (grades 1-12), with special emphasis 
on rural schools. 
 
C.  Project Description 
[from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The Government has requested that the project support three areas addressing the key 
issues above:  
 
Component I: Professional Development of Educators
 
would aim at raising the awareness, knowledge 
and professional competences of teachers and school directors in order to implement the reforms underway 
in teaching and learning in general education.  The following activities could be financed by the project: (a) 
Training of trainers
 to upgrade the knowledge and skills of trainers needed in designing new training 
programs for teachers (and school directors), preparing the respective training and professional 
development materials, and conducting training programs as well as mentoring the educational change 
processes in schools and in rayons; (b) In-service training for teachers
 organized by the Regional In-Service 
Training Centers and local (rayon) methodological centers, based on demand by schools and teachers (there 
would be a particular emphasis on village schools in rural parts of the country); (c) Leadership training for 
school directors
 including updating of the existing school directors’ in-service training programs, provision 
Page  2
 
 
of regional school leadership workshops for school directors and development of professional standards for 
school directors. (d) Enrichment of Regional (oblast) In-service Training Centers
 (providing in-service 
training and other professional development support to teachers) with the goal of meeting the needs of 
modern teacher development and school improvement. 
  
Component II: Improvement of the Learning Process
 
would aim at supporting ongoing efforts to improve 
the conditions of teaching and learning in secondary schools, focusing on the (a) Modernizing the 
curriculum content
 for grades 5-12 by providing inputs for developing materials/tools/approaches for the 
implementation of the curriculum reform; (b) Providing selected teaching and learning tools
, reference 
materials for teachers and students, and computers for sharing resources, networking and processing 
knowledge. A strategy with selected criteria to reach those schools and teachers with most urgent needs 
will be set up; (c) Developing a national strategy for evaluation and monitoring of education with an 
adequate system for monitoring quality and student achievement
; and (d) Supporting school improvement 
initiatives
 proposed by the rayons or schools, which could include public recognition and dissemination of 
good school improvement ideas, additional professional development support, material supplies, or both.  
While Component I would improve the professional knowledge and skills of teacher trainers and teachers, 
Component II would provide technical support to schools and teachers  
 
Component III: Efficiency and Management of Resource Utilization
 would complement the other 
components by strengthening the policy development capacity of the MES - and possibly other government 
institutions responsible for work on education sector, introducing data-based policy analysis approaches, 
and supporting Government efforts to provide better access for students (as well as teachers) to an 
educational physical environment conducive to effective learning and teaching.  Possible activities to be 
financed include: (a) Policy planning and management capacities
 to be improved through professional 
development support in the application of policy analysis and policy development methodologies, as well 
as their introduction into the routine education strategy development, implementation and monitoring 
process; (b)  Development of a comprehensive EMIS system
 for use in decision making; (c) Optimization 
of existing school infrastructure
 contributing towards increasing student access, particularly those students 
coming from small/remote localities, to a more complete learning environment and towards achieving 
greater efficiency/economy in the recurrent maintenance and operation of the facilities; and (d) 
Upgrading/rehabilitation of selected schools
 to minimum standards for general education facilities in 
Ukraine.  This component would also include support for the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). 
 
The main beneficiaries of the project include general education students and teachers who would be 
reached by specific project inputs such as professional development, modern learning aids in the 
classrooms and improved information dissemination mechanisms.  More broadly, all students in general 
education will benefit indirectly from more efficient and effective education services as a result of the 
strengthened capacities and optimization of resources supported by the project.  Long term benefits would 
be derived from the expected improvement in quality and relevance of learning leading to improved 
students achievement, improved effectiveness and efficiency of the education delivery system in Ukraine, 
thus substantially contributing to economic growth and development and reducing poverty. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project would rehabilitate rural schools in a limited number of oblasts to be selected according to 
criteria agreed with the Borrower (e.g. poverty index, limited access to quality education, population 
density). 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
[from PCN] 
 
As this would be the first Bank-financed operation in the education sector in Ukraine, the 
Borrower’s implementation capacity is untested and would need strengthening.  The 
Ministry of Education and Science (MES)  would be the lead agency, with its 
Page  3
 
 
Departments/ Units collaborating in the implementation of the project.  An inter-
ministerial Project Steering Committee may be formed to oversee the project and act as a 
high-level body empowered with full financial and administrative powers to formulate 
project guidelines and directives.  MES has established a Unit coordinating the 
implementation of a PHRD Grant.  This Grant Coordination Unit is expected to become 
the Project Coordination Unit that will coordinate project activities, manage procurement 
and financial management, and ensure timely and effective implementation of the project.  
Several oblasts /rayons would participate in the project, but  how these regional structures 
will participate in project implementation remains to be defined. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[very concise summary]
 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01)
  X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
!
A   
X
 B  
!
 C   
!
 FI   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
!
 S
1
   
X 
S
2
  
!
 S
3
   
!
 S
F
   
!
 TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[from 
PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard 
issues and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
There would be minor rehabilitation of selected schools (number to be determined).  Most of the 
rehabilitation work would improve the safety conditions of the users of the schools and the learning 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
environment.  The work may consist of improved water and sanitation facilities and sanitation 
management, improved energy efficiency through better windows and classroom insulation, roof repairs, 
and so on.  The quality of education will thus be enhanced. 
 
There are no large scale safeguard or environmental impacts expected under the project.  However, many 
school buildings in Ukraine were built during the Soviet regime and  are roofed with asbestos material.  
Many structures are dilapidated, and their rehabilitation under the project will require the safe removal and 
disposal of such asbestos materials.  No asbestos materials will be used in rehabilitating or building 
new/replacement schools.   
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements 
be addressed? 
 
MES would be asked to prepare an EMP in consultation with key stakeholders (including the State 
Committee on Construction and the pilot Oblasts, schools directors, teachers, community etc.) which will 
provide for measures that include the following: (i) no asbestos containing materials will be used in school 
rehabilitation; (ii) asbestos will be disposed properly according to law and consistent with generally 
accepted disposal practices; (iii) no lead-based paint will be used; and (iv) construction related noises will 
be set at a minimum acceptable to the surrounding community.  During rehabilitation, building contractors 
will be asked to abide by the EMP.  The EMP will be part of the standard bidding document. 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation  
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Ana Maria Jeria  
Date 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Rita Klees 
 
Date  
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Maureen McLaughlin  
Date  
Comments 
 
