C25514
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
_ _____ ________
-J I-nfoShop
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/27/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Pro ject Data
Country: UKRAINE                                 Project ID: P076338
Project: Modernization of the Statistical System  Task Team Leader: Olga V. Ivanova
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 25, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m): 25.00
Bank Approval: September 21, 2004                IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: DECDG                              Sector: Central government administration (75%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Information technology (25%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Economic statistics; modeling and
forecasting (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The Modernization of the Statistical System Project (MOST) arises from the Government of Ukraine
(GOU) own initiative aimed at making wide ranging systemic changes in national statistical processes
and at strengthening critical areas. The detailed proposals are prepared by the State Statistics Committee
of Ukraine (SSCU) together with other beneficiary agencies (Ministry of Finance, Economy and the
National Bank of Ukraine) in close cooperation with the Word Bank and are the outcome of "The
Government program for transition to international system of accounting and statistics" (Program),
Strategic Information Systems Plan prepared under IBL in 1996, and ongoing policy dialogue with the
Bank. The GOU generally, and the SSCU specifically, are committed to system modernization, staff
upgrading and data improvements as evidenced by the recently amended statistical law and preparation
of the third phase of the Program implementation for 2003-2007.
The Government is increasing emphasis on the importance of transparency, and aspires to subscribe to
the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The Project's activities in implementing the
SDDS norms would make an important contribution to the better working of Ukraine's markets, facilitate
access to international financial markets, allowing financial services providers, for instance, to compare
information on potential borrowers against agreed benchmarks. The result should be lending and
investment decisions based on timely and comprehensive statistics, as well as increased accountability of
policymakers - overall, improved and more sustainable economic performance.
The Project would support the implementation of a broad-based poverty reduction strategy and attaining
job-creating, sustainable economic growth in Ukraine by making available a steady supply of trustworthy
and readily available social and economic statistics needed for policy making and monitoring purposes. It
supports the third phase of the long term program of restructuring of the State Statistical System of



2
ISDS
Ukraine (SSS) and the development objective of the Project is building of asustainable state statistical
system which efficiently provides timely and accurate data for policy evaluation and decision
making (see Annex 1). It would be achieved by a comprehensive reform of the SSS in the following
directions:
*      strengthening institutional capacity to collect, process, disseminate the data and use it for policy
analysis;
*      improving the match between the needs of those who use the data and the work of those who
provide it;
*      upgrading the quality and flow of official statistical and administrative data by introduction the
methodologies and definitions that can bring Ukraine's performance in the field of statistics up to
international standards.
Beyond these goals, the project will directly contribute to greater transparency, production of data
relevant to the operation of markets, and enable investors( both domestic and external) to make better and
more informed decisions. The Project represents an important input in the process of accelerating the
pace of both economic reforms, and that of the public sector.
The WB experience in preparation and implementation of similar projects in Russia and India was drawn
on while designing the Project. Thus, it is important to point out that although the modernization is a
long-term process and its full completion might take time beyond the Project implementation period, the
project design foresees, along with  achievement of longer-term goals, such short-term results as
improvement of dissemination of statistical and administrative data, including that on public
procurement; strengthening statistics at the regional level to support a formula-based transfer system in
inter-budgetary relations; tangible results in introduction of the GFS according to the IMF and Eurostat
standards; upgrading the Ministry of Economy (MOE) capacities in data analysis and forecasting.
To advance these aims, the Project would assist Ukraine in installing modem computer systems and
communications technology to link agencies and units in an information network. A strengthened and
more effective State Statistical Committee of Ukraine (SSCU) acting as a leading coordinating agency
would work closely with other ministries and the National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) to advance
modernization and, as the upgrading proceeds, to ensure monitoring of data quality and timely delivery
through an upgrading of the professionalism of statistical personnel.
Due to a reformation of the existing data collection mechanism, introduction of the network environment,
and other institutional changes, the Project anticipates a considerable shift in the skill mix of the
professional statistical staff and would assist the SSS to meet the new requirements by strengthening the
training and re-training system, particularly that of the regional staff, which practically ceased to exist.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Modernizing any national statistical system is a lengthy undertaking. In Ukraine, where the statistical
system is multi-layered, no overnight overhaul is financially or technically possible.  Instead, in
designing the Project, its authors in the Bank and in Ukraine have laid out a series of major required
steps, and defined the priority to be assigned to each within the overall statistical modernization strategy.
The specific actions given precedence in the Project will bring visible results in improving the quality,
reliability and timeliness of major indicators. By improving the statistics in selected areas and the
general statistical infrastructure, the Project will contribute a positive impact to statistical performance.
Components:



3
ISDS
A: ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT & MANAGEMENT
Al. Restructuring of organizational model of the SSC
A2. Building of institutional management systems (Financial & Budget, Human Resource, etc. Management)
A3. Strengthening of the system of staff training and re-training
A4. Development of the statistical data dissemination and users education strategy
B. STATISTICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Bl. Improvement of Household Sample Frame
B2. Establishment of the statistical register of enterprises and individual entrepreneurs on the basis of the Unified Register
(EGRPOU) and the Tax Administration Register
B3. Introduction of the Unified Classification Structure
B4. Improvement of Relations with Data Users and Providers
C. DATA DEVELOPMENT
C 1. Implementation of international standards in major data categories
C l-1. Real sector
C 1-2. Fiscal sector
C 1-3. Financial sector:
C 1-4. External sector:
C 1-5. Demographic and social statistics and analysis
C 1-6 Other statistics
C 2. Upgrading of data collection mechanisms
C2-1. Survey ofLiving Conditions of Households
C2-2. Enterprise Statistics and introduction of sample survey system
C2-3. Surveys of Economic Activity
Part D. STRENGTHENING OF INFORMATION BASIS FOR DECISION-MAKING AND FORECASTING AT THE
MINISTRY OF ECONOMY
* 1. Upgrading of Data Presentation and Processing Standards for Analytical Purposes
D 2. Introduction of new short- and long-term forecasting models
Part E. INTRODUCTION OF MODERN COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
E 1. Identification, procurement, and installation of information technologies to support parts A-D
E 2. Data- and metadata base development
E 3. Electronic Data dissemination tools development
E 4. Procurement and installation of computer equipment at the NBU, MOF, and MOE
E 5. Staff training
Part F. PROJECT MANAGEMENT
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The location of the project will be largely in kyiv, Ukraine and in some of the regional capitals. The focus of
the project on modernizing statistics will have no environmental impact (see below).
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: Only minor civil works are being planned. An internal renovation of the Training center at the
SSCU headquarters will be performed (for the total of about $22,200, including materials), which will
include installation of window frames, a new door, walls painting, floor repair, etc.).
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                         Applicability



4
ISDS
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                            0 Yes C No      0' TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                                     OYes *No       CTBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                               C) Yes * No     C TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                           O Yes * No      1TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               -          Yes * No     C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                        CYes *No        DTBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                               C Yes 0 No     C0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                            Yes *No C! TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                  0 Yes * No     03 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                         C Yes 0 No      C) TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
NA
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
NA
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
NA
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
NA
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
NA
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Participatory approach of stakeholders
Stakeholders              Identification         Implementation             Operation
1.  Primary Beneficiaries:
SSCU staff
Headquarters               CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL IS.
Regional                   CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL. IS.
Other related agencies
National Bank of Ukraine   CON. COL IS             CON COL. IS             CON COL IS
Ministry of Economy        CON COL. IS.            CON COL. IS.            CON. COL IS.
Ministry of Finance        CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL. IS.           CON. COL. IS
11. Other Key Stakeholders:
Politicians                CON IS                  COL. IS. SUP.          COL. IS. SUP.
Oblast and local governments  CON. IS. COL         IS. COL, SUP           IS, COL, SUP
Academic Institutions      CON IS.                 CON.                   CON.
Private sector             IS.                     IS.                    IS.
NGO                        CON, IS.                CON. IS                CON. IS.



5
ISDS
Other Donors:
IMF                     CON IS              CON IS.              CON IS.
TACIS                   CON. IS.             CON IS.             CON IS.
Bilateral               CON. IS.             CON. IS.            CON. IS.
CON - Consultation,  COL - Collaboration,  IS - Information Sharing,  SUP - Support
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Olga V. Ivanova
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:



6
ISDS
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Marjory-Anne Bromhead                       02/12/2003
Sector Manager/Director:       Deborah L. Wetzel                             02/25/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
. ~_           ,_ _                       __i_        i , 
5E^RCHFLDAC _IT               MA          ______,__     ^PrSOCAf 1



