Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC353 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 7, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P085138 
Project Name: UKRAINE METHYL 
BROMIDE PHASE-OUT 
Task Team Leader: Vladimir Tsirkunov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): Nil 
Estimated Board Date: July __, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: GEF Grant 
Sector: General industry and trade sector 
(20%);Agro-industry 
(50%);Petrochemicals and fertilizers 
(30%);Central government administration  
Theme: Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  V.Tsirkunov  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
3 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to the protection of ozone layer by ensuring Ukraine’s long 
term and sustained compliance with the Copenhagen amendment to the Montreal Protocol after January 1, 
2005 and to move the country forward with complete phase out of ODS in line with the evolution of  
international practice and obligations. More specific objectives are: i) to eliminate remaining ODS 
production capacity in the country, specifically for Methyl Bromide (MBr) and Carbon Tetrachloride 
(CTC), ii) phase out consumption of MBr; iii) strengthen institutional capacity to maintain compliance 
with international obligations and expand the scope of ODS phase out generally, and iv) ensure social and 
economic impacts associated with MBr phase out are mitigated and offset by creation of new economic 
development opportunities. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project will be designed to meet the above objectives through development and implementation of 
four components: (a) permanent closure of the MBr production facility at the Saki Chemical Plant in 
Crimea; (b) permanent closure of the CTC production facility at Kalush in the Ternopil region; (c) 
institutional strengthening and support of residual MBr consumption phase out, and (d) project 
management, monitoring and evaluation. The table below summarizes the tentative allocation of the grant 
to these four components, noting that this allocation, particularly between the first three components will 
be subject to a final decision by the Government, based on detailed preparation information.  
Page  2
 
 
 
Project Components 
Total Cost (Grant 
Amount) US$ 
Million 
A: Compensation for permanent closure of the Saki MBr production facility 
1.50 
B: Compensation for permanent closure of the Orina-Halev CTC production 
facility 
075 
C: Institutional strengthening related to compliance with the Montreal 
Protocol Amendments and phase out of residual MBr consumption 
0.60 
D:  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
0.15 
Total 3.0 
 
Components A and B are directed at the permanent closure of Ukraine’s only ODS production capacity at 
the Saki and Orina-Halev chemical Plants. In both cases the facilities are operable but are in poor 
condition technically and have not regularly been in production on a viable commercial basis for some 
time. The approach to be used will utilize a performance based model in its design whereby a two part 
compensation payment would be made, the first upon legally binding commitment to an agreed Closure 
Plan and the second upon completion and independent verification of Closure Plan implementation by the 
Bank. For purposes of initiating discussion with enterprises, it is recommended that the first and second 
payments be 30% and 70% respectively. The preparation phase of the project will be devoted to 
development of the detailed technical Closure Plans which will address the dismantling or disabling of 
key process equipment and its disposition, removal of raw material supply capability, environmental 
sound disposal of process residuals, and establishment of monitoring procedures which will be employed 
during and following closure plan implementation.  The scope of Component C would cover institutional 
strengthening support respecting regulation and trade controls on MBr and transitional substances, 
technical assistance to residual MBr consumers in phase out including  minimization consumption and 
emissions involved in exempt uses, and, if applicable, direct investment in eligible alternative 
technologies. Subject to any direction on eligibility from the GEF or Montreal Protocol, the Component C 
may also make provision for funding a reasonable and monitored stockpile of MB to be available for 
qualified critical or exempted uses which would be acquired prior to January 1, 2005. Component D 
would be allocated to local project management, monitoring and evaluation within an existing Ministry 
based PIU (Ozone Office) inclusive of supporting local monitoring capacity in a post plant closure period.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will involve two specific plant locations associated with Components A and B described 
above, namely the town of Saki in the autonomous Republic of Crimea and at the town of Kalush in the 
Ternopil region of Western Ukraine. The location of potential MBr consumption phase out initiatives will 
be defined upon further preparation work. However, locations identified to date may include various 
agricultural product inspection and quarantine facilities located at points of entry around the country.  
Institutional strengthening assistance will be primarily be focused on Kyiv but will also include various 
customs authority facilities.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The Government and specifically the Ministry of Environmental Protection has developed strong 
institutional capacity over the course of implementation of the GEF ODS Phase Out Project. During the 
course of this project the Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to compliance with the 
Montréal Protocol through progressive ratification of the London and Copenhagen Amendments and is 
currently pursuing assumption of further obligations under subsequent amendments. At the level of 
Page  3
 
 
project implementation capacity, the previous ODS phase out project involved some 13 investment sub-
projects and four major TA assignments covered by 62 procurement contracts, most of which involving a 
high degree of technical complexity. This project will utilize the established PIU that has handled larger 
and more complex previous project. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project could potentially have incremental environmental impacts associated with the 
closure process of the targeted components in the two chemical processing facilities, 
specifically in relation to disposal of any residual raw materials, process constituents, by-
products and products. The environmentally sound management of these would be an 
integral part of the agreed Closure Plans and closure monitoring procedures.  Project 
preparation will also assess the environmental condition and performance of the overall 
plants in which these facilities are located and the project could potentially attach 
conditionality in the event that major issues exist.  
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
The phase out of MBr consumption will require assessment of any substitute technology 
and/or techniques considered with respect to performance in agricultural product 
protection, health and safety implications and environmental impact. Funding will be 
restricted to technology and techniques consistent with WHO and FAO guidance 
documents as well as that of the Montreal Protocol Technical and Economic Assessment 
Panel. More specifically, substitute options will emphasize the use of biological and 
environmental techniques rather than synthetic chemicals.  
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ x] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
With respect to environmental assessment, the key preparation activities will be development of the 
detailed technical Closure Plan inclusive of identifying any incremental impacts associated with closure 
and the actions to be included in the Closure Plan that are required for mitigation. These are anticipated 
relate to solid and aqueous waste disposal, and potentially ensuring that any local site contamination 
within the subject facilities are remediated or contained. 
 
With respect to pest management, where MBr applications are identified, preparation will involve an 
assessment of alternatives. This will specifically involve their ranking against the criteria set out in OP 
4.09 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The project in both the preparation and implementation stage will require a wide range of stakeholder 
consultation and disclosure of project plans. This will specifically include affected workers in plants to be 
closed and potentially within organizations using MBr as well as government organizations at the 
national, regional and local level. This process has been initiated during project identification with the 
preparation and distribution of information materials on MBr.  
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
