24392                                        ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                             AWorid Frce o Poverty
InfoShop
,,.  YV.",. II .'
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UKRAINE                                 Project ID: P035777
Project: RURAL LAND TITLING AND CADASTRE         Task Team Leader: lain G. Shuker
DEVELOPMENT
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 27, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m): 94.78
Bank Approval: February 11, 2003                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                              Sector: BI - Institutional Development; VM - Natural
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Resources Management
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The primary objective of this project would be to allocate land parcels to individuals in rural areas
on an equitable basis, establish their property rights by issuing titles, and encourage the restructuring of
farms into more efficient units, with due consideration for environmental and social safeguards.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Component 1. Institutional Development and Legal Reform. This component would provide the State
Land Committee (SLC) with the resources required to reorganize and change its function from
Soviet-style land use planning to land use regulation better suited to a market economy. The role of the
SLC civil service would change to that of monitoring zoning compliance, providing advisory services
related to land and environmental management and land rehabilitation. This would require a
reorganization of SLC, training of staff and the procurement of office equipment, computers, and
software, and the upgrading of office facilities. The component would also fund the preparation of
specific legislation required for improving land use management.
Component 2. Public Awareness. Providing information to all potential recipients of land titles is
essential to the success of all systematic titling programs. Given that the concept of private ownership
rights is new to many rural people, the publicity campaign would focus on informing small land holders
of their rights to individual title, and their land use rights and obligations after these rights have been
granted. Information would also be supplied on farm management, legal procedures related to land, and
leasing of parcels. This would be achieved through mass media campaigns, production of pamphlets and
leaflets on a mass scale and through holding public meetings at each farm to give instruction and answer
questions. It is also planned that regular newspapers or periodicals would be printed. The management
of the public awareness campaign would be contracted to an NGO, group of NGOs, or to a public
relations company.



2
ISDS
Component 3. Training. The project would implement the following training programs:
§      Short Term Training. The project would provide short term training courses in of land
management/land survey to expand the number specialists available to assist in farm restructuring and
title issuance. This will include the environmental management needs of the land titling process. The
bulk of this training would occur in the first two years of project implementation. International technical
assistance would be provided to assist with course development and to conduct some workshops with the
universities as part of a 'training of trainers' program. There would also be a series of study tours by key
personnel to review practices in other countries, for consideration of adapting these to Ukraine's
conditions.
§      Long Term Training. The SLC has proposed that funds be provided to equip the four agrarian
universities in Odessa, Lviv, Harkiv and Kiev and to assist them to further development of their courses
in order to develop their long term training capacity. In recent months the SLC has invested heavily in
renovating premises and establishing a school of land management at the Agrarian University in Kiev.
The new school replaces a department that dealt primarily with land management and cadastre and is
aimed at broadening and deepening the curriculum in order to include legal studies and land market
related subjects. The school will have three faculties, and already has a dean and heads of faculties. The
three faculties are: (a) Land Management; (b) Land Law and General Law; and (c) Post-graduate studies.
Component 4. Land Management. This is the largest component of the project, and would focus on the
subdivision of former collective farms and the issuing of titles to individual rural land owners. This
process requires a substantial amount of preparatory investigation and consultation with the owners of
former collective farms, agreeing on farm restructuring and subdivision plans, land survey work,
environmental management activities and implementation responsibilities, and ultimately the issuing of
titles. The process of distributing land would include identifying existing land share certificate holders
and developing lists of the people' who have a right to a physical land parcel, and delineating assets to be
transferred to municipal ownership (hospitals, schools, roads, and parks and potentially other
environmentally sensitive lands). Areas under threat from degradation of soil, water courses, areas for
efficient utilization of natural resources, and similar sites that require protection, would be identified and
plans made for their management. Topographic surveys would be conducted and data about soil quality
would be collected (primarily from existing maps) to determine the quality and value of land. Land not
allocated to municipal ownership or environmental protection would be sub-divided such that each
person gets an area of equivalent value (i.e. land parcels are of different physical sizes to account for
difference in quality), according to the methods established by legislation. This process of consulting and
decision-making can take up to a year or longer since the owners have to have sufficient time to discuss
the options for farm sub-division and distribution, creation of new agricultural enterprises, and to decide
on the creation of groups that would like to have adjacent parcels. The procedures include all the
necessary safeguards for citizens that allow them to voice their opinions and concerns about the
distribution of non-land assets, distribution of land, participate in the allocation of plots and inspect the
plans and results before they are finalized. There are procedures for objections and appeals. A manual
defining a standardized methodology for farm subdivision is being developed for the project. This will
include preparation of an environmental assessment for each farm restructuring exercise and an
environmental management plan that integrates nature conservation considerations in the process of
preparation and issuing land titles through environmentally sound spatial planning and land-use,
introduction, where appropriate, of restrictive regimes in agricultural practices and other land uses.
Completion of a Land Titling Manual acceptable to the Bank is a condition of negotiation for this loan.
Component 5. Cadastre System Development. This component would finance development of a



3
ISDS
computerized cadastre system to store and manage the data generated by the surveys under Component 4.
Component 6. Farm Restructuring Services. The farm restructuring component of the project would
provide advisory services to new or potential land owners. These advisory services will include
explaining legal rights and obligations to new land owners, advice on drafting of rental agreements,
technical support in cases where there are disputes between parties over division of land or non-land
assets, advice to: former collectives in transferring social assets to municipal authorities, and former
collective entities in dealing with debt problems. The project will provide advice and training to
municipalities on how to manage the land reserves placed under their jurisdiction and on the
development of plans for land use where land is used in common.
Component 7. Proiect Management. The project would finance a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in
Kiev, comprising about 10 professional staff and 4 support staff. There would also be a regional
representative in each Oblast to coordinate and promote project activities in that Oblast.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented across Ukraine, on the territories of former collective farms. The
dominant land use type, regardless of geographic location, is arable farmland. Collective farms which
might be restructured under the project can be found in Ukraine in all regions, at multiple elevations,
with a wide variety of environmental characteristics (i.e. climate, soil type, habitat, presence/absence of
rivers or wetlands, proximity to important cultural sites, etc.). However, the process of participation in
restructuring is demand-driven, and it is therefore not yet known exactly which collective farms will
participate, or when they might do so. This uncertaintly is also true for protected areas, critical habitats,
and culturally or socially sensitive areas.
In rural areas overall, approximately 50% of the population is retired. Young people are leaving rural
areas in search of better opportunities in urban areas. Of the remaining active population, only a small
percentage are interested in farming on their own. By distributing land and other assets on an equitable
basis to all rural inhabitants the Government hopes to provide the rural population with the means to
support themselves, either through farming the land themselves or, in a majority of cases, through renting
out the land to others. For many of the pensioners, this supplemental income from land rent would serve
as a social safety net. By allowing farmers to farm independently, either on their own land or on rented
land, the Govemment hopes that the more entrepreneurial farmers would emerge, thus increasing
agricultural productivity and rural incomes.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)
Comments: The Financial Intermediary Assessment (Fl) environmental classification for the project as a
whole is based on two principal characteristics of Component 4, which has the largest portion of project
expenditures, and is the only component in which any environmental or social impacts are expected. The
first characteristic is that project investments are channeled from a central fund. The second, and critical,
characteristic is that participating farms, and their associated beneficiaries, are not known at the time of
appraisal, and therefore it is not possible to undertake site-specific environmental assessments or design
environmental impact mitigations ex ante. Under these conditions, the Fl classification is appropriate.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability



4
ISDS
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes     No   . TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes *No        TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               D Yes *No     ?TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 C} Yes * No      TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes * No      TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       C Yes 0 No       TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                C Yes 0 No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)                                 C Yes * No      TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           C Yes 0 No       TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         O Yes * No    C TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment is the only Safeguard Policy triggered by the project. No large-scale, significant,
or irreversible impacts are foreseen, though as noted above, it is not known which farms, in which areas, will
participate; there may be the potential for some adverse impacts on some farms. The dominant land use
types on the former collectives are plowed farmlands, farm infrastructure, and access roads. From an
environmental standpoint, only the actual farmland will be subdivided and titled. Inside the boundaries of
the former collectives, there are lands that will remain in either state or municipal ownership, as required by
the Land Code. These environmentally sensitive areas include various types of wetlands such as rivers,
stream courses, and other water bodies, and their associated riparian zones; steppe remnants; and rangelands
that have important community uses, as well as potential environmentally sensitive qualities (i.e. this land is
steep or erosion-prone). Also not eligible for privatization are most forests, the exception being those
smaller than 5 ha of contiguous area. Forests with a contiguous area of greater than 5 hectares can be owned
only by the state and municipalities. Privatization of small forest stands will not substantially change the
structure of forest ownership in Ukraine: more than 90% of the most productive forests will remain in State
ownership and a substantial part of the remaining 10% would be under the jurisdiction of municipalities.
These factors should substantially lessen any adverse environmental impact that land privatization could
have on environmentally sensitive lands. Further, detailed mitigation measures will be included in the Land
Titling manual.
The Natural Habitats policy is not triggered because there will not be any significant conversion (loss) or
degradation of natural habitats either directly or indirectly. The project will not operate in any areas which
would be classified as Natural Habitats. Rather, these lands have been used as farmland for at least the last
20 years.
The Forestry policy is not triggered because the project will not operate in the forest sector, and the
interventions under the project should not impact significantly upon forested areas. As noted above, most
forests are not eligible for privatization, and therefore the project's impact on forests should be negligible.
There is, however, a risk that small forest stands in the agricultural landscape which are subjected to
privatization could be unsustainably harvested for income or fuelwood to satisfy short-term needs. Forests
are protected under the Forest Code and by several environmental laws which together define the
requirements for harvesting timber and fuelwood sustainably. These laws and regulations will continue to



5
ISDS
apply to forest shelterbelts withii the former farm enterprises. These small forest stands will also be subject
to management plans and mitigation measures according Ukrainian laws and the Land Titling Manual.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Initially, potential negative impacts on any given parcel of land should be mitigated in accordance with
plans developed as part of the restructuring process. In the longer-term, although the use of natural
resources is controlled by Ukrainian laws and regulations to ensure environmental sustainability, it is
likely that privatization will lead to some over-utilization as new landowners satisfy short-term needs.
The impact of this would not be significant at the level of the individual farm. However, if there was a
systematic overuse of ecologically sensitive lands on numerous former farm enterprises that would
receive land titling assistance under the project, the cumulative impact on these many farms could be
adverse. Laws and regulations related to sustainable land-use practices will need to be regularly
reviewed and updated to ensure their relevance to the new land ownership situation.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
As noted above, Project Component 4 - Land Management - is the only project component where
environmental or social impacts tnight be a factor, and is the largest project component. Further,
undertaking of the individual titling described in this component forms the primary rationale for the project
as a whole. Any project scenario (with the exception of a "No Project" scenario) would include this
component. It is therefore difficult to suggest a viable 'concept' alternative. Because the exact locations of
farms to be restructured is not known, it is not possible to design 'location' alternatives, except to emphasize
that environmentally sensitive lands on any given farm will not be privatized. The 'technical and
technological' alternatives are limited, as the titling work is carried out according to well-established survey
techniques and methodologies.
Project design does foresee an opportunity to develop 'implementation' alternatives, depending on the land
use types encountered on a given farm. The environmental assessment is planned to be a 2-tier system. For
each farm enterprise, an environmental review as proscribed by the Land Titling Manual's checklist of
environmental issues (e.g., presence of important natural habitats) would yield either of two outcomes:
*   Case 1) - if the environmental review finds no potential for adverse environmental impacts, for
example if the farm consists entirely of plowed lands, with no special environmental requirements.
In this case, no further environmental assessment steps would be required; and
*   Case 2) - if the environmental review finds important forest, steppe habitat, or wetlands that could be
adversely impacted by the project, then a more detailed environmental review would be carried out.
This environmental review would identify and map important natural assets, examine the impacts of
the land titling process on these, and identify mitigation measures to be implemented to minimize the
potential impacts to an acceptable level. If the detailed review concludes that significant adverse
environmental impacts could be expected, even with mitigation, the given farm would not be eligible
for project funding.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Ukraine has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework related to environmental protection,
including requirements for environmental assessments and mitigation. As noted in the Description
section, the Land Titling Manual will provide the framework for designing the detailed environmental



6
ISDS
mitigation measures to be undertaken'during privatization. It will also establish the details of which land
use types are to be considered "environmentally sensitive", and hence need to be kept out of the
privatization process. These procedures will be valid regardless of farm location, and so should provide
a consistent, national-level, framework for mitigation of any potential adverse environmental impacts of
privatization. In addition, Ministry of Environment staff will have to approve each farm's environmental
management plan. There is sufficient capacity in the country for this. 'Table I below provides the
summary steps required for all farms wishing to undergo privatization; note that as Step 4, Environmental
Assessments are undertaken early in the privatization process. The Land Tilling Manual, acceptable to
the Bank, is a Condition for Negotiations.
Table 1. Summary of steps to be followed for privatizing for er farm enterprise.
Steps                       Description                      Environmental management
measures
0    Application from eligible owners for land share in kind -  None
Individual land share certificate owners apply to the rayon
administration for a land plot and State Deed for ownership of
this plot.
The output is an application from individuals and a decision
by the rayon state administration on the transfer of land into
private ownership.                                   _
I   Prepare list of eligible owners - A list of land shares owners is  None
complied from the Book of records of land certificates.
The output is a list of prospective land owners with information
needed for issuance of land title.
2   Collect and combine information from existing plans and maps  Compilation/summary of
that have been developedfor the purpose of environmental  baseline information on the
protection and land use - Relevant plans, maps and technical  subject farm to be used in the
materials are gathered from state agencies and the former farm  environmental assessment
enterprize.                                           (Step 4).
The output is a digital map of the territory to be privatized. The
information will be verified by field work before designing the
scheme for dividing the land into parcels.
3   Review and update soil classification, more precise monetary  Provides information on
assessment of land share stock - the assessed value of the land  susceptibly of land to erosion
will be updated based on soil and topographic data.    and degradation to be used in
the environmental assessment
The output is an updated soil classification and land value
assessment parameters.
4   Environmental assessment and mitigations - An assessment of  Mitigation of adverse
environmental assets of the subject property (e.g., forests and  environmental impacts of
other natural habitats), analysis of potential adverse  land privatization, including
environmental impacts of land privatization, and mitigation  exclusion of ecologically
measures, including identification of environmentally sensitive  sensitive lands from
lands that are to be excluded from privatization and restrictions  privatization, environmentally
on the uses of other lands.                           sound zoning of farms,
selection of open spaces
The output is an environmental assessment that includes a map  delegated to municipalities
of lands to be excluded from privatization and lands that may be for management as local
privatized with use restrictions to ensure environmental  parks, and development of



7
ISDS
sustainability.                                        special regimes of land use.
5   Geodetic Works - establish new geodetic points to connect the  None.
cadastral boundaries to at least two existing geodetic points in
order to survey limits and different features of lands.
The output is survey data needed to establish the boundaries of
individual properties.
6   Make topographic and cadastral plans. Specify the contours of Topographic and cadastral plans
agro-production groups of soils - the survey is conducted for  once developed and in use can
features as necessary for each particular case using GPS and/or assist in the management of land
total stations, and survey techniques.                and land use (e.g. regional
lanning) and enable sustainable
The output of this activity is survey infonmation that can be used development and environmental
to update existing maps.                              monitoring.
7   Initial design schemefor dividing collectively owned land into  Environmental protection
parcels - A draft design scheme for subdividing the land, and  measures identified in the EA
excluding environmentally sensitive lands, is developed in  are incorporated into the draft
accordance with the interests of individuals or associations and  scheme.
environmental conditions.
The output is the initial design scheme that is presented for
discussion to prospective landowners and the local rada.
8   Final Scheme of division of collectively owned land into land  Additional environmental
parcels - The final Scheme for fanm privatization is produced  mitigation measures
after consensus is reached on the allocation of land parcels.  identified during the
consultations with
The output is the final scheme showing the allocation of parcels goveniment, local
to various new landowners                              governments, farmers, and
civil society can be added at
this stage to provide for
environmentally sound
decision.
9   Mark the botndary ofparcels- the final Scheme is updated to  None
show the location of parcel corners to be marked.
The output of this activity is marked land parcels in kind (on
site) and the installed cadastral monuments.
10   Prepare thefinal cadastral plan - A cadastre plan is developed The Final Cadastral Plan
based on the final Scheme of land subdivision and survey data. combining updated information
on land and ownership rights
The output is the cadastre plan, the list of owners and the parcels and responsibilities is a tool in
allocated to them.                                    sustainable economic
development and environmental
management.
11    Prepare informationfor the production of land deeds   The deeds will include land
-Information on land deeds is prepared for inclusion in the  owner rights and
official record.                                      responsibility including
specific protection regimes to
The output is information for the State Deed and the Book of  be followed by the
Records of land titles.                               landowner.
12   Submit cadastral plan and deed informationfor approval - The None
cadastral plan and deed related files are submitted to the
Cadastral Center for examination, acceptance, and for printing
the deeds.



8
ISDS
The output is electronic files submitted to the State Land
Cadastre, with completed State Deeds.
13   Ensure that State Deeds are recorded by the local or rayon  None
rada and distributed to parcel owners - The State Deeds are
issued to the land owners by the local rada before the owners
take possession of the land.
The output is a statement from the local rada indicating that
the deeds have been issued to the land owners.
Three components of the Land Titling project will provide training in environmental management,
among other areas. The project will finance training in:
*      specific environmental management practices of the technical and social steps of the land titling
process. This training will be provided to the: (i) State Land Committee, responsible for oversight of
project implementation; (ii) contractors, responsible for implernentation of the land management
component (Component 4); and (iii) Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources staff that will
monitor the environmental aspects of project implementation;
*      to the State Land Committee, for managing the overall process of environmental management for
the project (under Component 1).
*      Farmers and municipal authorities on sustainable uses of lands held in common (e.g., rangelands)
(Component 6).
Additional information on the training programs, including the curriculum, duration and selection of the
trainers, will be developed during the appraisal mission.
Beyond the implementation of mitigations arising from the environmental assessments, the project is
designed to promote environmental awareness among farmers and local govemments, by providing
training and advisory services to farmers on practical environmental management measures.
In the coastal corridor of southern Ukraine where there are many ecologically important natural habitats,
the Land Titling project will be implemented in collaboration with the Azov Black Sea Corridor
Biodiversity Project (ABCBP), a project that supports protected areas management and sustainable
agriculture in the rayons that border the Black Sea and Sea of Azov. The ABCBP will assist farmers in
the coastal rayons of southern Ukraine, where nutrient runoff is a serious environmental problem, to
create and maintain riparian buffers. It will also map the remaining steppe habitats and provide
recommendations and financing for improved management of the areas considered to be the most
ecologically significant.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the individual members of the former collective farms, who currently hold land
share certificates which entitle them to an un-demarcated parcel of land on the collective. As outlined in
the Description section above, the actual determination of what parcel any given individual will receive
is a long process, which involves land owners, along with municipalities, state agencies, NGOs, etc.,
being directly involved in the land and non-land allocation process for their farms, according to
Ukrainian legislation. The allocation plan must be approved by a majority of the land owners.
The EMP will initially be discussed with a key group of stakeholders, including NGOs and local
govemment authorities, in late June 2002, prior to project Appraisal. Based on the results of those



9
ISDS
consultations, the EMP will be revised. Additional stakeholder consultations will be conducted in
September 2002, and will be aimed at reaching agreement on a final version of the EMP. These
additional consultations will also provide the opportunity to discuss the draft Land Titling Manual, to
incorporate community suggestions into the Manual prior to project Negotiations.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               6/17/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           6/25/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            6/27/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Developmeni Plan/Framework:             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:           lain G. Shuker                              06/20/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Phillip Brylski/Person/World Bank    06/20/2002



10
ISDS
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Adriana Jordanova Damianova                 06/21/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Laura Tuck                                   06/21/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
L, a ,, FEEDBACFi      SUTE MAP           i   SHOWCASE -



