ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 A World Froo of Povortv
A4nfoShop
'MeWm xrl Hank-
Report No AC56
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/07/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UKRAINE                                 Project ID: P057815
Project: First State Tax Service Modernization Project  Task Team Leader: Craig R. Neal
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 24, 2002    IBRD Amount ($m): 40.00
Bank Approval: June 5, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPE                             Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  Theme: Tax policy and administration (P),
Status: Lending                                  Administrative and civil service reform (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The two-phase State Tax Service Modernization Program seeks to establish a sustainable
state revenue system  This includes: (a) voluntary compliance with the Tax Legislation by
taxpayers and third-party payers; (b) competent, honest, and equitable administration by the State
Tax Service; and (c) a growing and efficient enterprise sector.
*   Phase I seeks to establish sound organizational and operational foundations for the
State Tax Service. These include: (a) modernized business process and
organizational designs; (b) a consolidated and function-based structure; (c) a proven
prototype of modernized taxpayer registration, tax accounting, declaration
processing, and document management functions; (d) strengthened capacities in
priority areas of human resource management, senior and middle management,
legislative and statistical analysis, audit, collection, large taxpayer offices, etc., and
(e) enhanced public accountability mechanisms.
*   Phase 2 seeks to modernize STS operations on a nationwide basis and to complete
the modernization of the STS's institutional management functions (i.e., executive
management and institutional representation, legislative affairs, internal business
support, internal control, reporting and analysis, human resources, internal
administration, document and records management, institutional computing
resources).
A sustainable state revenue system is one that provides the legally mandated revenue to
the state budget -- on the basis of technically, politically, and economically sustainable
arrangements. The STSMP would seek to:



2
ISDS
*   Increase voluntary compliance to the Tax Legislation by taxpayers, by: (a) reducing
the cost of compliance; (b) increasing the probability of discovery of tax evasion and
non-payment; (c) increasing the credibility of collections and effectiveness of dispute
resolution mechanisms; and (d) increasing taxpayer and third-party understanding of
the Tax Legislation, administrative procedures, available taxpayer services, taxpayer
rights, as well as taxpayer and STS obligations.
*   Achieve competent, honest, and equitable administration of taxes by the STS, by:
(a) improving the STS's capacity to apply the Tax Legislation accurately and
uniformly; (b) improving the STS's capacity to monitor and maintain its
administrative integrity; and (c) strengthening the public's ability to monitor and hold
the STS accountable for proper tax administration.
*   Foster economic growth by: (a) enabling a reduction in tax rates via a broader tax
base, as a result of increased compliance; (b) reducing micro-economic price
distortions via more uniform cost structures across firms, as a result of greater
compliance; (c) reducing operating costs of productive entities via lower compliance
costs and reduced corruption and administrative abuse; (d) increasing
macro-economic stability via greater fiscal stability, as a result of sustainable
revenue performance.
I.A.3. Project Description:
APL - Component A (Phase 1: 2003-2007)
A]     Organization & Management Modernization
All.. Strategic project managemllent capacity building
Al.l.1 design, planning, & testing
A1 .1.2 project management & administration
A1.2   Organizational consolidation & functionalization
Al.3. Human resource management capacity building*
Al 4. Management capacity building*
Al.5   Legislative and statistical analysis capacity building*
Al .6  Stakeholder relations capacity building
A 1.6.1 inter-agency
A1.6.2 internal
A1.6.3 community at large
A2.    Operations Modernization
A2 1. Prototype of modernized core tax administration operations (registration,
accounting, declaration processing, and document management)
A2.2. Customer Service Call Center
A2.3. Compliance strengthening*
A2.4. Large taxpayer office strengthening*
APL -- Component B (Phase 2: 2008-2012)
B]     Organization & Management Modernization



3
ISDS
B I .1.  Strategic project management capacity building
B 1.2. Organizational streamlining
B1 .3. Institutional management capacity building
B2.    Operations Modernization
B2. 1. National roll-out of core modernized operational (registration,
accounting, declaration processing, and document management)
B3     Continuation of Plhase I Incremental Recurrent Costs
Note: "*" indicates priority-tactical initiatives -- as contrasted with long-term strategic
initiatives.
The inputs required to achieve the outputs associated with the various
components/sub-components include: technical assistance, training, study tours, minor civil
works, office and related equipment, vehicles, information technologies, information systems,
technical services (such as communications services, period taxpayer surveys, office site
engineering surveys) and incremental recurrent operational cost items (such as information and
communications technologies licences and maintenance, communications charges, office and
related supplies, vehicle operations and maintenance).
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The State Tax Administration operates through a network of 450 + offices in cities and
towns throughout Ukraine. The modernization of the STA is an institutional development program
with little to no enviromental or social impact (beyond a gradual reduction in the geographic
presence of the STA and a gradual reduction in the required staffing levels). STA premises and
conventional administrative offices and do not create issues in relation to protected areas, critical
natural habitiats, or other culturally or socially sensitive areas.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments.
The project is not likely to involve any new construction or expansion, or demolition of
entire buildings. The civil works will deal mainly with refurbishment and remodelling activities
inside existing buildings.
Minor disturbances may be caused by noise, dust, disruptions associated with movement
of men, materials and equipment. Reconstruction wastes will have to be properly disposed of.
The TOR for the engineering consultants will include the obligation to incorporate into
the bidding documents appropriate environmental clauses and ensure that the construction
acitvities are carried out in accordance with adequate safety and environmental protection
measures. Special attention should be given to the proper handling and disposal of asbestos



4
ISDS
materials, mercury containing bulbs, and any other hazardous substances. Building wastes
containing asbestos will not be recycled and reused in construction activities financed by the
project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                             0 Yes * No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
none.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
none.
Il.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
none.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
none.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
See Section B above.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
none.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the



5
ISDS
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



6
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/A nalysis/Management Plan            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                           Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                   Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Craig R. Neal                                 April 28, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator. Jane E. Holt                               April 28, 2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Helga W. Muller                               April 28, 2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
| SEAflOH  .. I |EED8~      j LSrrE           SHOWCASE;



