Report No. 23745
Report No: I070937 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: URUGUAY         Project ID: P070937
Project: Third Basic Education Quality Improvement Project        Task Team
Leader: Ricardo Rocha Silveira
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 6, 2002     IBRD Amount ($m): 42.00
Bank Approval: April 25, 2002    IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSHE     Sector: EP - Primary Education
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objectives of this project are to: (i) increase equity in the
provision of education; and (ii) improve the quality of the labor force
to increase global competitiveness and economic growth. These objectives
will be achieved by: (i) expanding the full-time school model, which
focuses on students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds; (ii)
improving the quality of primary education by enhancing the teacher
training system and introducing new teaching and learning instruments in
the classroom; and (iii) increasing the efficiency of education
institutions.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Project Component 1 - Expansion of the Full-time School Model - US$47.98
million (77.4 percent of total project cost)
The main objective of this component is to expand the existing pedagogical
model of urban full-time schools (Escuelas de Tiempo Completo - ETCs) from
35,000 students to 78,000 students. The component will also adapt the
urban full-time school model to rural areas, covering some 8,000 students
in 172 rural schools with 30 students or more. Overall, the project will
cover approximately 86,000 students in ETCs or over one-fifth of the urban
and rural enrollment. The project will continue the efforts of MECAEP II
in improving the quality of primary education.
1.1 Construction, transformation, rehabilitation and equipping of full
time schools (US$36.7 million)
Under this sub-component, MECAEP III will provide the physical
infrastructure necessary to expand the full-time school model to benefit
an additional 51,000 students, representing approximately 13 percent of
total enrollment in public primary education. This will consist of: (i)
the construction of 540 full-time classrooms in disadvantaged and very
disadvantaged urban communities, equivalent to about 68 new schools,
covering nearly 17,000 students; (ii) the transformation and
rehabilitation of 816 classrooms in urban double shift schools into



full-time schools, by transferring students from one of the two shifts of
a regular school into new full-time schools and/or by rationalizing
regular school enrollment, involving 102 schools and benefiting around
26,000 students; and (iii) the rehabilitation of 434 rural classrooms (172
schools) to adapt them to the rural full time school model, benefiting
some 8,000 students, or about 41 percent of rural enrollment.
The project will finance civil works as well as the acquisition and
distribution of: (i) furniture for all the new classrooms and spaces built
during the project's execution and for approximately 15 percent of
existing classrooms being converted to the full-time school model; and
(ii) kitchen equipment for all full time schools created by the project.
1.2 Acquisition of school equipment, learning materials and school
libraries (US$5.76 million)
MECAEP III will equip the full-time schools being created and will ensure
that they are adequately provided with educational materials. The project
will finance the following school equipment and learning materials: (i)
one television set and audio equipment per school (and one additional set
for schools with bilingual program); (ii) one computer (including
educational software and large screen) per classroom for each full-time
school in urban areas (including those financed under MECAEP II) and one
computer (including educational software) per school in rural areas; (iii)
one set of learning materials per full-time school with eight classrooms
and two sets for schools with 16 classrooms, for primary level; (iv) one
set of preschool learning materials per school (with two preschool
classrooms); (v) one set of learning materials for each rural school; (vi)
one set of learning materials for each of the 164 bilingual classrooms;
and (vii) reading books and one year of textbooks for all full-time
schools.
1.3 Teacher training on the full time school model, new education
technologies, and bilingual education (US$3.5 million)
An evaluation of the teacher training component of MECAEP II found it to
be highly relevant to and capable of fulfilling the aspirations of
teachers. The new teacher training modules in MECAEP III build on the
experience of the previous project and introduce specific training in
bilingual education and new education technologies. The project will
finance training in: (i) the full-time school pedagogical model provided
to about 1,800 preschool and elementary schools teachers, principals,
inspectors,and teachers in administrative positions and (ii) new
educational technology to facilitate the integration of computers and new
educational technology into the classroom for some 3,700 teachers,
principals, and inspectors. The full-time school pedagogical model will
consist of two modules. The basic module will take 150 hours and will be
mandatory. The second module will take 80 hours, will be voluntary, and
will be implemented through workshops in social sciences, natural sciences
and language. Training in new technologies will consist of: (i) workshops
in Teacher Training Institutes on the use of new technologies; (ii) annual
follow-up training at the Regional Training Centers for resource teachers;
and (iii) tutorials for the resource teachers. The project will also
finance training for approximately 100 teachers taking part in a program
of partial immersion in English and Portuguese in 40 full-time schools,
- 2 -



benefiting a total of 4,900 students.
1.4 Strengthening the partnership between schools and parents (US$1.9
million)
Under MECAEP II, a school/parent partnership was forged to address the
needs of students in schools in particularly difficult social
environments. The purpose of this program has been to improve the
institutional climate inside the schools and to strengthen the
relationship between the school and the students' families. The program
introduced into each school a part-time, remunerated social worker intern
(a recently graduated or senior student) who is assisted by a team
consisting of a psychologist and four senior social workers. Together,
they work with teachers to identify children in need of special attention
and to develop a support program with the children's families. The
project will finance the contracting of the social support teams that will
enable the continuation of this program, thus making these services
available to 17,000 children in 72 schools. Each school will benefit from
the program for three years with a gradual reduction in activities over
time.
Project Component 2 - Institutional Strengthening - US$14.02 million (22.6
percent of total project cost)
MECAEP III will be instrumental in strengthening of the school and of the
overall education system. The project will enable education
administrators to reformulate the teaching training system on the basis of
the results of a series of diagnostic exercises to be carried out during
the project's first phase. The project will build on the experience of
MECAEP I in implementing educational development projects by expanding the
scope and number of schools covered, with a particular emphasis on
environmental and health education. The project will also continue to
finance student assessments and special sector studies.
2.1 Reforming teacher training (US$5.2 million)
The primary objectives of reforming the teacher training system are to
improve the academic training of teachers and to enhance the teaching
career. This will be done by revising the curriculum, developing a system
of professional standards, and making a systematic evaluation of the
teacher training institutes through exit tests for teachers. The project
will finance technical assistance for: (i) a diagnosis of the pre-service
and in-service teacher training programs; (ii) the development of
professional standards; (iii) an evaluation of pre-service teacher
training; (iv) curriculum development; (v) training of teacher trainers on
the new curriculum for reformed pre-service teacher training; and (vi)
in-service training program for tutors for teachers in practice. The
project will also finance improvements to the libraries and to the
physical structure of Teacher Training Institutes.
2.2 Development and implementation of PMEs (US$ 4.1 million)
The experience with PMEs under MECAEP I was very successful in terms of
improvements in academic achievement, in developing education planning
skills in school staff, and in bringing the community closer to the school
-3 -



by involving parents in the design and implementation of some of the
PMEs. The proposed project will finance 250 PMEs per year awarded on a
competitive basis in regular and full-time schools, 100 of which will
focus on environmental and health education. Each PME will receive an
average of US$3,000. While the project will finance some technical
assistance to help to implement the PMEs, regular PMEs will be implemented
by CEP staff, who were responsible for them during MECAEP I. During the
first year of the project, environmental and health education PMEs will be
entirely the responsibility of the MECAEP project implementation unit and
will gradually be transferred to the CEP.
2.3 Monitoring of the Education Program (US$2.3 million)
This sub-component will promote institutional strengthening by financing:
The ongoing development of the Research and Evaluation Department
(Gerencia de Investigaci6n y Evaluaci6n), which will absorb the Unidad de
Medici6n de Resultados Educativos (UMRE), which was created and financed
under MECAEP I. This department will be responsible for carrying out the
impact evaluations of programs and for the innovations in learning
achievements methods to be implemented at the primary and secondary
levels.
The implementation of the management information system for schools
(Sistema de SecretarUas Escolares). This subcomponent will deepen the
efforts to create an information system to capture information on
teachers, students, and school infrastructure from the schools themselves
(Sistema de SecretarUas Escolares). When the information system is fully
implemented, ANEP expects to have readily available and current
school-level data, thus enhancing the role that the schools play at the
center the education system.
The project will finance: (i) training for 2,400 teachers and directors,
200 inspectors and 20 administrative personnel on the use of basic and MIS
software; (ii) the purchase of computer equipment, software, and computer
furniture for schools (250 computers, 350 printers, and 100 furniture
sets); and (iii) technical assistance.
2.4 Project Administration (US$2.3 million)
The unit that has implemented MECAEP I and II will continue to be
gradually reduced as its functions are absorbed by ANEP, leaving only
those staff who will be carrying out core implementation activities of the
project. The project will finance: (i) the management of the procurement
activities of the project; (ii) the management of the financial and
physical execution of the project; and (iii) project monitoring and
evaluation.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented nation-wide. Construction of new schools
is expected to take place in urban areas, and in rural areas there will be
rehabilitation of some schools. No sites will involve protected or
- 4 -



culturally sensitive areas. A list of proposed sites can be found in the
project files.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
As in MECAEP II, the project includes the construction of new schools and
classrooms. This construction will take place in urban areas in Montevideo
and in the interior on public land not involving protected areas or
ecologically fragile. The government has made a decision that no sites
involving involuntary resettlement will be chosen for this project.
The project will follow local, national, and Bank environmental safety
standards and processes. In accordance with new Bank operational policies,
a separate environmental assessment (EA) has been issued and disclosed
publicly by the Government of Uruguay (GOU) and through the World Bank
Infoshop.
As the project supports the implementation of an environmental education
program, developed with the support of a Japanese grant, this operation is
expected to have a positive impact on the environment through school
improvement projects related to environmental and public health issues, as
well as through the inclusion of environment and public health themes in
the teacher-training curriculum.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The construction envisaged under the project will be small-scale, and will
consist of both construction of new classrooms and rehabilitation of
existing ones. These civil works have the typical potential environmental
impacts as enumerated in the EA, particularly in the areas of soils,
movement of terrain, green areas and vegetation, and noise and dust.
Given the small size of the individual work, these impacts are not
expected to be significant, and will be mitigated through adherence to
national, local, and Bank environmental and safety standards. No large
scale or irreversible impacts are anticipated.
- 5 -



II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Only one safeguard is triggered, so cumulative impacts due to the
application of more than one safeguard are not envisaged.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The environmental assessment carried out by the GOU focuses on four areas
where environmental aspects must be considered: (a) site selection; (b)
school design;
(c) school construction; and (d) ex-post supervision of construction works.
A. Site selection.
1. The Public Education National Administration (Administraci6n Nacional
de Educaci6n Publica) has identified 79 potential sites where 750 new
classrooms will be built throughout the country. Information on the
location of these proposed sites can be found in the project files. In
all cases, ANEP either owns the land, or the land will be donated by the
municipalities or other governmental organizations. A school map is
currently being generated on a Geographic Information System (GIS) and
should be completed during the implementation of the Third Basic Education
Quality Improvement Project.
2. Sites were chosen based on community needs for additional schools, and
then specific lots chosen based on geographic, topographic, and locational
(e.g., traffic pattern) characteristics. The specific process involves
site visits and studies to analyze the following:
n Urban, suburban, or rural characteristics, and municipal regulations
affecting the proposed lot
n Accessibility and distance to inhabited areas
n Land ownership
n Verification of squatters and other potential legal problems with land
acquisition (in this operation only sites with clear land titles and no
squatters will be selected)
n Geographic and orographic characteristics
n Soils and subsoils
n Contamination of site by lead or other pollutants, according to
prevailing regulations
n Flora and fauna characteristics, and regulations governing wildlife
habitats
n Historic, cultural, and community characteristics
The EA spells out an environmental management plan (EMP) that restricts
selection of sites that, among other things, pose undue risk to historic
or cultural areas, flora, or fauna, and those that are located in
protected areas or on former landfills. Neither can sites be located
- 6 -



within 1500 meters of industries whose emissions pose air quality dangers
or that pose other safety hazards. The EMP also restricts sites that are
affected by undue noise or noxious odors, are in flood plains, or on
steep slopes. Sites where basic infrastructure (e.g., potable water,
sewage system, and solid waste collection and disposable) already exists
and can support the new school are preferred. Where basic infrastructure
is not sufficient, the school design must include a plan to expand or
create such a system.
Upon completing the above analysis, the following agencies are contacted
to verify and provide further details on issues affecting the proposed
site:
n Ministry of Housing, Land, and Environment (National Department of
Environment - DINAMA), regarding water and pollution control.
n Ministry of Public Works, regarding roads
n National Department of Hydrography, regarding possible flooding issues
n National Department of Catastro
n National Administration of Electricity
n State Administration of Sanitation Works, Subministry of Water,
regarding sanitation issues.
n Municipal Department of Construction, regarding regulations and master
plans for the communities
n Municipal Department of Works, regarding exiting infrastructure and
future plans
The National Education Council approves the final selection of sites, once
this analysis is completed.
B. School design.
Upon site acquisition (whether through purchase or donation), school
designs are formulated through a consultation process involving local
education authorities, including the Primary Education Council,
Departmental Supervisors, and the community, through the Promotion
Commissions of each school. School designs follow local, national and
Bank norms regarding public health, hygiene, and construction quality, and
also follow criteria of the Public Education National Administration
(ANEP). ANEP criteria include, but are not limited to, consideration of
the following:
n Security and handicapped provisions
n Heating
n Ventilation
n Natural and artificial light
n Square footage per student
Potable water (designs must guarantee the quantity, quality, regularity
and positive pressure of the water supply system; they must also ensure
that systems are protected from contamination and that there is an
adequate maintenance system in place)
n Number of students per bathroom (to ensure there are adequate facilities
and sanitation systems to accommodate increased enrollment and longer days
spent in school)
n Sanitation (designs must choose canal systems that will minimize
leakage, that are easy to maintain and preferably do not require
- 7 -



electromechanical elements. In cases where there is no water and
sanitation system, a treatment process is designed that must be approved
by the Ministry of Housing)
n Historic and cultural considerations (in cases where construction may
affect culturally or historically important areas, the Ministry of
Education and Culture must approve the project)
Solid waste disposal (designs must guarantee that the new school is
covered by a public solid waste collection system, or design a system if
the new school is not served by an existing network)
In addition, permits are required for sanitation systems, electrical
hook-ups, effluent discharge, and road construction.
During the school design phase, the following organizations are
consulted:
n UTE - regarding electrical and energy connections and regulations
n OSE (Office of Potable Water and Sanitation)
n DINAMA - in case a water and sanitation system does not exist, the
project will formulate a design for water treatment that must be approved
by this office. In addition, if a site has been identified as having
special environmental considerations, DINAMA must approve the school's
final design.
C. School construction.
Contractors are required to comply with national and municipal regulations
governing the environment, public health, and safety. In general,
contractors must ensure that the project does not adversely affect the
surrounding infrastructure, vegetation, and water and electrical
connections in the area, nor inhibit access to public places by community
members or pose a public safety hazard.
Among other things, contractual clauses require adherence to:
Materials procurement guidelines to avoid asbestos, lead paint, scarce
timber sources, or arsenic-containing wood for any works with which
children may come into direct contact;
Proper solid and liquid waste disposal;
Good behavior around local people; ,
Consultation with appropriate authorities before design changes are made;
Specified hours to undertake work creating excessive noise;
Provision of temporary latrines for workers;
Provision for the adequate disposal of construction waste;
Minimization of vegetation removal, protection of trees when possible,
and when not, replanting with native species.
Public safety standards.
During this phase, the following organizations are consulted:
n Municipal officials, regarding the project and its compliance with local
norms.
n Ministry of Labor, regarding safety and public hygiene considerations
n OSE and UTE, regarding provisionary installations during construction
n Technological Laboratory of Uruguay (LATU) and its engineering faculty -
- 8 -



regarding quality of construction materials.
D. Ex-post evaluation.
MECAEP will carry out an ex-post supervision of all new construction to
ensure that the schools meet quality standards and that no permanent or
temporary negative environmental impacts are occurring as a result of the
construction.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are community members where schools are being built
or renovated. Upon site acquisition (whether through purchase or
donation), school designs are formulated through a consultation process
involving local education authorities, including the Primary Education
Council, Departmental inspectors, and the community through the Planning
Commissions of each local education group.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     2/12/2002       2/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 2/19/2002       2/28/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop  2/14/2002       2/27/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank     Not Applicable  Not Applicable
-9-



Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Ricardo Rocha Silveira   March 27, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Karla J. McEvoy March 27, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name     Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Juan D. Quintero        March 27, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         William Experton        March 27, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 10 -



