ISDS
TiE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                AWo,rI1:FrauoI PnYrlrty
InfoShop
Report No: AC87
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UZBEKISTAN                             Project ID: P070084
Project: Public Finance Management Reform Project  Task Team Leader: Roland Clarke
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 4, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m): 10.00
Bank Approval: July 6, 2004                     IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSPE                            Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Public expenditure; financial management
Status: Lending                                 and procurement (P); Standards and financial
reporting (P); Other accountability/anti-corruption
(P); Macroeconomic management (S); Other
economic management (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The proposed Public Finance Management Reform Project (PFMP) aims at improving fiscal
management, public governance and transparency in Uzbekistan. Its main objectives are:
*  Improving overall fiscal discipline and strategic resource allocation by placing the state budget
into a medium-term perspective and developing medium-term policy reviews;
*  Ensuring effective budget execution and oversight by streamlining payment authorization
arrangements, budget monitoring and reporting;
*  Improving efficiency of expenditure and financial management through the establishment of a
Treasury, centralization of cash balances, better financial planning, and progressive development of
line ministries' reports on performance;
*  Increasing transparency and accountability by strengthening financial controls and internal audit
capacity, improving accounting and reporting, and publishing regularly budget documents and other
general purpose public finance reports.
I.A.3. Project Description:



2
ISDS
]. Budget Preparation
To improve overall expenditure control and intersectoral resource allocation, the Project will assist the
government in streamlining the budget preparation process, with a view to: (i) building effective financial
constraints into the budget preparation process; (ii) placing the annual budget into a multi-year
perspective to assess sustainability of budget policies and to identify needed policy changes; (iii)
establishing a close coordination between budget preparation and investment programming.
The Project will support the implementation of the following activities:
*  Preparation of a three-year rolling MTBF in close coordination with budget preparation. The MTBF
will be fully consistent with the macro-economic framework and will cover all revenues and
expenditures, regardless of their economic nature and financing source. Expenditures in the MTBF will
be presented by broad programs and/or line ministries. The MTBF will focus on the forward fiscal
impact of existing policies and identifying the major policy changes to be decided on when preparing the
budget. The MTBF will be supplemented by an assessment of fiscal risks related to explicit and implicit
contingent liabilities, as well as by the strategy for dealing with revenue volatility.
*  Preparation of a policy paper and initial ceilings to frame budget preparation within line ministries,
with a view to encouraging line ministries to prioritize their programs. This policy paper and the initial
ceiling will be submitted to the COM at the outset of the budget preparation cycle and line ministries will
have to prepare their budget requests within the ceilings approved by the COM. When the MTBF process
will be fully operational, these ceilings will be in large part derived from the MTBF prepared the
previous year.
* Strengthening of coordination between annual budget preparation and investment programming (joint
review by the MOF and MOMS of the capital and current budget, estimation of recurrent costs of
investment to be included in the MTBF, etc.). The budget and the annual investment program should be
submitted to Parliament and voted together.
*  Improving the format and the content of budget submissions prepared by line ministries. These
submissions should distinguish the costs related to existing programs and give the forward fiscal impact
of proposed policy changes for the MTBF projections. They should include brief narrative statements
and indicators on the expected results.
2. Budget Implementation and Cash Management
To assure effective controls over budget implementation and to improve cash management efficiency, the
Project will assist the government in improving its budget implementation and cash management
procedures. Activities in these areas will include:
*  Setting up a robust in-year financial planning system with a view to ensuring smooth implementation
of the budget and improving the preparation of borrowing plans. Methods for forecasting in-year cash
inflows and outflows will be improved. The budget implementation plan should be rolled over quarterly
and notified to spending agencies, as well as the monthly cash limits.
*  Introduction of improved rules for appropriation management that meet accountability, expenditure
control and efficiency of program implementation requirements, including: (i) more precise definition of
the scope of authority given by Parliament; (ii) separation of the release of the authority to spend from
the provision of cash; and (iii) review of rules for transfers between budget items.
*  Setting up a Single Treasury Account at the CBU through which all cash flows will be channeled.
Budgetary accounts of all spending units will be zero-balance accounts (except perhaps a few cases such
as special accounts of donor projects or accounts of remote agencies). Extrabudgetary fund accounts



3
IS DS
financed by earmarked taxes should also be integrated into the Treasury Single Account (special
arrangements for the Pension Funds to be defined). Alternative variants of the payment system will need
to be evaluated during the Project preparation stage (see "Areas requiring further discussion" below).
*  Review of banking arrangements. A limited number of banks should be selected on a competitive
basis to be fiscal agents. A more transparent system of remuneration for both tax and expenditure
administration by the banks is required. Clearance procedures must be established to ensure an effective
functioning of the Single Treasury Account.
Taking into account the fact that about 50% of general government expenditures are made by the
subnational governments, these modernization measures should be implemented at every level of
government. However, it will be necessary during the preparatory phase of the project to specify some of
these measures depending on the level of government.
3. Financial Control and Audit
Control over cash and payment transactions is a necessary but not sufficient condition for improved fiscal
control: effective management control systems are also required. Although it will not address the broad
range of issues related to management control, the Project will address the following specific measures:
*  Strengthening of internal audit and ex-post control by the MOF, notably audits of commitment and
payment transactions, and other decisions with fiscal impact, should be carried out frequently by the
Control Division of the MOF (or a Treasury financial inspection).
*  Establishment of ex-ante MOF financial control for commitments of a significant size and multi-year
commitments.
*  Preparation of regulations to clarify responsibilities and duties of staff involved in expenditure and
money management, including the establishment of internal procedures for dual control and the review of
the system of sanctions.
The issue of external audit is under discussion as the Budget Committee of Parliament is interested in
assistance in this area. Upon receipt of a request from Parliament, the feasibility of assistance will be
decided and the Project team will try to activate bilateral or other donor assistance in establishing a SAI.
T'his would include assistance from the INTOSAI or an INTOSAI member in (i) reviewing institutional
issues; (ii) preparing an activity program; (iii) assessing staffing requirement; (iv) preparing the legal
framework. The SAI will carry out regularity and performance audit, and will certify the year-end
accounts of the government. The reports of the SAI should be published and discussed by the Parliament.
4. Monitoring and Accounting
The Project will assist the government in streamlining the budget reporting system, including:
*  Daily (or weekly) reports on cash expenditure and revenue transactions by broad economic
categories.
*  Monthly reports on appropriations, apportionments and released authority to spend, commitments,
verification/actual expenditures financed by both domestic and foreign sources, and cash transactions
along the budget classification.
* Draft annual budget report produced within 2 months and submitted to the Parliament and SAI.
To produce these reports spending units will have to keep a commitment register. This should not pose
major problems since spending units already account for expenditures at the verification stage which



4
ISDS
differ from commitments in the budgetary sense only for contracts and orders that are not fulfilled during
the accounting period. Under the Project cash payment transactions will be automated, and also
warrants/certificates, the budget implementation plan and commitments (contracts) transactions above a
defined threshold will be automated.
In addition to the above financial reports, the preparation of reports on the performance of budgetary
organizations, including indicators on the results achieved (e.g. line ministries reports, policy reviews,
and investment expenditure report) will need to be initiated.
To improve accountability and transparency, the Project will also assist the government in defining what
budgetary documents should be made public (Budget in Brief and presentation of budget forecasts).
5. Chart of Accounts
The Project will assist the government in improving its Chart of Accounts. The Chart of Accounts
(including budget classification) must be comprehensive and cover, among other things, all budgetary
transactions (appropriations and uses of appropriation at each stage of the expenditure cycle), including
expenditures financed by foreign sources. The budget classification must meet the needs for policy and
fiscal analysis (including production of analytical reports in accordance with GFS), and for administering
the budget within a computerized environment. Accordingly, an appropriate coding system will be set up.
Some accounting procedures (e.g., as noted above, accounting for commitments) will also be reviewed.
6. Organizational Arrangements
The Project will assist the government in establishing appropriate organizational arrangements to
perform the financial functions related to cash and debt management, financial assets management,
financial planning and cash flow forecasting, accounting and reporting. A working group composed of
MOF, tax agencies, CBU, MOMS, and others will be established to prepare in-year financial plans. A
Treasury Department responsible for, among other financial activities, coordination of in-year financial
planning, cash management, budget implementation, financial supervision and control of all government
bank accounts will be set up. The organization of the Treasury Department and its staffing needs will
depend largely on the design of the payment processing system. To limit recurrent costs, reallocation or
better definition of responsibilities of existing MOF staff at the rayon level should be systematically
sought in preference to recruitment of new staff under the Project.
7. Information Systems
The Project will provide assistance in setting up an appropriate budget preparation system. In the longer
term the budget submissions of all line ministries should be submitted electronically. To ensure
timeliness and accuracy in reporting and to automate budget preparation and budgetary controls, the
Project will assist the government in implementing a FLS that will include:
*  A core accounting system where all government financial transactions (or summaries of transactions
along the chart of accounts) and events will be registered. This core accounting system and the revised
chart of accounts will define the data exchange standard for all government financial management
systems.
*  A budget execution system that will: (i) register all payment transactions, summaries for actual
expenditures and commitments; (ii) register appropriations and apportionment of appropriations; (iii)
control uses of appropriations against authority to spend; (iv) produce all required budget execution
reports.
* Electronic links between: (i) FLS subsystems; and (ii) the FLS and the bank systems. In the longer



5
ISDS
term, the development of spending agency budget management systems, linked with FLS and fitting its
data exchange standards will be desirable. The design of the FLS will have to take into account these
needs for possible future development.
A phased approach for developing and implementing the FLS will be adopted. It will be necessary during
the preparatory phase of the Project to review: (i) the possible architectures of the system (e.g.
centralization of payment transactions either at the rayon level or at the oblast level), and (ii) the different
options for application development. Investment and recurrent costs of each variant will be assessed.
Areas Requiring Further Discussion
As noted above, two variants, or a combination of the variants, for streamlining payment processing are
currently being considered under the Project: Variant I -- Payment transactions initiated by the spending
agencies, but controlled and processed by the Treasury; and Variant 2 -- Monthly spending limits notified
by the Treasury to the bank selected as fiscal agent with the payment requests sent by the spending units
clirectly to this bank. Cost-effectiveness of these variants will be assessed during the preparatory phase of
the Project. Variant 1 requires substantial changes in MOF and Line Ministries organization. Variant 2
requires an upgrading of the information system used by banks for tracking budget transactions (system
AISCB) and incorporating in this system the control of payment transactions against the smetas and
certificates. The revised AISCB system should be seen as a subsystem of the FLS. When designing the
payment system, it will be necessary to take into account needs for efficient management. In a limited
number of cases (such as remote units and donors projects), it may be necessary to supplement the
variants described above with a system of imprest accounts.
Ilndicative Project Implementation Plan
Phase                                            Yr 1   Yr2    Yr3    Yr4    Yr5    Yr 6
Choice of the variant for the payment system    x
Reform of procedures
Budget preparation                             x      x
Budget implementation                          x      x
Information systems
Functional design of the FLS; preparation of IT  x    x
blueprint, IT modernization plan, and tender
documents.
Selection of Budget and Treasury package(s) and  x    x
software integrator(s); selection of hardware vendors,
possibly selection of telecom operators.
Application development and IT training               x       x
Implementation of the core accounting system.         x       x
Implementation of the revised payment monitoring
system within the banks if Variant 2 of the payment
system is selected)
Implementation of the budget preparation system               x
Implementation of the budget execution systems at             x
pilot sites
Systems replication                                                  x      x      x



6
ISDS
Cost Estimates
The Project cost estimates are based on the assumption that the hardware and software costs of the new
payment system and FLS are capped at around US$7.7 million due to the overall Project envelope, but
experience in similar projects suggests that the costs risk being much higher than this envelope. This will
require a careful evaluation during the preparatory phase of the variants, or their combination, for
payment processing, system architecture and development. The implementation of the FLS should also
be carefully phased and focused, in order to get substantial benefits in terms of efficiency of public
resource use, even if the FLS coverage is not comprehensive. Special attention must be given to recurrent
costs issues when reviewing the possible variants.
The Government will bear a part of the Project preparation and implementation cost by financing
incremental operating costs, including dedicated staff at the Ministry of Finance which will be
performing functions of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Installation of the telecommunication and
networking equipment linking local financial departments to the center which will facilitate the
establishment of an FLS and introduction of the payment system, is also being fully financed by the own
resources of the Government. Duties, if any are applicable, on imports of hardware and software under
the Project are being estimated at 30%, subject to confirmation during appraisal. Additional areas for
government counterpart financing and the level of this financing will be quantified during project
preparation.
Components
I.  Technical Assistance
I . Policy and Design
(a) Designing and implementing MTBF and improved budget preparation processes, and review of
budgetary
documents.
(b) Developing improved in-year financial planning methods.
(c) Designing streamlined budget implementation procedures and payment system; review of reporting
requirements; review of the legal/regulatory framework.
(d) Reviewing the Chart of Accounts.
(e) Reviewing banking arrangements.
(f) Setting up an independent national audit office.
2.  System Iplementation
(a) Development of functional requirements of the FLS and the budget preparation system.
(b) Specification of hardware, telecom network and software requirements.
(c) Preparation of the tender documents for hardware procurement, packaged software parameterization
and/or specific software programming.
(d) Selection of hardware and software vendors and integrators.
(e) Project management and assistance in implementation.
II. Equipment and Software
(a) Equipment and application software for budget preparation at MOF Headquarters.
(b) Equipment: servers, workstations, routers, modems and other associated peripherals, systems
software,           application development tools, and development.
(c) Office equipment and training facilities.



7
ISDS
(d) Country-wide network design and installation.
III. Training and Management of Change
(a) Technical assistance for development of an overall training strategy.
(b) State-of-the-art courses and certifications for IT staff (operating systems, networks).
(c) IT staff training on future system specifics.
(d) End-users training on future system.
(e) Seminars, project-related events, project communication tools, study tours for government officials.
I'V. Operating Costs
V'. Contingencies
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: There is no civil works or reconstruction associated with the project.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes * No    O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
clescribe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
clue to multiple project component.



8
ISDS
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Since the Project is rated C, no Environmental Assessment of the Project is required.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the Project are the MOF, line ministries, the Parliament, and the general public.
It is proposed to establish working groups comprising staff of the MOF and line ministries, both at
management and technical levels, and bringing Parliament staff as needed, to enable participation of
these key stakeholders in the Project development and implementation. A participatory process for the
general public needs to be determined.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Fnvironmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual



9
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                   Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sined and submitted by         Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Roland Clarke                                 5/21/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Alexandre Marc                             5/22/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Helga W. Muller                              5/23/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEED8ACK       SrTE MA        SHOWCASE



