ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorti rec ol rovorty
lI-nfoShop
Report No AC12
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UZBEKISTAN                               Project ID: P009127
Project: DRAINAGE, IRRIGATION AND WETLANDS Task Team Leader. Masood Ahmad
IMPROVEMENT PHASE-I PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date December 18, 2002     IBRD AmouL1t ($n) 35 00
Bank Approval. June 24, 2003                      IDA Amounit ($ni) 25 00
Managinig Unit. ECSSD                             Sector Irrigation and drainage (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investmenit Loan (SIL)  Theme Water resource maniagemiien1t (P), Rural
Status: Lendinig                                  services and infrastructure (S); Civic engagement,
participation and community driven developmelit (S)
Social risk mitigation (S)
I A.2. Project Objectives:
Main development objectives of the Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement Phase-I Project
(DIWIP-I) are to. (iicrease productivity of i-rigated agriculture, employment and incomes in
Karakalpakstan, one of the poorest regions in Central Asia; (b) improve the water quality of the Amu
Darya river by the safe disposal of the drainage effluenit, and enhanice the quality of wetlands in the Amu
Darya delta; and (c) development of institutions for improving water management, operation and
maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation and drainage systems, and for promoting sustaiiiable irrigated
agriculture through participatory irrigation managemenit
The project is part of the Aral Sea Basin Program (ASBP) approved by the heads of five Central Asian
States in 1994. In Uzbekistan, in particular in Amu Darya basin, the soils are saline aiid drainage systems
are inadequate. The common practice is to apply large quanitities of water for leaching the soils of salts.
This practice, in the absence of adequate drainage, resembles more to washilig the salts from the soil
sLirface. It results in shallow groundwater water levels and causes, througlh capillary action, the salts in
the soil profile to be broughlt to the stirface. By improving drainage, the project would be the first
meaningful intervention in the Aral Sea Basin to break this vicious cycle of high water applications,
waterlogging and secondary soil salinization, henice requirinig again higl water applications for leaching
the next season. The project would make a start in addressing this problem by substantially imiprovinig
drainage conditions and significanitly improving water use efficiency in the irrigation sector. It would
help sustain the livelihood of the 400,000 people in one of the poorest region of the Central Asia



2
ISDS
Key elements of the project strategy include (a) improving the irrigation and drainage practices in the
project area, hence improving water use efficiency, and reducing the amount of drainage effluent
generated and the amount of salt mobilized by the drainage water, (b) the safe disposal of drainage
effluent throughi a drainage chaniel leading to the Aral Sea instead of discharging the effluent into the
Amu Darya, thus improvinig the water quality of the Amu Darya; (c) improvinig the irrigation and
drainage infrastructure in the South Karakalpakstan area, and (d) establishinig Water Users Associations
(WUAs), and promoting sustainable irrigated agriculture through participatory irrigation management,
establishing a farmers' informiationi services desk, together withi crop and on-farm  irrigation
demonstrations and farmers' training aiming at improving current cultivation, cropping and irrigation
practices  All these measures combined would increase agriculture productioni and increase farmers'
incomes in the project area. The project would constitute the first phase of a long-term program for
improving irrigation and drainage on the right bank of Amu Darya in Uzbekistan.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project is located in the Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan and would constitute (i)
improving the safe disposal of the drainage effluelt discharged from a nearly 100,000 ha irrigated area In
South Karakalpakstan, (ii) the rehabilitation of the irrigation and drainage (I&D) infrastructure within
this area, includinig the I&D systems serving the formesovkhoze and kolkhoze (FSKs) orshirkats, and
also the I&D systems withini the FSKs; (iii) the protection and enihancemilent of several wetlands and
archaeological sites; and (iv) the establishmelit of water user associations (WUAs) to operate and
maintain the l&D systems withilin the FSKs. The preparation of the next project would be supported under
the project and would focus on the improvement of the drainiage disposal systems in the Kashkadarya and
Bukhiara Vilayats.
Component A: South Karakalpakstan Drainage Disposal System.
The drainage effluent from SK would be disposed off to the Aral Sea by connectinig the existing collector
drains in the area to the partially constructed Southi Karakalpakstan Main Collector (SKMC), which
would take this effluelt to the Akchadarya Main Drain (AMD), which is also partly constructed but
requires completion The major drain thus formed, namely the South Karakalpakstan Main Drain
(SKMD), WLould be the backbone of the draiiiage system in SK, starting near the Amii Darya in the east
and running along the northeril boundary of the project area and then conveying the drainage effluent to
the Aral Sea The existing collectors connecting to the SKMD would be cleaned and rehabilitated in
order for the whole drainage system to work effectively.
South Karakalpakstan Main Collector (SKMC). Works for the about 100 km long SKMC include (a)
remodeling the BeruIni collector drain (CD) [21.8 kin], which currenitly drains into the Amu Darya, in
order to reverse its flow towards the Akcha Darya, thereby eliminating the need for the Beruni pumping
station; (b) linking the Beruni CD withi the Ayazkala CD, mostly througil the existing EK-2 and
Kyzylkurn CDs (in total 35 4 km), which for that purpose will be enlarged, this will eliminiate the need
for the Kyzylkum pumping station; (c) enlarginig the existing Ayazkala CD (43 5 kin) up to its outfall in
the Akcha Darya. T'he design capacity of the SKMC has been set at 25 m3/s at its juliction with the
AMD    SKMC flow would pass through the two existing wetlands I and 11, whichi would be combilled to
develop a larger wetland. Additional works for regulating the flows to, and water levels in these
wetlands may be carried out to eiihanlce the environmental, biodiversity and social worth of these
wetlands



3
ISDS
Akchadarya Main Drain (AMD) The AMD will coniect the SKMC with the Jana Darya, an old (dry)
river bed of the Syr Darya which runs to the Aral Sea The AMD will mainly follow the existing Akcha
Darya chaniel (an old Amu Darya river bed) over a lengthi of about 200 km Its construction has been
partially completed over a stretch of about 40 km, starting from its juLiction with the SKMC, constructionl
has been mostly completed for the next stretch of about 80 km, while construIction on the remaining 80
km up to the Jana Darya has not yet started
Works to be carried out for the SKMC and the AMD would include channel excavation, chalilnel
protection works to prevent breaches that could damage the actively grazed rangelanid or important
archaeological sites; providing crossings for livestock; wetland control structures, and, the provision of
hydrometric gauging stations.
Improvements to Collector Drains (CDs;elective improvements will be made to the main and
secondary CDs in Southi Karakalpakstan (in the Berunli, Ellikala and Turtkul Tumanis) The works may
include general CD cleaning, deepenilg where required,  removal of constrictions, hydraulic and
protection works at the junctions with the SKMC, and selective rehabilitation of other related canal
structures
Component B: Irri2ation Improvements and Command Area Development.
The main objective of the Irrigation and Drainage (I&D) componenit would be to promote sustainable
irrigated agriculture in SK through rehabilitation/imiprovements in I&D infrastructure and techilical
assistance to improve reliability and efficiency of irrigation and drainage systems. The component would
include the development of participatory irrigation management, rehabilitationi of key irrigation
infrastructure; I&D improvements withil .the areas managed by the WUAs, improving operation and
mainteniance (O&M) and water management, and the promotion of improved irrigation and agricultiral
practices. Necessary technical assistance would be provided to achieve these objectives.
Development of Water Users Associations.WUAs wvould be established in the Beruni and Turtkul
Tumans, following the same concepts as developed and agreed for the Ellikala Tuman under the on-going
Rural Enterprise Support Project (RESP). Main features include, the development of a two-tiered system
of organizations, WUGs covering a hydrological unit, and WUAs consisting of several WUGs for l&D
managemenit on the territories of the formiersovkoze and kolkhoze (FSKs), that is on areas of about 1,500
to 3,000 ha. The WUAs would participate in irrigation managemilenit, in particular in water distribution,
O&M of the system and collection of water charges. They would also identify and prioritize the
rehabilitation works to be undertakeni and participate in monitoring of their implementation
TA and Training for Improving I&D and Agricultural Practicesin addition to the development of
WUAs, the technical assistance and training under this componenit aims at iiicreasinig agricultural
production in the project area throughi three main activities (a) Farmers' Participatory Training, involving
training of specific target groups in various agro-technical fields and farm  managemenit, (b)
demonstration of improved and moderil technologies to increase production, improve water uIse
efficiencies and reduce environimental degradation. For this purpose demonstrationi plots would be
developed in the Beruni and Turtkul Tumanis and equipment and services for laser land leveling would be
provided, as well as limited agricultural extensioni services; and (c) the establishmenit of a Farmers'
Information Services Desk in the project area to provide relevanit information to farmers through different
means (pamphlets, videos, radio, T.V, weekly papers etc) to advise them on making their farms more
productive and sensitive to emerging market demands.



4
ISDS
I&Dlmprovements within the areas managed by the WUAienerally these areas forli one
hydrological unit (possibly two in some cases) and are served with water by the district level irrigation
organizationi (raiselvodkhoz) Critical infrastructure would be improved as prioritized by the WUAs and
WUGs. The average investmenit costs would be limited to $130 per ha  This investmenit should be
sufficient to remove the most critical bottlenecks in the I&D systems controlled by the WlJAs The works
may also include land leveling and/or the constructioni of additional field drains.
Main and secondary irrigation system improvements Selective improvements will be made to the
main and secondary irrigation canals (ICs) in SK covering the Beruni, Turtkul and Ellilaka Tumanls. It is
envisaged that improvements will concentrate on rehabilitationi of water control structures (especially the
rehabilitation of control gates and provisions for flow measurement up to and including the intake gates
for the WUAs), removinig constrictions if any, canal cleaning, etc.
Environmental Management Plan (EMIP) WorksThis involves the required mitigation works as
identified in the environmental managemenit plan, including but not limited to protection works for the
Badai Tugai (Forest) Reserve; installation of monitoring wells for archaeological sites; other monitoring
equipment; measures, if any, for Lake Ayazkala; livestock passages across the AMD, costs for buffer
zones along the SKMC and AMD, etc. lo the extent possible EMP works would be included in the
drainage and irrigation component/conitacts Only the works whicil cannot be incorporated in these
contracts would be carried out separately.
Component C: Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project Impact and Environmental Management
Plan
The M&E activities would provide continuous feedback to the MAWR, the Government of
Karakalpakstan, the Karakalpakstan Project Coordination Committee (KPCC), the PIU and other
implementation agencies, on the project's performance and impact of its various componenits, so that
corrective actions could be undertaken in a timely mannier. Particularly, the implementationi of the
environmental managemenit plan (EMP) would be monitored carefully. The M&E activities are thus
likely to cover, but not limited to: (i) environmenital impact of constructioni activities in the project area in
particular of the SKMC and AMD on archaeological sites, including the handlinlg of any "chance-finids"
of archaeologically importanit objects, affected wetlands, populationi and livestock, as well as (ii) the
impact of the l&D improvements in the command area on ground water levels and quality, and soil
salinity; irrigation water supply and drainage flows; on-farm water use; water use efficiency at various
levels; cropping patterns and yields, and livestock population, health and production, and (ill) the impact
on the level of unemploymiient and household incomes in the project area, estimationi of the project's
overall benefits and economic rate of returns etc
Component D: Proiect Management, Institutional Development and Training
This component would support the Governmenit in implementinig the project and prepare a follow-on
project It would include (a) support for the operation of the PIU, and financing of overall project
managemilent, as well as technical assistance in such areas as detailed design, contract administration and
construction supervision, procurement, financial management, and agricultural development, (b) a
modest institutionial strengthening program includinig (i) introductioni of modern tools for irrigation
scheduling in the project area, at the project level and at the tuman and raiselvodkhoz level; (ii)
assistance with budgeting and accounting for project O&M; and (iii) training and study tours; (c) a study
for improving water management in the Uzbekistan's Amu Darya river basin, the operation of key



5
ISDS
hydraulic infrastructure on the river, in particular operation of Tuyamuyun reservoir and Takhiatash
barrage durinig extreme flood and drought periods, passing controlled floods for maintaininig chaniel
conveyanice capacity and managed flooding of lands next to the river where it is desirable such as Badai
Tugai forest, and (d) project preparation (feasibility studies and preparation of bidding documents) for a
Phase 1I project possibly includinig development of drainage and disposal systems in the Karslil and
Bukhara area. This would involve the finanicilg of consultilng services, equipmenit and software. These
studies would be carried out jointly with Turkmenistan in order to develop common solutions for
disposal of drainage effluent from Karshi and Bukhara areas.
L.A 4. Project Location: (Geographic location, informationi about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project irrigation command area and the proposed drainage disposal system, lie wholly withlini the
Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan, in the lower Amu Darya basin. South Karalpakstan (SK) is one
of the poorest regions in Central Asia and much of the populationi has incomes that are less than the
UN-defined poverty line of US$2/day/person. The command area lies within the three districts of Soutil
Karakalpakstan. Beruni, Turtkul, and Ellikala  The proposed main outfall drain towards the Aral Sea
crosses the Takhtakupir District in North Karakalpakstan  The maini beneficiaries are about 400,000
people living in the command area in South Karakalpakstan (SK) where irrigated agriculture and
agriculture related activities are by far the main source of employment and incomiles for the populatioll.
The livelihood in this area depends solely on the Amu Darya, the flow of which is regulated by the
Tuyamayuni dam. The area is also intersected by the old river channels of Amu Darya, includinig the
dried up Akcha Daiya.
The project is aimed at reversing the environmental degradation caused due to in adequate
drainage, and mismanagement of land and water resources and hence is expected to have a
positive environmental impact. With the improvements in drainage and irrigation under the
project, agricultural production and farmers' incomes are expected to increase significantly.
Other population groups affected by the project area are:
Herding communities in the Akcha Darya basin Grazinig land used by farms from both North and Southi
Karalpakstan is located in the Akcha Darya basin. The main settlement in this area Is Chukurkak. The
families that use this settlement as their base also belong to an agricultural shirkat and have linkages with
the irrigated land in SK. The residents of Chukurkak are concerned about the project because some of
their rangelands in the Akcha Darya valley and delta were flooded in 1998, when a portion of the flood
waters released from Tuyamuyun reservoir were intentionially routed througIl the project area's irrigation
and drainage system and through the Akcha Darya chaninlel. This was mainly due to the fact that the
Akcha Darya Main Drain (AMD) to the Aral Sea was not yet completed. However, the event led to
considerable complaints from the local populationi and especially the livestock herders. The herders are
also concerned that the draiii could cut them off from their grazing lands.
Fishing communities at Lake AyazkalaThe project may have some impact on the populationi of
Ayazkalinskim village, some of whom are believed to derive some benefits from Lake Ayazkala. Most of
this population also are members of a shirkat linked to the irrigated area of SK. With closure of the lake,
currenit residents will not be able to continiue to fish in the lake Nonetheless, most residents in this area
have already moved during the past two years, or have expressed a desire to move their fishing
operations to another lake in the area because fishing in AyazKala lake is not commercially viable and
fish stocks are declining yearly.



6
ISDS
Workers at the Beruni and Kyzylkum pump statiousBecause the project will result in the closing of
these  pump stations, the approximately 20 persons, who work in the pumping stations and are
government employees, will need to be transferred to other jobs. While MAWR intenids to transfer these
workers at to other jobs in the regioni, assuranices would be obtained at the thime of negotiations that these
workers would be provided employment
The project may also touch upon archaeological sites and would affect some wetlands, includinig a nature
reserve as described in II.D. 1.a below
B. Clleck Environmental Classifiication: A (Full Assessment)
Commr71ents
The project is aimed at reversing the environmental degradation caused due to in adequate drainage, and mismana
and hence has overall positive envirolimental impact The project itself is in fact an environmental maniagemilenit/mii
waterlogging and salinity, improving the quality of the Amu Darya water, and wetlands and biodiversity in the An
Environmiental Category "A" due to the major constructioni activities it will support and the chaniges it may have o
environimental assessment process also provides a mechaniism for rigorous review of the proposed actions and fo
decision making process.
C. SafeguardPolicies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                     * Yes C No    C TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4 04)                             *Yes C No     C9 TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                        CYes * No       TBD
Pest Management (OP 4 09)                                    G Yes * No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                * Yes C No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 G Yes * No    GTBD
Involulitary Resettlement (OP/BP 4 12)                       I Yes * No    C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  * Yes CJ No   O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes   ) No  'C- TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                  C Yes * No    (D TBD
*By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejtudice thefinal determination of the parties'cla/ims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summnary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions If information is n7ot available,
describe steps to be iaken to obtain necessary data
LI.D Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significanit and/or irreversible impacts
The most significant issues are: (a) the protection of archaeological sites; (b) the issues related to Lake
Ayazkala, the wetlands in the Akcha Darya river chaninel and the protection of the herders' rights in the
Akciha Darya valley and delta, and (c) the protection of the Badai Tugai (forest) natural habitat The
project may potentially have certain negative environmental impacts but it is expected that these caii be
mitigated The measures proposed would in fact enilliace the environimiienit and generate positive impacts.
The main objective of the project is to improve the drainage conditions in the project command area,
whicii is expected to considerably reduce waterloggimg and soil salinizationi. As a result the overall



7
ISDS
environmenital impact of the project would be very positive.
Archaeological sites. In the irrigated areas of South Karakalpakstan whichi is waterlogged the project is
expected to have a positive effect on archeological sites as the lowering of the ground water table in the
project area slhould reduce the risk of deterioration of archaeological sites. In the area where new drain is
to be constructed there may be negative affects.The Ackha Darya is an old riverbed and functioned as
such until about 100 BC There are numiierous historical sites along this old riverbed and in the delta of
the Akcha Dartya, including citadels and castles that are typically 20 centuries old such as (a) the
archaeological monument of Kyzil Kala, a fortress dating back to the 1st -2nd century BC and located
about 100-150 m from the Beruni collector; (b) the old settlement of Toprak Kala dating back to the 1 st -
6th century AD; (c) the three Burli Kala mounits dating back from the 4th century BC to the 1 st century
AD; (d) the Ayaz Kala complex dating back to the I st - 8th century AD, and (e) the Kurgashini complex,
an old oases center of the Stone and Bronze Age Nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes also used the river
valley, and remnants of settlements are probably located on both sides of the river bed The drain is
cutting through the riverbed and could occasionally touch upOIn such sites. The nortlherin delta also
containis a number of settlements suchI as the Barakram Oasis and the Kurgashini Kala. However, little is
known about this area, whichi is partly covered by sand dunes  The aligiiment of the drain has been
marked on the ground and area has been surveyed by archeological team.
Water table monitorinig sites have already been set up in areas where these monuments are within 150
meters of the South Karakalpakstan Main Drain (SKMD) If the water table would be found to rise,
mitigationi measures such as lowering the ground water table by pumping or Iniing of the SKMD near the
site to be protected will be implemented.
Natural habitat (wetlands) The project touches upon a number of wetlands and a forest reserve which
is a protected site. The project would also create a number of wetlands.
The Badai Tugai (forest)is a 6,460 ha nature reserve*povednik) and one of the few remaining tugai
forests along the right bank of the Amu-Darya, in the Beruni and Kegelli districts. The reserve was
created for the purpose of saving tugai woods and fauna under conditionis of regulated river discharges It
has a unique biotope and contains a fairly unique fauna, n1cluding a herd of about 100 elk that migrate in
and out of the forest In the course of the irrigation development along the Amu Darya over the last 50
years the water regime in the floodplain has changed significanitly. Thie regular floods of the river are
largely controlled and the water supply for the forest is mainly from ground water, partly fed by the river
and partly from the Beruni CD The Badai floodplain is also occasionally fed with water pumped from
the river. The groundwater is reported to become more saline, and there are signis of salinity stress amonig
certain trees (mainly Populis ariana). The drainage effluent pumped by the Beruni Pumping Station goes
through the forest reserve to Amu darya and has partially been the cause of increase in soil and
groundwater salinity. However, at the same time its is important sources of water for the forest even
though water quality is quite bad. Therefore, stoppinig Beruni station would improve the salinity
conditions, at the same time fresh water supply would have to be provided in order to imiprove the
conditions in this forest area.
Lake Ayazkala. This is an artificial lake of 6,000 ha, created in 1982, that receives drainage water fi-om
the Kyzylkum pumping station. The lake has two distinct parts. The Kzylkum pumping station pumps
water in the eastern part of the lake, whicih is also smaller in size about 2,000 ha, and hence this part is
relatively live The western part is about 3,000 to 4,000 ha and is practically dead. Over time salts have
accumulated in this part of the lake and they are reported to range betweell 20 to 38 g/l in different
sections of this lake The salts has crystallized and settled on the lake bed. It is not possible to improve



8
ISDS
the quality of this part of the lake by flushinig. Also flushinig of western part would damage the eastern
part of the lake and downstream area. The quality of the eastern part of the lake can be improved. Sec
section 11 D.3 for option selected for Implementation
Wetlands in the Akcha Darya Valley and Deltdn 1998, a portion of the flood waters released from
Tuyamuyun reservoir were intentionlally routed througIl the project area's irrigation and drainage system
and through the Akcha Darya chaninlel As the Akcha Darya Main Drain (AMD) to the Aral Sea was not
yet completed, rangelands in the Akcha Darya valley and delta wvere flooded and this led to considerable
complaints from the local population, especially the livestock herders. It has been agreed with MAWR
that the AMD would be designed In suci a way that flooding of the rangelands will not occur again.
Firstly, discharges larger thanl the design capacity of the AMD will not be released in the AMD and,
secondly, under the project the AMD will be completed beginninig from the Aral sea and the excavation
work will move from north to south so that any discharges released to the drainage collectors can be
conveyed to the Aral Sea. New wetlands in Achadarya delta would not be created under the project.
International Waters. The project is situated on the Amu Darya, whicih is an interinational waterway,
therefore OP/BP7.50 applies. However, the project falls under exceptions to the notification
requirements. See section IID.4 for detailed explanation.
Dam Safety. The Tuyamuyun reservoir complex is the major water storage facility for Karakalpakstan.
Its currenit live capacity is 5 3 billion m3 and it features several earth dams and flood protection
embankments; gated spillways with a total discharge capacity of 12,890 m3/s, a 150 MW power plant;
and two canal intakes, one with a capacity of a 560 M3/s on the left bank and one on the right bank with
a capacity of 200 m3/s The reservoirs provide seasonal storage for irrigation wvater. In 2000, a dam
safety inspection identified a number of deficiencies in the civil works and related hydro-mechanical
equipment. See section If D.3 below for addressing these issues.
11 D lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component
No cumulative impact expected.
Il.D Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area
The long tern impact of the project would be improved agriculture, waterlogging and soil salinity, water
quality of Amu Darya river, and wetlands in the Amu Darya delta area. Key elemenits of the project
include- (a) improving the irrigatioil and drainage conditions and practices in the project area, henice
improving water use efficiency, and reducilng the amount of drainage effluent generated; and (b) the safe
disposal of the drainage effluenit through a drainage chaniel leading to the Aral Sea instead of
discharging the effluent into the Amu Darya, thus improving the water quality of the Amu Darya. The
improvements to be made in the drainage collector system in the project area is expected to lower the
groundwater table, which should reduce secondary soil salinizationi and the need for extensive leachinig,
thereby decreasing the need for water. The irrigation improvements will also ensure a more reliable water
supply furthier reduce the need for water releases from Tuyalmluyunl reservoir. The improvemenit in the
water quality of the Amu Darya downstream of the outfall of the Beruni collector should slightly increase
the crop yields on about 250,000 ha of agricultural lands.
1l.D 2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatmenit of alternatives (if required)
Design options for the Badai Tugai (Forest), Lake Ayazkala, and SKMD wetlandliadai Tugar:



9
ISDS
various water supply options have been considered, includinig opening of Kok Darya (an old tributary of
the AmLu Darya runimng throughl the forest reserve and currenitly used as an extensionl of the Beruni CD)
and pumping water from the Amu Darya, and extension of a nearby irrigation channel and supplying
water to the forest by gravity. ForLake Ayazkala: various options considered included. (i) keeping the
lake "as is", (ii) improving western part of the lake; (iii) closinlg the whole lake, (iii) closing the highily
saline westerni part and improving the less saline eastern part. These alternatives also considered various
lake water levels and different locations for inflow and outflow. The best option is to close down the
western part of the lake properly The western part of the lake has primarily been used as a salt dump for
last 20 years, its improvement is infeasible. Flushing of western part of the lake is not possible because
the evaporation from the lake is MIucIh higier compared to the lake volume and non availability of water
volumes required for fluslling. Also the salts flushed out of the western part would cause environimenltal
degradation in the eastern part of the lake and dowilstream. Therefore, the best option which is selected
for implementation is that the western part of the lake would be closed and eastern part of the lake would
be maintainied. The development of the new wetlanids would be monitored and if they develop well then
closing of eastern part would be considered
SKMD rangeland and wetlands the local herdsmen have been consulted on the impact of the AMD,
whicih has led to (i) the design of low embankments to avoid the flooding of rangelanld around
Chukurkak and at some 40 kiim north of Chukurkak; and (ii) appropriate location and design of cattle
crossmigs over the AMD. Only the Kurgashiinkala wetlands (I and 11) at the end of the SKMC would be
retained and combined into one system of wetlands; a control structuLe to regulate their outflow has been
included in the design
11 D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Archeological sites. To assure that the permanent or temporary project activities will not disturb these
sites, the following actions are envisaged or are being implemented durilig project implementation:
(a)    a system of groundwater monitoring in selected wells near cultural heritage sites has
been set-up (in October 2002). Additional wells if required would be established prior to
starting construction of the surface drains The groulidwater levels, in particular near the
cultural heritage sites would be monitored by the independent Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E) consultants team reporting directly to the Governmeit of Karakalpakstan;
(b)    the planied location of the proposed collector drain is shared with the Cultural Heritage
consultant. The proposed alignmenit has also been marked on the ground. The Cultural
1Icritage Consultant team has done a field survey along the alignmenit and assessed that
the proposed alignment would not pose a risk to the preservation of cultural heritage
sites.
(c)    The independenit M&E consultanits would also have a Cultural Heritage team whicih
would continue the indepenident monitoring during the project implementation. It will
also assist in handlinig any "chanice-finds" durling the construction phase The procedure
for the "chanice find" will be specified in the bidding documents for construction works
The Cultural Heritage Consultants would establish contacts with relevant institutions in
the country to preserve and/or store any "chanice find" item of cultural importance.
Natural habitat (wetlandsIFhe project touches upon, and may create or improve, a number of
wetlands, of whichi one, Badai Tagai, is a protected site



10
ISDS
The Badai Tugai (forest) The protection of the forest would require: (a) maintaininig a certain water table,
with reasonable inflow of fresh water for the survival of the existing forest; and (b) occasional flooding
to induce sprouting of seed and rejuvenation of the forest. A number of options (pumping from the river,
re-opening the Ink to the Kok-Darya, supplying the Kok-Darya from an irrigation canal etc ) were
reviewed by the team and discussed witl interested parties in stakeholder meetings. To ensure fresh
water supply to Badai Tugai forest the Kod-Darya woould be opened so that flows from Amu darya is
possible and if needed water would be pumped from Amu Darya In additioD, an existing irrigation canal
would be extended up to the forest area discharging into the Kok-Darya. The MAWR is responsible for
Badai Tugai and is prepared to make the necessar-y investmenlts to improve the water supply conditions
for this forest. In addition, the Amu Darya water management study that would be carried out under the
project would suggest improvements in river managemient, in particular of Tuyamuyun reservoir and
Takhiatashi barrage, with the objective of improving drought and flood managemeit. This would
positively impact the river reaches downstream as it would include measures to facilitate the passage of
controlled floods throughi Takhiatish and maintaini the carrying capacity of the river. Badai Tugai would
benefit from a more regular pattern of floodiig
Lake Ayazkala Four main alternatives for dealing with the lake have been considered (i) keeping the
lake "as is" i.e. maintaininig both western and eastern parts of the lake, (ii) improving westerni part of the
lake through flushling and hence improving overall quality of the whole lake, (iii) closing the whole lake
both western and eastern parts, in which case mitigating measures would have to be designed, and (iv)
closing only the wester-ni part and improving the eastern part. The option is most suitable on economic
and environilimenital groulids and has been selected for implementationi. The western part would shut off
from the inflow of the eastern part by constructing a low dike on the ridge separating them The western
part would be planted with salt tolerant vegetation. Further details on each option and reasons for
rejections are given below
Keeping the lake "as is" does not make any sense both on environmiental and/or economiiic grounds. The
western part of the lake is dead for all practical purposes and has little value for the ecosystem  The salts
have been dumped in this part over twenty years, they have concentrated and settled on the bed of the
lake. Keeping "as is" would mean additional evaporation and concentration of the salts in western part
of the lake and continiued deterioration of quality of the lake.
Improving the quality of western part of the lake is infeasible both on economic an environimilenital
grounds. Improving the quality of the lake would require heavy flushing anilually througIl the lake on a
sustained basis The water available for flushiing is the drainage water withi expected salt concenitrationi
of 4 g/l which can be supplied either by installinig a new pump station on the western end of the lake, or
construction of a conveyanice chaninlel from the existing Kzylkum pUmnping station passing through the
lake to the westerin end. The capital and O&M cost of pumpilIg makes this option economilcally uliviable
and unsustainable. In addition, it is extremely difficult to improve the quality of the western part of the
lake and also flushinlg this part of the lake would cause environmenital damage to the eastern part of the
lake whichi is relatively fresh and the downstream chaninels and grazing areas The lake is very shallow
with high surface area to volume ratio and henice ratio of anIual evaporation to lake volume is very higih
making it extremely difficult to maintain desirable water quality in the lake in particular because
available inflows for flusiiing the lake consists of drainage water with concenitration around 4 g/l
During the project implementation period the migration and breeding of birds as well as the fisheries in
the eastern part of the lake will be closely observed and monitored. Governmiienet expects that most of the
birds will migrate to the new wetlands I and 11 (the Kurgashinkala wetlanids) that will be created in the
SKMC and Akchadarya Main Drain (AMD), as well as the envisaged new Wetlands Ill in the AMD



11
ISDS
Additional wetlands may develop on the old bed of Aral Sea. The wetlanlds would be managed USin1g the
model developed by Karakalpakstan Government under the Lake Sudoche restoration project (funded
under WEMP) and Lake Musdrachii The drainage water is the primiary source for these lakes, however,
fresh water is passed from the canal system whenl it is available  The imporvment in the quality of
existing and new wetlands would be monitored by the independent M&E consultants reporting to the
Karakalpakstan Government. If Suclh ani imilporvmilenlt is adequate the government also plans to slowly
close the eastern part; if this will not be the case, the eastern part would be maintained The State
Committee of Nature Protection (Goskompriroda) would be inforimied about the results of the
environmenital monitoring on annual bases. MAWR would consult Goskompriroda and the Bank before
deciding to close the eastern part of the lake. If eastern part of the lake is to be kept then the sufficient
pumping capacity in the Kzylkum pumping station would be rehabilitated ulider the project in order to
provide reliable flow to the lake at least over the next decade The Bank supervision mission, once a
year, would include hydrology and ecology specialists to monitor the ecologcal conditioni and assist
Governm1ent reachinig decision in this regard.
Wetlands in the Akcha Darya Valley aiid Delta. It has been agreed with MAWR that the AMD would be
desigined in such a way that flooding of the rangelands will not occur againi. Firstly, under the project the
construction would be begin from the north side (from Janna Darya ) and chanilel completion would
move towards the southl i.e. from downstreanm to upstreamii towards the irrigated area so that any
discharges released to the drainage collectors can be passed without causilng flooding of rangelands
Secondly, starting from southl of Chukurkak to the Jana Darya a confined chaninlel would be constructed
capable of fully containing the AMD's design discharges The local herders' wislhes with respect to
increasing the nulimber of livestock crossings would be considered on the basis of current tracts and
migrationi routes. A list of crossings required, in particular oni the stretch of drain southl of Chukurkak,
has been prepared. In addition, the constructioni contract would be provided with sufficienit contingency
funds for providing additional crossings if such need arises during the constructioni  The impact of
seepage from the AMD on the environm11ent (habitat and wells) will be evaluated. Some support for
selected monitoring of disease and disease vectors will be provided and, where needed, a plan to reduce
their short and long term effects through water canalization and a strengtheniing of the animal healtl
service
Dam Safety. The latest safety inspection of the Tuyamuyun complex was carried otit under the Bank
financed Water Supply, Sanitation and Health Project (Ln 4216-UZ). The Tuyamuyuni Dam Safety
Inspectioni Report was issued in February 2001. A nulilber of dam safety issues were identified by the
inspection team, the most importanit ones includinig. (i) the safety of Sultansanldjar Dam, (ii)
rehabilitating the hydro-meclhanical equipmenit; (iii) improving dam instrumenitation; (Iv) updatinig the
O&M manual of the scheme; and (iv) preparing an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), important as
damages can be caused downstreamii by discharges that are ilmuch lower than the maximu1111 flood. The cost
of the recommended dam safety measures was estimiated at US$11.4 million withl higlh priority works
costinig about US$1.0 to US$2.0 millioni.. It was agreed that the MAWR would carry out the remedial
works under the ongoinig Water Supply Project and if necessary US$1 0 from the DIWIP-I would be
allocated for carrying out highest priority works  The measures have been taken to ensure that the
project complies with the requiremenits of the policy
International Waters. The project is situated on the Amu Darya, which is an internationial waterway
The project was included In the Aral Sea Basin Program approved by the concerined five heads of state In
1994. In addition, the project would help Uzbekistan to comply with the agreement it signed with
Turkmenistan on January 16, 1996 regarding the joint and rational use of Amu Darya water resources
The agreement (Article 9) requires that both countries would stop discharging drainage water from both



12
ISDS
banks of the Amu Darya, startimg from 1999. With the project, Uzbekistan would make a first step in
meeting this requiremenit by closing the Beruni station, which currently pumps saline drainage effluent
into the Amu Darya, and instead disposing this saline effluent by gravity towards the Aral Sea. No works
would be undertaken under the project which may increase the extraction of water from Amu darya The
new construction under the project involves a main drain that would carry water from the project area for
disposal to the Aral Sea The quality of drainage water would be much better than the quality of water in
Aral Sea. All Central Asian States are aware of the project, and it was discussed at the IFAS meetiig
(December, 2002) with participation of the Central Asian States and the key donors interested in the
region.
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultationi and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people
The project, in particular AMD, was conceptualized durinig late eighties. It Is ulider implementation
since 1992 and AMD works have been constructed signiificantly. So the population in the area aiid
various stakeholders are well aware of the project. However, followving Bank guLidelinles on consultationi
and disclosure, the EA/SA and the Engineering consultants as well as PIU and MAWR undertook
extensive discussions in the project area withi all stakeholders. Most of the consultations withi NGOs and
civil society organizationls were undertakeni during project preparation as part of the SA efforts. The
intent of developing this project and a brief project description were shared as early as in 200 1 with the
general public in local newspapers and through the distribution of two types (I e different level of
complexity) of leaflets in three languages sumlimarizinig the potential environimenital and social impact
Short presentationis were also provided by radio and TV
During project preparation, the main stakeholders were ideiitified and consulted through both the SA and
environmental assessment processes. The SA involved (i) a household survey of 572 farmers across all
four districts and including shirkat and OFKh farmers, private farmers, and farmsteads; (ii) interviews
with the heads of shirkats and OFKh farmis, and officials from each of the district administrations, (iii)
public consultationis in all affected communities in North and Southi Karakalpakstan, including the
districts of Ellikala, Beruni and Turtkul in South Karakalpakstan, and Takhtakupir in North
Karakalpakstan, and the comimiunlity of Chukurkak, which is located along the Akcha Darya
The technical consultants conducted public meetings in Southi Karakalpakstan and Buchara/Kashkadarya
to consult governmenit officials, farm managers, community representatives and NGO's with a view to
improve the preliminary design of the project and the design of complemenitary activities to enable the
beneficiaries to make the best use of the project. Final consultationi sessions about the project design and
EA and SA were ulidertaken during December 2002  In all of these sessions project documenits were
provided to the participants in English and Russian before consultation sessions.
During the implemenltationi phase the Karalkalpak Project Coordination Committee (KPCC) wvill
supervise and coordinate project implementation, inter alia, by reviewing the project monitorinig and
evaluation reports submitted by the M&E consultanits. Two farmers' representatives from each Tuman
will be members of the KPCC.
It is envisaged that implementationi of the EMP will be moniitored by an internationial M&E consultant
and an environimienital specialist in the PIU. The M&E consultant would provide a report to MAWR,
PIU, the KKPCC and the World Bank on a quarterly basis. The Project Head and PIU would oversee the
implei1lentationl of the EMP.
E. SafegutardIs Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of



13
ISDS
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significanit technical and instiLttiolial risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are Iimited in their impact and are
technically and institLtionially manageable
S3.-No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial internediary projects, social development funds, community driven developmenit or
similar projects whiich require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard Issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessmlent/Analysis/Managem1ent Plan.         Expected      Actlal
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/30/2002    01/20/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/30/2002     12/20/2002
Date of submission to 1nlfoShop                             01/30/2003     03/10/2003
Date of distributilng the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  02/28/2003
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framnework                          Expected      Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoSlhop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framewvork               Ex-pected     Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to lnfoShiop
Pest Management Plani                                        Expected      Actutal
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-couLitry" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Damn Safety Management Plan                                  Expected      Actuial
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Masood Ahlimad                               02/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1.  Tjaart W Schillihom-Vani Veen/Personi/World  02/28/2003
Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                         Date



14
ISDS
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                 04/03/2003
Sector Manager/Director         Joseph R. Goldberg                            04/20/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
iEARCH         iEEDREK         SUE MAAP     j SHOWCASE 



