Report No. 23529
Report No: I057903 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/08/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: UZBEKISTAN      Project ID: P057903
Project: KARSHI PUMPING CASCADE REHABILITATION PHASE-I PROJECT Task Team
Leader: Masood Ahmad
Appraisal Date: January 15, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m): 25.00
Bank Approval: May 30, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 30.00
Managing Unit: ECSSD     Sector: AI - Irrigation & Drainage
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The main development objective of this rehabilitation project of emergency
nature is to increase the reliability, efficiency and sustainability of
the pumped water supply from the Amu Darya to the Karshi irrigation
command area (400,000 ha) in the Kashkadarya Oblast on which the
livelihood, employment, and incomes of more than 2 million people depend,
thereby, to avoid a potential social catastrophe in case of complete or
partial breakdown of the Karshi Pumping Cascade (KPC).
This objective would be achieved through: (a) rehabilitation of, and
improvements in the efficiency of the most critical components of the KPC
and its overall management; and (b) initiating the development of water
management institutions in the Karshi irrigation command area for
improving operation and maintenance (O&M) and water management, and for
promoting sustainable irrigated agriculture through participatory
irrigation management. The project would constitute the first phase of a
long-term program for the rehabilitation of the KPC and     irrigation and
drainage (I&D) system in the Karshi command area.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The Karshi Pumping Cascade Rehabilitation Phase-I project (KPCRP-I) would
constitute the first phase of a longer-term program for the rehabilitation
of the KPC, establishment of viable water management organizations
including Water Users' Associations (WUAs) to operate the main I&D
infrastructure, and the rehabilitation of the I&D systems within the
former sovkhozes and kolkhozes (FSKs). The subsequent phase would cover
the expansion of WUAs and rehabilitation of I&D, institutional reforms to
improve management at the upper tiers of the system, and possibly
rehabilitation of additional pumping units. The project includes the
following main components:
Component A: Rehabilitation of the Pumping Stations (cost US$91 million).
For the individual pump units three alternative rehabilitation options are
proposed: (a) unit with new pump and new motor; (b) unit with new motor
but rehabilitated pump (Rehabilitation Type A or RT-A). This option is
very close to the installation of a new pumping unit but with a change in
the type of pump: from axial flow to mixed flow.
Depending on the financing available and actual costs, it is expected that
out of the 36 pump units in PS1-6, the project would provide at least two
new pump units and rehabilitate 20 units. In PS1, two pump units (each



consisting of motor and pump) would be replaced by new mixed flow pumps
and lower speed motors; the pump impellors would have adjustable pitch to
have better control over varying discharges approaching the PS1. Two
units in PS1 would be rehabilitated under option RT-A. In PS2, PS3 and
PS4 two units in each station would undergo RT-A and two units in each
station RT-B. In PS5 and PS6 two units would undergo RT-A and one unit
RT-B. In PS7 pumps and motors are newer, but about half pump units require
rehabilitation to bring the reliability of this station up to the same
level as for PS5-6. In addition to rehabilitation of the pumping units
all switchboards and circuit breakers would be replaced by new switch
boards and a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system would
be installed.   All   discharge pipelines (of PS1-PS7) would be covered
with protective coating both inside and outside for providing protection
against corrosion/erosion.
The Talimarjan workshop would be refurbished/modernized and spare parts
for electrical and mechanical equipment in the KPC provided. Relatively
minor repairs to the buildings for the pumping stations would be
undertaken. Cranes and lifting equipment would be refurbished, and new
equipment to be provided includes new trash racks; siphon breakers and
filters for cleaning the water supplied to the bearings for cooling.
Component B: Sediment Control/Management, and Hydraulic Improvements (Cost
US$36 M). The configuration of the river intake would be widened and
improved and a gated regulator would be constructed at the river intake to
reduce the amounts of sediment entering into the KMC, particularly during
the summer months. The reach from the river intake to this regulator would
be widened and deepened in order to create a desilting basin for the
coarser materials entering this channel. A short distance downstream of
the new regulator a second desilting basin would be created at a suitable
location. Downstream of this desilting basin and up to PS1, dredging would
be carried out to restore the canal profile. A number of existing
dredgers would be rehabilitated and ancillary equipment provided.
The damaged canal lining between PS1 and PS2 would be repaired by
restoring collapsed embankments, cleaning pieces of broken lining and
replacement of broken lining with suitable material. The rehabilitation
works at Talimarjan reservoir would consist of repairing the concrete
sections originally installed for the embankment protection, the
installation of piezometers, repairing the seals of the outlet gates, and
repairs to the dam's drainage system. Assistance would be provided for
carrying out periodic reservoir sedimentation surveys. The first phase of
an environmental enhancement plan for Talimarjan would also be
implemented, i.e. a bio-physical revetment to stabilize water erosion
patterns on the north-west shore of the reservoir.
Component C: Irrigation and Drainage Systems Improvements in the Karshi
Command Area (Cost US$6.6 million). This component would support the
following activities:
(i) development of about fourteen Water Users Associations (WUAs), two in
each rayon (Karshi command consists of seven raions); each WUA in average
covering an irrigated area of 2,000 ha that is about 28,000 ha in total;
(ii) rehabilitation of key I&D infrastructure within the jurisdiction of
these WUAs; and
-2-



(iii) technical assistance for the preparation of detailed designs and
tender documents for the rehabilitation works and construction
supervision, and equipment for precision land leveling.
The WUAs would be formed in areas consisting of private farms. The WUAs
are likely to be two-tiered organizations consisting of (a) Water Users
Groups (WUGs) at the tertiary canal units, ranging in size from 200 ha to
500 ha; and (b) WUAs, comprised of several WUGs and covering a
hydrological unit (on average about 2,000 ha) on a secondary canal system.
The cost of the rehabilitation works would be limited to US$200 per ha.
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and
Institutional Development (cost US$6 million). This sub-component would
enable the Government to implement the project. The project would support
the operation of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and would
specifically finance an international consulting firm to (i) assist with
the procurement of goods and services for Components A and B and take
responsibility for contract management, including supervision of
construction, installation of equipment and commissioning of this
equipment after installation; (ii) assist the PIU with the preparation of
interim O&M plans for the project implementation period; (iii) assist the
PIU with the design, bidding and contract management for the works under
Component C and the establishment of WUAs in the 14 pilot areas (cost of
these services is included in Component C); (iv) assist with monitoring
and evaluation (M&E); and (v) establish an Environmental Management Unit
(EMU) within the PIU to implement Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for
the project.
Institutional Development. The objective of this sub-component is to
enhance performance capacity of: (a) the PIU in project preparation and
implementation; (b) the three organizations involved in the operation of
the KPC and the I&D infrastructure in the Karshi command area: (i) the
Dostlik Construction Department of Hydromechanisation, which is
responsible for the dredging operations; (ii) the Operating Directorate of
the KPC (ODKPC) which is responsible for the operation of the KPC,
including the pumping stations, intake, the main canal until a point
downstream of Talimarjan; Talimarjan reservoir; and Talimarjan workshop
for repairs and maintenance of the cascade; and (iii) the Kashkadarya
Oblast Irrigation Department (Oblselvodkhoz/KOID) which, together with its
raion (district) level organizations, is responsible for the O&M of the
irrigation distribution system within the Karshi command area up to the
boundaries of the FSKs; and (c) preparation of the follow-up project.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Karshi project area is located in western part of the Kashkadarya
Oblast of Uzbekistan and lies between latitudes 38o 00 and 39o 34' North
and longitudes 64o 23' and 67o 41' East. The area is situated on a
plateau on the right bank of Amu Darya. The KPC lifts water from the Amu
Darya in Turkmenistan to essentially irrigate some 400,000 ha of the
Karshi Steppe in the Kashkadarya oblast. The area is inhabited by more
than 2 million people who largely depend on this source of water for their
- 3-



livelihood. The project area slopes gently to the west, from an elevation
of 400 meters above mean sea level to 350 meters. The area has distinct
continental climate, with hot dry summers, with maximum temperatures of
well over 40o C and cold dry winters, with minimum temperatures below
-250 C. Rainfall is mainly in winter and spring. The mean annual
rainfall is 240 mm, while evaporation is more than 1,700 mm, making
irrigation essential for any cropping.
There are no protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any culturally or socially sensitive areas within or close to the project
area. The area around Talimarjan reservoir has developed into an
environmentally valuable area and ecologically important site. The
Talimarjan reservoir was developed as part of the KPC to store the water
pumped by the cascade and release it for irrigation use when needed.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project is classified a Category B project in accordance
with the World Bank Operational Policies (OP 4.01) as, in general,
rehabilitation works of existing infrastructure are considered to generate
limited negative environmental impacts. This has indeed been confirmed by
the environmental assessment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      Yes
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         Yes
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No major safeguard issues under the project are expected.
Environmental Assessment. The project is essential for to ensure the
reliable supply of water to about 400,000 ha of agricultural land and for
the livelihood of more than 2 million people. Environmental impacts of
the Phase I project are considered limited and generally positive. The EA
confirms that the project has indeed no significant negative environmental
impacts, except for certain environmental hazards quite normal during
construction, which will be mitigated under the proposed environmental
management plan (EMP). The two main issues concern:
n Disposal of dredged material: the quantities are reduced as a result of
- 4 -



the project; in addition operation of the disposal basins will be improved
and the disposal plan requires disposal areas to be covered with
sandy-loam and planted with vegetation to prevent wind erosion; storage
space is sufficient for 30 years of operation;
n The environmental hazards during rehabilitation/construction works in
case these are not properly managed by the contractors and/or not properly
supervised.
Proper implementation and monitoring of these measure are included in EPM
and would be implemented by the EMU in PIU and independent international
team of consultants.
Dam Safety.   Talimarjan reservoir is an off-stream storage reservoir with
two embankments. Its main embankment is 9,745 m long and has a maximum
height of 35 m; the second embankment is 1,000 m long and has a maximum
height of 36 m. A start has been made under the GEF-funded Water and
Environmental Project with the safety assessment of two dams in each of
the five Aral Sea Basin countries. As the reservoir is off-stream and has
no catchment area, it would not be affected by failure of any other dam in
the Amu Darya basin and, therefore, it has received a low priority for
inclusion in this dam safety review program. Accordingly, no formal dam
safety review has therefore been carried out for the Talimarjan
embankments. International consultants' have nevertheless carried out a
field inspection of the Talimarjan embankments and a review of available
reports. The Bank Dams Specialist has confirmed that there are no dam
safety issues involved in Talimarjan reservoir. Some problems, unrelated
to the safety of the dam, were identified and the necessary remedial works
would be implemented under the project (these are included in Component
B).
International Waters.    The project is situated on the Amu Darya, which is
an international waterway. The project would not change the quantity or
quality of the water in the river basin because it is strictly a
rehabilitation intervention. On request of the Government of Uzbekistan,
the Bank notified the riparian states, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan about
the project by letter of January 9, 2001. No response has been received
from these Governments.
There are no issues related to the international waterways. For the Amu
Darya, the present arrangements are that Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan are
to equally share the Amu Darya flows measured at Kerki (just below
Tajikistan). The share of Karshi project is 5 Bcm and the annual
diversions have averaged 4.7 Bcm over the last 10 years. The Talimarjan
reservoir located in the project area has a storage capacity of about 1.5
Bcm. The water pumped by KPC during the non-vegetation period or when the
water requirements are low is stored in the reservoir and used to meet the
requirements during the peak period. Therefore, fluctuations in the river
flows have relatively little affect on water deliveries to the project
area. Under the project limited rehabilitation of the pumping cascade
would be carried out which would not result in increase in pumping
capacity of KPC or in extraction of flows from Amu Darya.
A related issue is the location of part of Uzbekistan's water
infrastructure in Turkmenistan, including the intake and the major part of
the KPC that would be rehabilitated under the proposed project. To
- 5 -



operate the water intake and 6 of the 7 pumping stations on Turkmen
territory, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan maintain an agreement that covers
Turkmenistan lands under the Karshi cascade, Amu-Bukhara systems and
Tuyamayun reservoir. Based on this agreement Uzbekistan is to operate the
cascade in return for: (a) a yearly payment of about US$12 million for
leasing a narrow strip of land on which the cascade has been built (amount
also includes lease for lands for Amu-Bukhara and Tumayun reservoir); and
(b) diversion of about 10t of the pumped water for the irrigation of some
25,000 ha of irrigated lands on Turkmen territory, free of cost to
Turkmenistan. The easy passage of personnel and equipment (especially of
consultants and contractors) during project implementation is a concern,
however, to date no major impediment has been observed to Uzbekistan
operating and maintaining the canal, the pump stations, and dredging
operations at the intake.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impact is expected.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
The long-term impacts are included:
(i) full implementation of institutional and agricultural policy reforms
and full recovery of the cost of water from beneficiaries, some anticipate
that in future (15-20 years) agriculture on some highly salinized plots in
the project may no longer be viable and that such plots may have to be
abandoned; (ii) It is expected that the project will increase efficiency
of water use in the proposed area, and therefore will reduce overall water
need; and (iii) the institutional reforms can be expected to result in
staff reductions in the existing organizations and the associated social
impacts which would need to be mitigated. These issues are common to
countries in transition to a market economy and institutional reform
programs, and methods to deal with such issues are known. However, these
events would not take place during the proposed project period, they are
beyond the scope of the project, and would be dealt with when and if they
arise under an appropriate framework possibly during preparation and
implementation of the future phases of the Karshi rehabilitation program.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
The rehabilitation of the KPC is the only viable alternative and is the
most suitable one economically, socially and environmentally. Without the
project, a full or partial breakdown of KPC would have catastrophic
social, and economic consequences and create a flux of environmental
refugees.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As the institutional supervision capacity of the local environmental
agencies are limited, the project will; (i) establish EMU within the PIU,
which with the help of an independent team of international consultants
- 6 -



implement the EMP.; (ii) provide training to the local agencies to enhance
institutional capacity and (iii) implement the EMP that addresses all
issues and will mitigate potential environmental impact of the
construction phase as well as the overall operations.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources,
Operations Directorate for KPC, Kashkadarya Oblast Irrigation Department
(Obselvodkhoz), District Level Irrigation Organizations (Raionvodkhoz),
Collector Drainage Network Directorate, Dostlik Construction Department
(DCD) water management organizations within the Former State and Communal
Farms (FSKs), water users' associations, farmers and other water users.
Extensive public consultation were carried out during the Social
Assessment process under which two stakeholder workshops were held to
share the results of the SA and discuss other project/program issues
relating directly to the project's long-term goals, including: readiness
of the population for the introduction of charges for water and mechanisms
of payments for water; the possibility and relevancy of establishing Water
User Associations (WUA); the functions, goals, and possible operational
risks of WUA; and public participation in project implementation. The
first stakeholder seminar was held in Karshi on October 19, 2001 and
second in Tashkent on October 23, 2001.
In addition, in July 2001, scoping sessions on the environmental aspects,
with participation of all major stakeholders, were organized in Tashkent
and Karshi by the EA consultants. Upon completion of the draft final EA
Report, workshops were held in Tashkent, Karshi, Talimarjan and Dustlik on
December 19 and 20 2001 to discuss the main findings and recommendations
contained in the report. The Government, through its MAWR and PIU would
maintain an open and continuous channel of communication with the WUAs,
farmers, water users and other stakeholders. The WUAs formed under the
project would provide a good link for communications with the major
stakeholders. The WUAs representatives would also participate in the
Oblast Steering Committee meetings for reviewing the overall project
implementation and institutional program.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
- 7 -



Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/19/2002        12/17/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/22/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/22/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)        1/31/2002
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Masood Ahmad
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Stan Peabody     01/22/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Joseph Goldberg 01/16/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 8 -



