Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC286 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 22, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P079663 
Project Name: VN-Mekong Health Support 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Samuel S. Lieberman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 7, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 47 
Estimated Board Date: November 9, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Health insurance 
(10%) 
Theme: Health system performance 
(P);Population and reproductive health (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
a. 
Province-level preventive medicine staff have access to technical, programmatic and 
laboratory support from well-trained specialists at the regional level who concentrate on 
three cross-cutting functions: disease surveillance, behavior change and environmental 
health. 
 
b. 
Cohorts joining the ranks of the health profession are trained in community-based 
practice in medicine, pharmacy and nursing, with a focus on the needs of the Mekong 
region. 
 
c. 
The out-of-pocket costs of hospital-based curative services are reduced—especially for 
poor households—by upgrading provincial and regional facilities and strengthening the 
referral system, thereby reducing the need to bypass lower-level facilities. 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The three major components correspond to the regional institutions described above: 
i.e.
 the regional 
preventive medicine center, the regional university of medicine and pharmacy, and the regional referral 
system and hospital.  Each component would include ancillary interventions 
e.g.
 referral system reforms 
in the hospital component and development of field-based teaching sites in the university component; and 
Page  2
 
 
the package as a whole would ensure that functional links between the three institutions are fully 
developed.  A health development fund component would be added to support innovative health sector 
investments at the province or cross-province level and to complement the regional institutions on which 
the project otherwise concentrates.  Additional components would support monitoring and evaluation and 
project management.  A Specific Investment Loan is proposed with an estimated total project cost of  US$ 
60 million. 
 
Alternatives considered but rejected include: 1. Support for infrastructure and training only.
  This 
approach would fail to provide the ancillary interventions necessary to the success of each regional 
institution and would not capitalize on the potential links between them.  For example, an infrastructure-
only approach would fail to address weaknesses in the referral system, whose improvement is critical to 
the success of any investment in the regional hospital.  2. Support for facility rehabilitation in selected 
provinces throughout the country.
  This approach was used to good effect in the National Health Support 
Project but was rejected here because of the desirability of developing a regional tier in its health system 
and the desire to focus on the Mekong region.  3. Support for demand-side interventions only, 
e.g.
 scaling 
up health  insurance.
  This is the subject of a separately-proposed operation (see PCN for 
Health Care 
Fund for the Poor
).  Moreover, demand-side interventions would  not by themselves address constraints 
in medical education or preventive medicine, nor will they be successful in the absence of a strong 
referral network and tertiary-level facilities. 
 
Collaboration is envisaged with the Royal Netherlands Embassy on medical education, with the Asian 
Development Bank on infrastructure for the regional preventive medicine center, and with KfW on 
hospital management reforms.  Direct co-financing is not anticipated. 
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be located in the Mekong Region. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
While Vietnam’s implementation record has been patchy, there is evidence of strong political and 
administrative commitment to the project and the MOH has moved rapidly to appoint a project 
preparation team that was fully engaged in development of the project concept.  Several officers have 
been seconded to project development on a full-time basis and project preparation has been placed under 
the direct supervision of the Director of Planning and Finance.  
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
Environmental assessment may be required depending on the extent and nature of 
facilities construction to be financed by the project. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [X ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
An upcoming mission will clarify issues regarding the civil works to be financed under the project and 
whether an EA will be necessary and what classification the project should receive. 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
The next preparation mission will need to decided the nature and extent of civil works to be financed 
under the project.  Environmental assessments will be planned accordingly.  Vietnam already has 
significant experience with civil works in the health sector and the Environmental Assessment 
requirements of the Bank. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
 
