AC1 70
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/28/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                 Project ID: P059663
Project: Road Network Improvement Project        Task Team Leader: Jerry A. Lebo
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 24, 2003      IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 23, 2003                 IDA Amount ($m): 200.28
Managing Unit: EASTR                             Sector: Roads and highways (80%); Sub-national
Lending Ihistrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (20%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Other human development (P); Other trade
and integration (P); Public expenditure, financial
management and procurement (S); Small and
medium enterprise support (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the project is to reduce poverty in Vietnam by increasing domestic and international
competitiveness of the economy through improved road connectivity and quality. Within this overall
objective, specific objectives are to: (a) improve the efficiency of transport services in the northern
region of Vietnam by selective improvement of the national road network; (b) preserve existing road
assets through a three-year rolling program of strategic periodic maintenance on the core national road
network; and (c) enhance the processes and institutional and financial framework for sustained
maintenance of the national road network through capacity building and institutional strengthening of the
Vietnam Road Administration (VRA).
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project will consist of three components: (i) Network Preservation Program (NPP); (ii) Network
Improvement Program (NIP); and, (iii) Road Sector Management and Institutional Building Program
(RSMIBP).
Component 1. Network Preservation Program (NPP) (US$136.3 Million)
The NPP will finance three annual works programs of periodic maintenance on national roads throughout
Vietnam. The project will not finance routine maintenance expenditures, except when undertaken
integrally as part of the pilot long-term performance based contracts as discussed below.
The first AWP has been determined during preparation by undertaking a strategic analysis of high traffic
road sections on the national highway network where deterioration is reaching a critical level and the
returns to periodic maintenance will be highest. At the same time, a strategic analysis was undertaken of
the entire national road network so as to identify key performance targets and the related investments and
maintenance needs over the next 10 years. Based on this strategic analysis, indicative works programs
for AWP2 and AWP3 have been identified, but will be adjusted as part of the VRA's annual strategic
data collection and planning process. In that sense, the NPP takes a programmatic approach to the
funding of periodic maintenance, so as to allow maximum flexibility in the design of subsequent year



2
ISDS
AWPs, as well as a keep the project strongly linked to the VRA existing maintenance programs.
During project implementation, the level of funding to be provided by the IDA credit for this component
will begin to decline and be steadily replaced by funding of other sources, including a road maintenance
financial mechanism to be develop as part of the project.
The NPP will also include a Pilot Program for Long-Term Performance based contracts to test the use of
(i) multi-year, performance-oriented contracts for maintenance of core portions of the national road
network, awarded on a competitive basis to private contractors or independent SOEs; (ii) integral
contracts for maintenance of road sub-networks by private contractors and recently equitized SOEs; and
(iii) performance-based contracts or agreements to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of
maintenance operations managed by RMMCs and PDOTs on behalf of VRA, respectively. IDA funding
would be available for financing contracts under (i) and (ii) above.
Component 2. Network Improvement Program (NIP) (US$ 157.4 million)
The NIP will finance three annual works programs (AWPs) consisting of rehabilitation and widening of
strategic portions of the national roads system in the northern areas of Vietnam. The total length of
facilities proposed for investment under the full program is approximately 700 kilometers of roads,
including 84 short bridges (6-25 meters each). Longer bridges (>25 meter) along the project alignments
have been identified and surveyed for priority upgrade or replacement, but are not included for finance.
These have been placed on MOT's list of priority bridges for upgrading under domestic sources of
finance or other donor-programs. Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) has identified a
program of bridge improvements to be undertaken in parallel to this component.
The roads which will be improved under the NIP were identified through a detailed screening process
based on a list of approximately 1600 kilometers of national and provincial roads in the Northem areas of
Vietnam that form part of the priority road program under the MOT's Road Development Strategy
2000-2010. Screening of the proposed list of roads was done using multi-criteria analysis that takes into
account for each link the environmental, social, and economic feasibility, as well as the investment value
in terms of the links contribution to overall road network integrity, economic returns, and regional
development.
The current condition of the roads selected for improvement under NIP is typically poor, although some
limited sections are in fair or good condition, particularly in or near towns. Improvements financed
under the project will upgrade the existing road pavement and embankment to two-lane Class III or Class
IV following the highway design standards of Vietnam (TCVN 4054-1998), supplemented by AASHTO
standards where gaps exist. Current traffic levels on project roads vary between 500-5000 AADT, with
non-motorized vehicles making up between 20-70% of average daily traffic levels. Given the high level
of non-motorized traffic on project roads, all improved roads (except in very low traffic remote areas)
will provide for non-motorized vehicle users.
Component 3. Road Sector Manarement and Institutional Building Pro2ram (RSMIBP) (US$9.7
Million)
This component would finance the provision of technical assistance and training to:
(i)       Develop a road maintenance financing mechanism used exclusively for road maintenance;
(ii)      Implement a renewal program for the core functions of VRA to strengthen its institutional,
operational and financial capacity for road maintenance;



3
ISDS
(iii)     Introduce a program to transfer technology and strengthen road maintenance management
practices of the PDOTs;
(iii)     Strengthen the capacity of the local construction industry;
(iv)      Design a framework for Public-Private Partnerships(PPPs) in the road sector
(v)       Identify and develop strategic investments for national and/or provincial roads, and;
(vi)      Undertake independent financial and technical review of the project.
Components:
1. Network Preservation Program NPP
Al. Periodic Maintenance on National Roads
A2. Project Management and Advisory Services
A3. Pilot Program Long-Term Perf. Based Contracts
2. Network Improvement Program NIP
B 1. Improvements on National Roads
B2. Project Management and Advisory Services
3. Road Sector Management and Advisory Services
C l. Establishment and Implementation of Road Fund
C2. VRA Institutional Strengthening
C3. Technical Assistance, Studies and Audits
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The study area for NIP covers 15 selected provinces and includes the Northern Highlands, Red River
Delta, and Central Highlands and neighboring areas. The topographic, hydrological and other physical
characteristics vary considerably from coastal lowlands to mountainous areas. With the exception of
NH-279 and NH-6 in the northwestern part of the country and 1 8C in the northeast, the NIP project roads
are generally located in relatively flat areas in the deltas of the Red and Me Rivers or river valleys. For
the selected NIP roads, no project road is located within or in proximity to undisturbed areas of known
habitat for special status wildlife or plant species. This was confirmed by field investigations undertaken
in February 2003 which indicated that little, if any, undisturbed habitat exists for wildlife species within
the project road ROWs (all of which are existing roadways) or their immediate environs due to the
existing level of development and intensive agricultural use along the corridors.
The NPP will take place using a programmatic approach to periodic maintenace on national roads within
the existing road paved area (carriageway and shoulders). The project area for NPP is potentially
nationwide. The NPP proposes no bypasses, realignments or other actions in undisturbed areas.
B. Check Environmenital Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
All civil works under the project will follow closely the alignments of existing roads, and the vast
majority of civil works will take place within existing rights-of-way. No new roads will be built under
the project. Road improvements for NIP and NPP will be performed within the present alignments as



4
ISDS
much as possible. Bridges and culverts will be rebuilt to upgraded design standards as appropriate. The
works will include limited land acquisition and displacement of people. The overall impacts on the
environment are expected to be minor and confined to construction period. Overall, the project will
generate long-term positive impacts, as access and road safety is improved and proper drainage is
restored.
A separate Project-Level EIA has been prepared to address the Network Improvement Program (NIP)
roads selected for the RNIP Year One Program. The Project-Level analysis began with a road screening
survey and the Screening Report was prepared. NIP Project Roads were analyzed first through rapid
screening of 1,650 kilometers of road. This resulted in the selection of approximately 900 km of roads for
a feasibility study and incorporation in a five-year program. Alternatives were further analyzed in a
feasibility study of the proposed improvements to the roads proposed for incorporation in a five-year
program. A final selection of 687 kilometers of roadways to be improved over a three-year period was
made. Design, technological and operational alternatives as well as the "without project" alternative for
NIP were also considered. For the selected NIP roads, no project road is located within or in proximity
to undisturbed areas of known habitat for special status wildlife or plant species. This was confirmed by
field investigations undertaken in February 2003 which indicated that little, if any, undisturbed habitat
exists for wildlife species within the project road ROWs (all of which are existing roadways) or their
immediate environs due to the existing level of development and intensive agricultural use along the
corridors. The NPP proposes no bypasses, realignments or other actions in undisturbed areas. No
selected project road is located in proximity to the national parks.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on W for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                 Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)       0 Yes (9 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)               (9 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                (9 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  (9 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                              U Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               * Yes (9No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      0 Yes ( No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          ( Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  ( Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*    () Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project consists civil works to upgrade and rehabilitate existing discrete road sections spread over
the northern half of the country. It also includes strengthening, rebuilding and preserving the pavements
within the existing right-of-way. Thus, direct impacts are expected to result from the construction
activities and may potentially include: material supply/transport; noise, dust, vibration, fumes from



5
ISDS
asphalting; disruption to traffic, access to roadside activities, and to waterways; potential contamination
of soil and water from disposal of waste materials and fueling equipment; destruction of crops, trees; and
worker safety.  Direct impacts from operation potentially include: increased noise and vibration
disturbance, air pollution from vehicle exhaust, fuel and lubricants spills, increased accidents, and
erosion, rockfall or other hazardous conditions. The impacts can be managed and mitigated. None are
irreversible.
Il.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The project does not anticipate cumulative impacts due to the application of multiple safeguard policies
or multiple project components as the entire project is devoted to road network improvement.
ll.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The major long term impact is expected to be traffic safety, and encroachment on the right of way in
townships and congested areas. Encroachment of the right-of-way (ROW) is a major nationwide issue
and will be tackled through judicious design (drainage, safety barriers, etc.) of the road sections and
strengthening of the environmental and social units in project implementing agencies.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
None envisaged at this point.
IL.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An independent monitoring agency will be employed during implementation to regularly report on
compliance with safeguard policies--and will be expected to provide regular reports to the MOT. This is
the current approach used in ongoing World Bank supported transport projects in Vietnam.
Environmental and Social Units have been set up in the implementing agencies and will be strengthened
under the project.
IL.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Programmatic and NIP Year-One EIA's were produced in draft form in February 2003. A
Vietnamese language summary was prepared and circulated within the potentially affected areas at that
time. A public outreach and consultation program was then undertaken. Prior to the consultation
meetings, the Project Team sent project information to selected representatives within the
project-affected Provinces and First Year Road Improvement Program Communes. The project
information package included a general Project Newsletter and a copy of the summary of the
Programmatic EIA, as well as the policy frameworks for resettlement, ethnic minorities and
environmental issues. These materials were subsequently distributed in the villages and towns potentially
affected by the First Year Road Improvement Program. Once all information had been disseminated to all
identified stakeholders, the public consultation meetings were conducted. Prior to the site visits, on 27
March 2003, the Project Team provided selected Provincial Department of Transportation (PDOT) staff
members with a brief training course in how to conduct public consultations in accordance with GOV
and IDA requirements.



6
ISDS
At the communal level, meetings were held in each of the 1st Year Improvement Program Communes
between the 3rd and 15th of April 2003. These communes were identified by PMU18 and the relevant
PDOTS and are listed in the Report on Public Consultation Meetings. The Environmental Management
Plan developed for the Year-One Project EIA reflects the comments and suggestions received from the
stakeholders and presents mitigations and monitoring for these potential impacts.
All final draft environmental and social documents will be disclosed in the appropriate languages in
Vietnam and Washington prior to the departure of the Appraisal Mission.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/25/2002    2/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/1/2002     2/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/11/2002    2/26/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/25/2002    2/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/1/2002     2/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/11/2002    2/26/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/26/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           2/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            2/26/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



7
ISDS
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Jerry A. Lebo                              6/24/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Anil H. Somani                       6/24/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Chaohua Zhang                        6/24/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                 Name                                       Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn Morgan                           6/24/03
Sector Director              Jitendra N. Bajpai                         6/24/03



