Report No. 23898
Report No: I075399 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/21/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: VIETNAM         Project ID: P075399
Project: Public Financial Management Reform Project       Task Team Leader:
Edward Mountfield
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 16, 2002 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 25, 2003    IDA Amount ($m): 50.00
Managing Unit: EASPR     Sector: BF - Public Financial Management
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The objective of the Public Financial Management Reform Project (PFMRP) is
to achieve a strengthening of public financial management, information and
transparency, thereby improving the quality and quantity of public
services resulting from the resources absorbed by the public sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The first (budget management reform) component of the project will have
four parts:
Support to the devolution of financial management procedures through
increased block granting to spending units participating in the
Government's budget reform: (i) capability building in output costing
and budget allocation by spending units participating in the budget reform
program; this would include additional freedom to manage financial
resourcing of personnel services; and (ii) capability building in budget
preparation and allocation by these spending units.
Support to the establishment of an integrated Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) to support the block grant system: (i)
Technical advice on policy, system design and content. Quality assessment
of system framework and procedures; (ii) IT systems software and hardware,
including testing and quality assurance of systems; (iii) building
institutional capacity in MOF to operate the integrated FMIS and interpret
the reports that it generates; and (iv) training and capacity development
in government agencies other than MOF to operate internal management
accounting systems which enable advantage to be taken of increased budget
flexibility.
Support to the establishment of a basic performance information system to
support the block grant system: (i) development of capacity to identify
and measure outputs and other basic performance indicators in government
agencies participating in the budget reform; (ii) Technical advice on
policy, system design and content, quality assessment of system framework
and procedures; (iii) IT systems software and hardware, including testing
and quality assurance of systems; and (iv) building institutional capacity
in MOF and participating line agencies.
Support to the establishment of multi-year budget programming to support



the block granting system: (i) building institutional capacity in MOF for
projecting the future costs of existing policies; (ii) training and
capacity development in government agencies other than MOF; and (iii)
Software development.
The second (national and sub-national government debt management)
component of the project will support the clarification and coordination
of roles and responsibilities of different agencies for debt management
(possibly resulting over time in the establishment of a Unified Debt
Management Office) and the strengthening of associated systems and
processes. This component will comprise five parts:
Conduct a detailed needs assessment of the IT and organizational structure
for public debt management;
Conduct an assessment of any changes required to the existing public debt
laws;
Clarify and coordinate roles and responsibilities of different agencies
for debt management, and strengthen associated management processes;
Implement an IT application for integrated and consistent recording,
disclosure and control of both domestic and external debt.
Training and capacity building to the debt management function in
identifying and managing government risk exposure.
Support for the establishment of a SOE fiscal risk management system will
form the third component of the project. This will:
Augment the SOE management function within the Ministry of Finance, by
strengthening reporting requirements for SOEs to MoF, putting in place
appropriate accountability and incentive mechanisms, building capacity and
raising profile.
Put in place an SOE fiscal risk tracking IT application in the MoF.
Support the development of pricing arrangements for government guarantees
of SOE debt and contingent liabilities.
The fourth (Change Management Unit) component of the project will have
three parts
Provision of capability building, contracting and other common services to
the first three components of the operation.
Ensuring consistency of components within the operation and of these
components with Government reforms in other areas such as human resource
management.
Ensuring monitoring, information dissemination and an appropriate profile
for the project as a whole.
The estimated costs of each part are detailed in Annex 1. The total
project costs of each component will not be known with any certainty until
detailed implementation options are identified during the design stage,
and decisions made on implementation architecture. These decisions will be
made by the Government in consultation with the project team, and will
take account of the cost-effectiveness of the identified options.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
- 2-



natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Initially, the project will be rolled out in Hanoi and in selected
provinces. By the end of the project, the project will be implemented in
all provinces and central government ministries.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments: We are not aware of any substantive environmental impacts.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
We are not aware of any.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
We are not aware of any.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
We are not aware of any.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not required.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Not required.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Not required.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
-3 -



that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Edward Mountfield        February 4, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Surhid Gautam    February 4, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan February 4, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Homi Kharas     February 4, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 4 -



