4s364
ISDS
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Section I - Basic Information                                               SCANNED
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/20/2002                                       NOV   1 2 2002
A. Basic Project Data (fromn PDS)
I.A.I. Pro ect Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                 Project ID: P073361
Project: Natural Disasters Mitigation Project    Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 2, 2004     IBRD Amount ($m).
Bank Approval: October 14, 2004                  IDA Amount ($rn) 150.00
Managing Unit. EASRD                             Sector: General water/sanitation/flood protection
Lending lnstrurnent Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  sector (70%); General public administration sector
Status Lending                                   (30%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (P)
I A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The proposed Natural Disaster Mitigation (NDM) project is the first step in support of a long-term effort
by the government to reduce Vietnam's vulnerability to frequently occurring natural disasters. This first
step would respond to the more urgent pre- and post-disaster investment financing needs of the country
while strengthening institutional coordination across its most vulnerable economic sectors In the longer
term, it would help lay the basis for a sustainable disaster mitigation strategy by financing strategic
investment and related policy studies, including the investigation of possible risk sharing schemes.
The main objectives of the NDM project are to: (i) save lives and protect economic assets, particularly of
poor communities living in hazard prone areas; and (u) improve the efficiency of long-term
reconstruction efforts This would be achieved through the provision of funding for: (I) structural and
non-structural investments to mitigate the impact of recurring natural disasters; (u) rehabilitation of
damaged infrastructure in the aftermath of natural disasters; and (mi) capacity building of national and
local institutions in preparedness, response, and long-term recovery.
I A 3 Project Description (From PDS):
1.     Structural and Non-Structural Measures for Natural Disaster Mitigation ($80 million)
The component would support a range of structural and non-structural prevention and
mitigation investments. Typical structural measures would include small to medium-sized
investments (each of the order of $10 million) such as stabilization of river banks,
strengthening of river and sea-dyke systems, river flow capacity improvements, construction
of diversion channels, construction of safe harbors for small fishing boats, and improvement
in water flow along the main highway and railway systems of flood-prone regions. Non-
structural measures would include flood plain and hazard mapping, flood forecasting and
modeling systems, review of building codes and design standards, and weather forecasting
and early warnig systems. The component will also investigate the viability and
support of the government program (under PM decision 173/2001/QD-TTg to
construct flood free residential areas in six provinces in the Mekong Delta.  Project
preparation will identify specific, priority sub-projects to be included under this proposed
project.
I.    Pilot for Community Based Disaster Management ($30 million)
The component would be initially a pilot and would provide a wide range of small-scale,



2
ISDS
natural disaster mitigation measures, both structural and non-structural, to communes most
affected by natural disasters. The initial number of communes participating would be small
[less than 20] with the option to expand to include larger number of communes at the time of
the mid-term review. The mitigation measures would be identified by the communes, with
support from local authorities. The structural measures could include elevated earth pads
with a multi-purpose building and a water well, local flood control structures, small-scale
earth reservoirs to provide water in the drought season, stabilization of river banks, etc.
Non-structural measures could include local flood plain and hazard mapping, community
early waming systems, land use planning etc. Project preparation will identify communes
that are most frequently affected by natural disasters, using ranking critcria based on
population affected, frequency and severity of past natural disasters, casualties and past
damage assessments, and poverty indices of the commune. Project preparation would [i]
identify the initial group of communes that would participate in the pilot, [iii undertake a
detailed assessment of what should be included under structural and non structural measures;
[in] design the implementation arrangements, specifying the roles of provinces, districts,
communes and people's organizations; and [iv] identify the technical assistance and capacity
building requirements to implement this component.
III.   Contingency Funding/Line of Credit for Reconstruction and Recovery ($40 million)
This component would involve the setting up of a special funding mechanism, within the
framework of the national budget, to finance the reconstruction of priority infrastructure such
as bridges and roads, irrigation systems, schools, health clinics, etc damaged as a result of
natural disasters. During project preparation, guidelines would be drawn up for the (i)
selection criteria for infrastructure to be financed under this component; (in) planning and
budget procedures to be followed; and (in) approval and disbursement arrangements to be
adopted to help ensure a rapid transfer of funds, including the definition of the role of line
agencies and of provincial and local government. In addition, different sustainable
mechanisms to finance disaster mitigation and reconstruction in the long-term would be
explored.
A review of financing mechanisms providing social and economic assistance to poor
communities affected by natural disasters would also be investigated during project
preparation. This review would focus on the effectiveness of existing mcchanisms for long
term recovery of affected people communities. The review will take note of the government
stated position to use grant funds for assistance to affected poor communities. .
IV.    Institutional Coordination, Capacity Building, and Strategic Studies (SIO million)
This component would strengthen governmcnt institutions to ensure better coordination
among the various govemment sector agencies and diffcrent levels responsible for
prevention, preparedness, relief and recovery. The component would also provide training in
mitigation and preparedness measures to provincial committees for flood and storm control
as well as to communities with a high vulnerability to natural hazards Project preparation
will include an institutional and capacity assessment and identify areas that require
strengthening Project preparation will also investigate options for the most effective
institutional arrangements to implement the project. Finally, project preparation will identify
the investment, technical assistance, capacity building, and training requirements at all
levels.
This component would also support a series of strategic and policy studies aimed at reducing
Vietnam's longer-term vulnerability to natural disasters. These studies would include [i] a
long-term vulnerability study that would help identify the different mitigation strategies in



3
ISDS
each of Vietnam's main river basins; these studies would also examine the impact of
environmental degradation and its effect on Vietnam's vulnerability to water related
disasters; [ii] a comprehensive insurance study, building on the findings of the UNDP's
recent work, which would examine the feasibility of different risk sharing schemes; and [iii]
other priority policy studies as determined dunng project preparation It is noted that the
government is reluctant to use Credit funds for studies, therefore, the team will work with
other potential donors to secure grant funds to finance these studies.
Components:
I  Structural and Non-Structural Methods.
II Pilot for Community Based Disaster Management
III Contingency Funding for Reconstruction and Recovery
IV. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will most likely be located in seven Central and Northern Provinces and six Provinces in the
Mekong rcgion.
B. Clheck Environmental Clavsiflcationt: A (Full Assessment)
Comments
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on W for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)



4
ISDS
Policy                           |     Appilcabillty
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        W Yes (.9 No   (9 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                u  Yes () No    * TBD
Forestrn (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 (9 Yes * No    (  TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   U  Yes     No  U  TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               U  Yes U   No     TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                   Yes (J No   U  TBD
Involuntar- Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       S Yes U No     (9 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                          (U Yes UNo       * TBD
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  U  Yes S No  U  TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60. BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     U  Yes * No    U  TBD
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Suinmmary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant qurestions. If rnformncationi is not available,
(lescrlihe sieps tio be takent to obtain necessary data
I.D. IDa. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project Identify and
desci ibe any potential large scale, significant and/or u reversible impacts
0   Environmental Safeguards
An overall environmental impact assessment (EIA) and a detailed social impact assessment (SA) will be
necessary for the entire project. A detailed assessment of the hazards and vulnerability will be conducted
to determine the root causes of the disasters and the results will be incorporated in the criteria for the
selection of the most vulnerable communities and the identification of the appropriate mitigation
measures. A study to determine whether the impact of natural disasters over the last several decades have
been aggravated by poor environmental design and planning will also be conducted to improve planning
and implementation throughout the project.
More specifically, the degree of impact on the project on the environment will differ according to the
various components and will be discussed individually below.
Component 1: Medium size structural and non-structural measures
The medium size structural measures entail projects that are less than US$10 million in size They
include projects like dyke strengthening, river training, restoration of small reservoirs and building safe
ports for fishermen. Since these medium size structural sub-projects will entail the control of water flow
in flood plains, the impact of the change in water flow on the surrounding environment, as well as, the
communities dependent on the water supply need to be given careful consideration. In the EIA,
particular attention should bc paid to (i) impact on ethnic minorities; (ii) resettlement and land
acquisition, (in) impact of the new infrastructure on flooding, landslides, erosion, surrounding wetlands
and forests.
The non-structural measures such as development of a early forecasting and waming system for flooding,
landslides, typhoons etc., hazard mapping and land-use planning, watershed management activities etc.
are expected to improve the environment of the disaster prone regions.



5
ISDS
During the project preparation, detailed guidelines for the preparation of EIA for structural mitigation
measures will be developed. During the project preparation, detailed feasibility studies including EIA,
will be conducted for the sub-projects to be implemented in the first year (most likely will be two of the
medium sized projects). Other medium size projects will be identified and designed (including the EIA)
dunng the implementation of the project. The ToR for the EIA of these projects will be prepared and
appraised dunng project appraisal.
Component 2: Community based disaster management
This component includes small scale community level structural and non-structural measures. The
community level infrastructure is not expected to have a large negative impact on the environment. Most
of the activities will actually improve the management of the watershed. The small scale structural
measures include multi-purpose shelters that serve as a grain storage center, school building, community
center and evacuation shelter. Other structural measures may include, check-dams and revetment walls
along landslides or areas affected by erosion.
Community based non-structural sub-projects will contribute towards the better management of the
environment for the prevention and mitigation of future disasters. These sub-projects may include
watershed management, reforestation and forest management, erosion and landslide control works,
animal disease control and the management of human health and sanitation.
A Checklist for the environmental screening of the community based structural and non-structural
projects will be developed during project preparation.. Training will provided to the government staff
to prepare and review the environmental check list.
Component 3: Contingency funding mechanism
The contingency funding mechanism will be used for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of critical
damaged infrastructure. The rehabilitation and reconstruction will be undertaken with clear attention
paid to the mitigation and prevention of future disasters by applying the appropriate building codes,
hazard/vulnerability analysis and land use planning An environmental check list for those projects will
be developed during project preparation. Detailed EIA will be conducted for those projects that have
shown the possibility of having a high impact on the environment.
Component 4: Institutional strengthening
This component will assist the Govemment of Vietnam to manage the environment to mitigate the impact
of future natural disasteis.
* Social Safeguards
Detailed social assessment determining the key issues that will arise from the project will be conducted
during project preparation and the results of the assessment will be incorporated in the detail design of
the project These results will also be used as a baseline to monitor the impact of the project The social
impact assessment should include: (I) baseline data on the age and gender, ethnic background,
socio-economic status, source of income, use of natural resources, casualties due to past disaster, existing
coping strategies towards natural disasters, disaster history etc.; (2) existing capacity of community
members and people's organizations, (3) assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of all the
stakeholders; (4) capacity and vulnerability analysis of the community to determine the appropriate and



6
ISDS
effective responses that would support development initiatives in the community; (4) community
development activities that are appropriate for disaster management; and (5) other interventions by
community or donors that are relevant for CBDM.
General: The project will directly address the socio-economic issues that are faced by the communities
due to disasters through Component 2: Commnunity based disaster management. Though 70% of the
population live in areas susceptible to flooding in the low-lying deltas and coastal lands for wet-rice
agriculture, the project will also address the hill land populations who are the poorest of the communities
and have been receiving relatively less attention for disaster relief efforts. A study conducted by Main
Beckman et al. Beckman, Malin, Le Van An, and Le Quang Bao (2002). "Living with the floods Coping and
adaptation strategies for households and local institutions in central Vietnam." Unpublished PhD research for
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. on the coping and adaptation strategies of households and local
institutions in Central Vietnam after the 1999 floods, found that the poor are most impacted by disasters.
The poor are most severely impacted by disasters due to the fact that they commonly have (1) poorly
constructed houses which are easily damaged and then require more resources to reconstruct; (2) higher
degree of production failure in animal husbandry due to lower standard in sanitation conditions and
production knowledge; (3) less diversified household economy and more dependent on paddy
production; and (4) less labor capacity and worse health conditions. The major damages due to disasters
to the lowland people are the loss of lives, loss of rice in storage, loss of animals and damage to houses.
The hill land people experience crop damage, loss of land due to erosion or landslides and loss of
animals. The impact of natural disasters are aggravated by the cutting of mangroves, mining of coral
reefs, deforestation of mountains, poorly planned agriculture and industrial development, water borne
diseases and poor animal husbandry, to name a few.
Clear guidelines and selection criteria will be developed to identify the most vulnerable communities and
the community based interventions will strategically target communities and areas that will be most
beneficial for the mitigation of disaster impacts. The interventions will also be adapted to the particular
disaster that the communities are subject to Particular care will be taken to understand the current
coping mechanisms and the interventions will be to develop upon them.
Gender: Assessment during project preparation on the role of gender in the commuwities will be
conducted. The information will be incorporated in the design of the project Proper provisions will be
made during the implementation phase that women are properly represented and encouraged to
participate in the activities.
Indigenous peoples: The project will target the poorest communities of which many are ethnic
minorities The project preparation will determine whether a lPDP will be necessary.
Involuntary resettlement: Currently in the Mekong Delta, the Government of Vietnam is conducting a
resettlement program where people living in the flood prone areas are being resettled to elevated areas
being constructed by the District Government. The project preparation will determine whether the
project will be involved in any resettlement activity and if necessary, a resettlement plan will be
prepared In case the resettlement is voluntary, no action plan will be prepared
Social issues that may arise during project implementation:
(I)    Governance at the commune level: The project relies heavily on the capacity of commune level
government to responsibility manage and determine their development program in an inclusive and
accountable manner. Historically, the management of development programs have been top-down and
this project will assist the communes to strengthen their ability to consult with the communities and



7
I SDS
guide the process of participatory decision making; and
(2)    Community capacity to undertake subproject implementation in a responsible manner: The
communities will be responsible for presenting, initiating, formulating, managing and implementing
disaster mitigation programs. There exists a high degree of awareness of the needs, however, there is
little experience in the conmmunities in the articulation of the needs or the management of projects. This
project will work with the communities through community facilitators to deterrnine the most appropriate
intervention measures for disaster mitigation and ensure that the implementation is conducted in a
responsible and transparent manner.
ll.D. Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
H.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Il.D 2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if iequired)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The method to ensure compliance with safeguard policies will be determined during the project
preparation phase which may include the possibility of an independent monitor.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakcholders and describe the mechanisns for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The participation will take place in every stage of the project from identification, design,
implementation and management of the necessary interventions. The activities will include site
visits, workshops, meetings, trainings and infornation dissemination. The project will make an
effort to ensure that there is proper representation of both genders. The detailed participation plan
will be presented in the conception rcport of the project preparation phase.
E. Safegutardv Classification (select in SAP) Categoiy is determined by the highest impact in any policy
Or on basis of cumulative Impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguaid policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply
Si. - Significanit, cuinulative and/or irreversible impacts: or significant technical and institutional risks
in managenment of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
techmically and institutionally manageable
[  S3. - No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard fi-amnework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclov,ere Requirements
Environmnental As.sessnient/Analysis/Manugenent Plan.        Erpected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  1/10/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              1/15/2004



8
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/15/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  1/20/2004
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettletnent Action Plan/Framework:                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop-                            1/15/2004
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framewvork:            Erpected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                1/10/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            1/15/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                             1/15/2004
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dan Safet Afanagement Plan.                                Erpected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:             Wael Zakout
Project Safeguards Specialists I AO'Glenn S. Morgan
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: eAsger Christensen ?(9 t-/V3/,2 <
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved bv:                 Name    M                                   Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinat*EGt;enn S. Morgan
Regional Safeguards Unit Director: Zafer Ecevi                           /J/2
Sector Manager/Director       Mark D. Wilson
Coniinent.%                        # Y



