Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC307
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/29/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                 Project ID: P066051
Global Supplemental ID: P074414
Project: Forest Sector Development Project       Task Team Leader: Susan S. Shen
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 30, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 30, 2004                    IDA Amount ($m): 44.80
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 9.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                             Sector: Forestry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Other environment and natural resources
Status: Lending                                  management (P); Biodiversity (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of the project is to achieve sustainable management of (plantation) forests and the conservation of
biodiversity in special use forests to enhance the contribution of forestry to rural poverty reduction and global
environmental protection. This objective will be attained by improving environment for sustainable forestry
development and biodiversity conservation; providing attractive packages to mainly poor farming households of
smallholders to plant trees on a sustainable basis and to generate additional income; providing small competitive
grants for managing priority special use forests of intemnational importance effectively; and enhancing capacity
in regional, provincial, district-levels, and site-levels to provide needed support services and to monitor and
evaluate impact and outcomes.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project will finance, over a period of six years, the following main components and activities.
Component 1: Institutional Development (US$1.17 million). This component, national in scope, will assist
the GoV in strengthening the enabling environment for sustainable forest management and biodiversity
conservation. The component includes the following subcomponents and key activities: (i) revising selected
policies and regulations based on field implementation experiences with regard to management of production
plantation forest and special use forests (examples include improved forest land allocation guidelines;
development of more effective guidelines for SUF management, planning, and budgeting; and improve ways in
which forests are addressed in provincial plans); (ii) establishing farm forestry groups to faciliate the
development of smallholder forestry; and (c) promoting certification of plantation forests to ensure environmental
sustainability and higher prices for participating households.



2
ISDS
Component 2: Smallholder Plantation Forest (US$62.56 million). This componienit, covering four provilces
of Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Binh Diith, and Thua Thinh Hue, will establish forest plantations and promote
small-scale tree growing by rural communities, many of whom are poor, based on different cropping systems,
including fast-growing plantations, mixed forestry-agriculture crops, and fruit trees. In addition, special attention
will be paid to improving productivity of already existing but poorly performing plantations. It will include the
following subcomponents and activities:  (i) participatory site section involving village consultations and
technical and environmental screening of proposed sites; (ii) land allocation and land use right certificte (LUC)
issuance which is an eligibilty criteria for the investment credit; (iii) extension and services delivery to assist the
smallholders in all aspects of plantation forestry; (iv) plantation design and management; and (v) plantation
investments in the form of credit to eligible households. While SFEs may also participate if they meet the agreed
eligibility criteria, it is likely that the number would be very few, if any.
Component 3: Special Use Forest (US$17.00 million). This component will improve the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity in priority special use forests and increase the reliability of special use forest
funding through the establishment of an innovative financing mechanism. It will be implemented nationally and
include the following subcomponents and activities: (i) Vietnam Conservation Fund (VCF) establishment and
operations including the set-up of the fund management structure and procedures; administration of a
competitive small grants program; and monitoring, reporting, and dissemination of lessons leanied; and (ii)
special use forest planning and implementation which focuses on site-specific activities such as completion of
conservation needs assessment, development of operational management plans, strengthening of field
implementation capacity; and operationalization of a site-specific mointoring and evaluation system. It is
expected that up to 50 priority SUFs could benefit from the grant packages during the course of the project. The
fund would be open-ended and could be replenished at the end of the project by other donors based on evaluation
of performance.
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.68 million). This component
would facilitate efficient project implementation and coordination and collaboration with various government
agencies at central, provincial and district levels as well as undertaking project specific monitoring and ensuring
effective collaboration and cooperation with other partners in the FSSP Partnership in accordance with the
signed MOA and related principles. There are two subcomponents: (i) project management; and (ii) monitoring
and evaluation to ensure the project is on course, improve project performance, and determine project impact.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infonnation about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Smallholder Plantation component focuses on four provinces of the central coastal region that have been
identified as having the most available and suitable land for production forestry, as well as access to processing
and transportation infrastructure. The provinces are Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, T.T. Hue, and Binh Dinh. The
forest land targeted for production forestry is not located in any protected areas or culturally sensitive areas, and
rigorous criteria for site selection will exclude any sites with good quality successional vegetation. Area
anticipated for plantations is approximately 66,000 hectares of which 49,000 is bare production forests and
17,000 is old poorly-stocked forest plantation land scattered in 120 communes in 21 districts involving 19,000
households. On average, each household is expected to plant 2-5 hectares. Although the majority of people in
these provinces are ethnically Kinh, there exists ethnic minority groups such as Mon Khmers, Xo Dang, Hre, Ba
Na and others. The Special Use Forest component is nation-wide and the population likely to be affected are
primarily the poor, rural households living in or adjacent to the Special Use Forests.



3
ISDS
B. Chleck En viron,itiental Clamsijication: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments.
The proposed environmental screening category for this project is category B. A "B" rating is justified because
infrastructure construction is not a primary focus of this project, and any such investments will be of a small
scale and with environmental impacts that are likely to be short-term and manageable with known mitigation
techniques. This rating is fully consistent with guidance provided in OP 4.01 and with similar projects recently
approved in the region. There is no major involuntary resettlement expected under the project that would trigger
an "A" rating. The "B" rating was confirmned at an interim safeguard meeting, after pre-appraisal, in June 2003,
when more information about geographic location, population likely to be affected and project activities was
available.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on lU for a detailed desciption or click on the policy nmnber for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                * Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 * Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                * Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes * No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Su)inary of Key Safeguard Issutes. Please fill in all relevant qluestions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Potential environmental impacts identified in the draft EA all relate to the Smallholder Plantation Forest
component. They are: (a) potential loss of residual biodiversity as a result of conversion to plantations of better
quality successional vegetation communities; (b) potential site degradation and nutrient depletion of sites after
several rotations; (c) potential increase incidence of pest and disease due to overly simplistic plantation
communities; and (d) potential increase in soil and water loss due to poor plantation practices and infrastructure
development (e.g., trail/road upgrade). Since most proposed plantation sites are located within 2 km of a
secondary service road, building of access tracks within plantation blocks will be limited to that necessary to
transport planting materials to the site and to extract products from primary landings in the woods to secondary
landings at the service road. Such tracks should be sufficient for passing motorcycles and wagons towed by
either draft animals or small tractors. This component is not located in any natural forest area; has no pesticide
issue; and covers a potential area of 66,000 ha in four provinces, smaller in scale than most other World
Bank-financed forestry projects. The draft EA concluded that the potential issues can be mitigated and the
prescriptions are laid out in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The methodology taken will be adapted



4
ISDS
for use in the Forest Sector Manual of the FSSP and this will have an impact beyond the four project provinces.
No resettlement and only minor land acquisition is expected under the project. Access tracks, as mentioned
above, to the woodlots will be made and some minor expansion of forestry extension offices in the project
districts may take place. Indigenous Peoples (Ethnic Minorities) in the project area will benefit from the project,
if they chose to participate in plantation forest. They may, however, need additional support to fully utilize the
provisions of the project. There are ethnic minorities living in and around most of the Special Use Forests eligible
for funding under the Conservation Fund. A threat assessment will be carried out in each Special Use Forest to
determine if there is a biologically justified need for restricting access to forest resources by local communities.
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None anticipated. However, in the four provinces of the Smallholder Plantation Component, the synergies
between this and the Special Use Forest component will enhance the general forest environment.
lI.D. lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project as a whole deals with sustainable forestry development, and the Special Use Forest component
specifically addresses measures to improve natural habitats of intemational importance. Therefore long
term environmental and social impacts should be positive.
Il.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
None required. See also below.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Safeguards:
An EA was carried out and an EMP was prepared by MARD focusing on the Smallholder Plantation Forest
component. No pesticides will be procured under the project, and the Environmental Protection Guidelines for
the plantation component will ensure that critical natural habitats and sites of cultural significance are screened
out as part of the site selection process. The project as a whole deals with sustainable forestry development, and
the Special Use Forest component specifically addresses measures to improve natural habitats of intemational
importance.
Social Safeguards:
No resettlement and only minor land acquisition is expected under the project. Access tracks to the woodlots will
be made and some minor expansion of forestry extension offices in the project districts may take place. Since
exact impacts cannot be determined beforehand, a draft Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared by
MARD to address any possible impacts mentioned above in accordance with the provisions of OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement. The Resettlement Policy Framework includes a Process Framework for the Special
Use Forest component. The Process Framework will assess and address any restrictions in access to natural
resources faced by local communities, and provide for remedies to these restrictions on a case-by-case basis. The
Process Framework incorporates features of the other social safeguard policy that applies to this project, i.e. OD
4.20 on Indigenous Peoples.
Indigenous Peoples (Ethnic Minorities) in the project area will benefit from the project, if they chose to
participate in plantation forest. They may, however, need additional support to fully utilize the provisions of the



5
ISDS
project. In and around most of the Special Use Forests that are eligible for funding under the conservation fund
there are ethnic minorities living. To ensure that ethnic minority communities benefit from the project and are not
adversely impacted, a draft Ethnic Minority Development Strategy has been prepared by MARD, under which,
for the plantation component, conmmune level Ethnic Minority Development Plans will be developed in a
participatory manner with the ethnic minority communities themselves, at the stage when the project enters the
commune in which they live.
Since the conservation fund of the Special Use Forest component builds on applications from the SUFs, the
provisions of OD 4.20 have been incorporated in two ways: (i) screening criteria have been designed for the
review of applications from special use forests to benefit from the Conservation fumd in order to ensure
compatibility with OD 4.20; and (ii) a Process Framework has been prepared to address the eventuality that
reduced natural resource use is warranted for conservation of important biodiversity. It set the rules of
engagement between the SUF management authorities and local communities in negotiating acceptable Natural
Resource Use Agreements. The Process Framework is included in the Resettlement Policy Framework.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Initial screening interviews with all stakeholder representatives to identify risks of negative impact as well as
opportunities of positive impact for the project was undertaken during the initial phase of preparation.
Subsequent series of interviews in sample communes in all four provinces led to preparation of environmental
and social recommendations for further project preparation. In addition to the above interviews, further
consultation consisted of dissemination to potential beneficiaries of a project information leaflets. A first version
of the leaflet was distributed in July 2002 to the provinces and some districts. A second version was disseminated
in February 2003 to all 120 project communes, and meetings were held in all 21 project districts. A third and
final version, highlighting the social and environmental impact assessment, was disseminated in September 2003,
in all project communes, and sample districts and communes had meetings, facilitated by the national social and
environtment consultants, to solicit feedback on the proposed project and the social and environmental impacts.
Consultation of the Special Use Forest component involved two weeks of field visits to four provinces in central
and southem Vietnam and included consultations with stakeholders at all levels involved in SUF management
and representatives of communities and local authorities.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is detennined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actlual



6
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank                                8/31/2003      9/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop                             9/5/2003       9/12/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                8/31/2003      9/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop                             9/5/2003       9/12/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                8/31/2003      9/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop                             9/5/2003       9/12/2003
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actuial
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Susan S. Shen                               09/23/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists l:  Lars C. Lund/Person/World Bank        09/23/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Glenn Morgan                           09/23/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          09/23/2003
Sector Director               Mark D. Wilson                              09/23/2003
Comments
Safeguards Unit Director      Maria Teresa Serra                         09/23/2003



