24390                                    ID
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                        AWorldF rec of Poverty  Y
InfoShop
l N,  -. 11 1  !1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06i20/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: VIETNAM                              Project ID: P073763
Project: Vietnam Water Supply Development Project  Task Team Leader: Alan Coulthart
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 4, 2003     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: December 11, 2003              IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: EASUR                          Sector: WIJ - Urban Water Supply
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: PRIVATE SECTOR; WATER
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is to expand water services, which are financially and
environmentally sustainable, to currently unserved households, irrespective of income levels, in
both large urban centers and in: smaller District Towns.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project has four components as follows:
1. Line of credit for well performing water supply companies for investment to improve and
expand service (The "Performance Route")
2. Line of credit for water supply companies willing to procure service delivery in currently
unserved areas through open competition (The "Competition Route")
3. Sanitation Fund
4. Technical Assistance
Key project components are summarized below and are described in more detail in Annex 1.
a) Performance Route
In the "Performance Route" investment funds will be available to WSCs who demonstrate
efficient performance to facilitate improved utility operational performance and also for
expansion, or rehabilitation of infrastructure. Access to funds for service expansion/rehabilitation
will require higher levels of performance than that required to access funds to improve utility
operational performance. Where the higher levels of performance cannot be achieved by the



2
ISDS
existing operator, investment funds will still be available, but only by adopting the "competition
route".
Three categories of funds are proposed through the "Performance Route":
Category 1:                   Category 2:                   Category 3:
Improving performance from    Refurbishment and expansion    Service provision to new or
existing assets             of existing systems       currently underserved areas
Investments that will lead to  Category 1 + investments for  Investments to provide service to
quick returns and improvement in rehabilitation of existing  currently unserved areas, or those
performance of existing assets  networks, some expansion to  with only limited coverage (e.g.
increase existing, limited,   30% or less). These areas might
coverage (e.g. 30% or more), and  be unserved District Towns OR
activities that further enhance  sub divisions within major cities.
utility perfonnance
Eligibility criteria to access the different categories of funds will focus on the financial,
commercial and technical performance of the WSCs. Performance is proposed to be measured
using indicators, including:
*      Working Ratio (operating costs (excluding depreciation)/revenues)
*      Collection Period (outstanding billing/billed amount)
*      Debt service ratio (internal cash generation/debt service)
*      Unaccounted for water (1- (water sold/water produced)) - or some appropriate surrogate
given the challenge in measuring unaccounted for water    accurately
b) Competition route
The proposed approach for the "competition route" is the "Design Build Lease" (DBL) model.
Here, the WSCs would invite bids from companies eligible to participate in World Bank
procurement, to design, build and operate the constructed assets for a lengthy period, say 15
years. This approach would ensure that assets are:
* optimally sized (as over-design would increase the bid amount, and under-design would
ultimately lead to additional operating cost for the contractor/operator),
. properly and timely constructed and maintained, because the contractor will want to start
earning revenues as soon as possible and will be responsible for the correct functioning of the
facilities over the period of the lease.
After construction is complete the contractor/operator connects customers to the network and, for
the remainder of the contract period, collects the tariff. Part of the tariff will be paid to the WSC
to repay the loan for asset construction, and the remainder will be retained by the contractor to
cover their operational costs and profit.
The precise basis of bidding will be determined during project preparation. Options currently
under consideration include:
*   The tariff



3
ISDS
* Minimum subsidy
* Subsidy for serving low income areas
* Combination of above
During project preparation the team will investigate the best way to make the DBL process attractive to
potential bidders. This will be important given the limited private sector participation in the provision of
infrastructure services in the country. The opportunity to undertake a trial competition in advance of
project appraisal is being investigated. It is envisaged that the trial would be undertaken in partnership
with the Swiss (SDC), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland and with PPIAF.
One issue to be carefully considered during project preparation is the strategy to be adopted if no bidders
turn up for any particular competition. An option might be the establishment of a subsidiary unit within
the existing WSC which operates within well defined commercial principles, and is independently
monitored by MoC.
c) Sanitation Fund
Improving water supplies inevitably brings pressure on sanitation. Demand for sanitation services
is however unclear and the benefits are less apparent to consumers than those arising from piped
water, at least in the short term. There is however evidence from our 3 Cities Sanitation Project
that households, even those on low incomes, are willing to borrow to improve on-site facilities.
The possibility of building local sanitation networks as part of the project design will be
investigated during consultations with the beneficiaries. However, if community demand is not
apparent, then, as a minimum, the project team proposes to provide a sanitation revolving fund
through the project. The fund, using the experience gained on the above-mentioned project,
would be administered by an experienced mass organization or NGO , and will allow consumers
to borrow money to improve sanitation facilities at their houses.
d) Technical Assistance
It is envisaged that the following TA would be included:
* Consultants to assist WSCs to prepare sub projects;
* Consultants to assist the Central Project Office in the Ministry of Construction and provincial
PMUs;
* Consultants to assist MOC update their water and sanitation strategies;
* Consultants to carry out "health checks" for a limited number of poorly performing WSCs who
want to improve to the level to qualify for project funds - see Annex 1 for more details
Components:
Investment Fund for "Performance Route"
Investment Fund for "Competition Route"
Sanitation revolving fund
Technical Assistance



4
ISDS
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The sub projects will provide water supplies and sanitation to currently unserved city and district towns.
They will be located across the country. No details are available at the current time on environmental,
social, cultural, or habitat characteristics as these will only become clear as project participants reveal
themselves during preparation.
B. Chleck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safteuard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes C No    C TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes O No   * TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               O Yes * No   C TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 0 Yes O No   0 TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   C Yes O No    * TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes C0 No   0 TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                0 Yes (0 No   0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*           0 Yes * No    C TBD
Projects in Intemational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          0 Yes ( No   0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
OP 4.01 will be triggered and the next mission will ascertain whether OD 4.20 and 4.30 will also be
triggered. There will be limited, short term, environmental impacts associated with the project during
construction activities. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement issues will be identified during
project preparation. The nature of the proposed activities (small scale water supply and sanitation
systems) is only expected to require limited use of public land in the case of new systems and



5
ISDS
resettlement is unlikely to be an issue. It will be determined during project preparation whether project
activities, which will take place in large urban centers and smaller District Towns, will affect indigenous
groups or ethnic minorities.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None anticipated at this time
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Provision of improved water supply and sanitation services is likely to cause further urbanization and this is
likely to pose some environmental problems in the long term.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Analysis of alternatives will be an integral part of sub-project design and guidelines will be provided in the
Operations Manual to guide project proponents.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
A Draft Operational Manual, which includes detailed guidelines on environmental assessments,
Compensation and Resettlement guidelines will be completed by appraisal.
To be determined during project preparation
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation stage, five significant activities are planned to ensure beneficiary
involvement in the project. These are:
A letter of intent signed by the Local Authorities (District and Provincial People's Committee) will be
submitted to the Ministry of Construction signifying the interest of the Province, Water Supply
Company, and District Towns in participating in the proposed project;
Results of the feasibility study and socio-economic surveys i.e. technical options, management options,
financial assessment and cost recovery options will be presented to the Province and District Autlhorities
showing the Water Supply Company's assessed capacity and clecision-making in assuming the
responsibilities required by the Project. The agreements to proceed with the project will be articulated
in a suitable form by the Province People's Committee (e.g. a Letter of Intent).
The Letter of Intent confirms the willingness of the Province (via the WSC) to: (i) delegate the
day-to-day management of the water utilities through supervision contracts to professional water
management organizations ("competition route" only); (ii) adopt water tariff rates to levels that will
ensure system sustainability; (iii) undertake specific investments to ensure that there are no adverse
environmental impacts from augmented water supply; (iv) borrow from the GoV on terms and conditions
specified by the national government; and (v) confirm that 10% of the total project cost will be provided
by the local government unit (most likely the PWC) as its counterpart contribution.
The provisions of the Letter of Intent will be presented and discussed in a series of meetings with the
Phuongs/District Towns that will be served by the project. The result of these meetings will be the
signing of the Willingness-to-Connect (WTC) forms by individual households. The WTC is a clear
measure of demand at the household/community level. At least 60% of the target households to be



6
ISDS
served by the water supply project should sign and submit this document so that the project will proceed
to implementation. If a number below 60% is reached, the project will not be implemented even if there
is a demand at the Province or District level. The Project team believes that demand should be
demonstrated at both Province/District Authority and community levels since the responsibilities of
making the Project work belong to all these parties.
The results of the Phuong (within large cities) meetings, the District Town meetings, WTC and the
detailed engineering design will be presented to the District and Provincial People's Committees. This
will lead to the adoption of a final resolution designating authority to the WSC to sign an on lending
agreement with the GoV after the loan is approved by the World Bank.
All of the five activities mentioned above will proceed on an iterative process of (i) information
dissemination; (ii) discussions; (iii) decision-making; and (iv) commitment and responsibility. The
process outlined above will also evolve as the project preparation proceeds.
Indigenous People: Proposed sub-projects that affect the customary rights of indigenous people are not
eligible for financing and this will be included in the Project Operations Manual as one of the subproject
criteria. In other situations where indigenous people live in participating towns, the Operational Manual
requires that decisions of service levels and tariffs are taken after adequate consultation and participation
of households at the Phuong level. A strategy for the informed participation of and consultation with
indigenous peoples will be included in the Operations Manual.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               3/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           12/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            3/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               3/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           12/1/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                            3/30/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:            Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank



7
ISDS
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:             Alan Coulthart                                12/18/01
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Patchamuthu Illangovan/Person/World Bank  01/15/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Asger Christensen/Person/World Bank      01/14/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Regional Safeguards Unit Director: Zafer Ecevit  01/03/2002
Sector Manager/Director:       Keshav Varma                                 06/05/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEAACH   l     FEEDJiaCK        EAP       2   HOWCAEj



