                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                  Report No: AC324
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/03/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                              Project ID: P074688
                                                              Global Supplemental ID: P080074
Project: Rural Energy II                                      Task Team Leader: Hung Tien Van
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 16, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 20, 2004                                   IDA Amount ($m): 220.00
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 7.00
Managing Unit: EASEG                                          Sector: Power (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The overall sector related goals of the project are to (a) enhance equitable, inclusive and sustainable
development by rehabilitation of existing rural networks and improving access to services among poor
communes in rural areas (b) help transition to a market economy by mobilization of additional investments
for rural development and improving management and maintenance of investments, and (c) promote good
governance by conversion of existing ad-hoc local management entities to legal entities with strong
corporate governance.


The overall development objective of the proposed project          is to   improved access to good quality,
affordable electricity services to rural communities, in an efficient and sustainable manner. This would be
achieved through: (a) repair and maintenance of the existing rural power network in about 1000 communes
and connection of about 200 new communes to the national grid; (b) conversion of ad-hoc local
management systems in about 1000 communes to local distribution utilities (LDUs) in legal forms like
companies/cooperatives, to improve management of power distribution in rural areas and enable
mobilization of private funds; (c) expansion of community based renewable energy grids in about 100
communes in the remote and isolated areas; and (d) institution building assistance for implementation of the
national strategy for rural electrification with special focus on (i) planning rural electrification at national
and provincial level, especially for least cost provision of energy to the remote mountainous areas and
islands; (ii) contribute to development of a regulatory framework for rural electrification at national and
provincial level; and (iii) capacity building and training of the        institutions involved, the provincial
authorities, EVN and MOI. The proposed project is expected to provide improved access to energy to
about 1 million households in Vietnam, including many living in some of the poorest communes identified
in the government's special commune program.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
There will be four major components in the proposed project: (i) rehabilitation/expansion of the Medium
Voltage system to be carried out by EVN; (ii) rehabilitation/expansion of Low Voltage system to be
implemented by about 30 Provinces with funds being provided through MOI and/or Provinces; (iii)
expansion of commune based renewable energy grids for remote areas with resources provided by the
Remote Area Renewable Energy (RARE) fund operated by MOI; and (iv) Institution building including

                                                        2
                                                                                                              ISDS


assistance for implementation of the national strategy for rural electrification with special focus on (a)
planning rural electrification at national and provincial level, especially for least cost provision of energy to
the remote mountainous areas and islands; (b) development of a policy and regulatory framework for rural
electrification at national and provincial level; and (c) capacity building and training of the LDUs, the
provincial authorities, EVN and MOI.

A three stage selection process will be followed in the selection of project provinces and communes as
indicated in detail in Annex 3. Only those provinces that agree on the basic concept of the project and
provide the necessary written assurances of compliance with the selection criteria will participate in the
Project. Each of the Provinces will propose communes for the Project following an explicit selection
process and criteria. The final choice of communes for inclusion in the Project will follow strict economic
criteria in accordance with World Bank guidelines.

The project will cover about 1300 communes in 30 provinces including the rehabilitation and expansion of
about 1000 communes, connection of about 200 unelectrified communes to the national grid and
development of about 100 commune based grids in isolated and remote areas. It will be implemented in
two stages (similar to the Rural Energy I project). In the first stage, detailed feasibility studies, including
EIA and RAP of 400 communes will be completed prior to appraisal scheduled for January, 2004. The
communes for the second stage will be selected, with the primary estimation of works volumes and costs
estimated. Policy frameworks for EIA and RAP will also be completed prior to appraisal. Full and detailed
F/S, RAP, EIA of the remaining communes can be completed and appraised during project implementation.

Summary of the typical business, management, supervision frameworks of the LDU system in a project
province is give in Annex 4. To help the provinces correctly select the most suitable LDU structure and
size, an intensive study on the alternative business models as well as the consultation with the related stake
holders will be carried out during the project preparation.

Project components (see Annex 1):

i. MV Distribution Extension
Rehabilitation and extension of the MV distribution grid in about 30 provinces of Vietnam (15 provinces in
northern, 5 provinces in central, and 10 provinces in south)

ii. Rehabilitation and expansion of LV systems
Rehabilitation and expansion of LV distribution grids in about 30 provinces (15 provinces in northern, 5
provinces in central, and 10 provinces in south.)

iii. Renewable energy Investments
Development of about 100 commune-based renewable energy systems for remote and mountainous areas.

iv. Institution building. ( Proposed for GEF)

a) Support Provinces to develop and select the suitable form of LDU

b) Support Province for the conversion of the existing administrative management system to LDU

c) Support capacity building of newly establish LDU

d) Support for promotion of productive use of energy

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS



e) Support Province for the setting up a regulatory framework for the rural electrification

f) Support provinces for the capacity building for planning, management, and supervision of an effective
provincial rural electrification program

g) Support EVN for the capacity building for planning, management, and regulation of an effective
provincial rural electrification program

h) Support MoI in developing national and provincial polices and regulation frameworks for rural
electrification


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: As environmental impact potentials of this project are limited in size and scope or can be
mitigated, B Category can be assigned


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes      No    TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes      No    TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes      No    TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes      No    TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes      No    TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes      No    TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes      No    TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes      No    TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes      No    TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes      No    TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.


II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

                                                          4
                                                                                                            ISDS




OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment
The project will be providing electricity services to rural communities. The project is compliant with the
    Bank's safeguard policies and the following is a summary of its compliance to each of the policies
An environmental assessment (partial) is necessary to ensure that the preparation and operation of the
    transmission lines and substations wiill not cause any harm, damage or nuisance to any of the end users or
    the environment.
The three EIA reports covering the Northern, the Central and the Sourthern parts of the distribution networks
    are being prepared in accordance with the World Bank's safeguard requirements
The project's Operational Manual (OM) will be prepared to contain a screeningh procedure for the site
    selection and environmental issues for each project components. The OM will also determine the level and
    scope of the environmental assessment and management of impacts that needs to be accomplished per
    project. The OM will emphasize the implementation of Environmental Management Plans that would
    address environmental concerns identified in the environmental assessment for each sub-projects such as
    safety and design standards, protection of natural habitats, air pollution control, the use of PCB in
    equipment. The OM will require that the project will follow local environmental regulations and land use
    plans, as well as public consultation and the disclosure process.

OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
The proposed sub-project screening process will be used to ensure that impacts on hantural habitats are
    identified and mitigated. Sub-projects with insignificant impacts, which can be mitigated, will be required to
    submit EMP satifactory to the Bank and the local environmental authority. Sub-projects which impacts
    critical to natural habitats will not be eligible for project financing.

OP 4.11 - Cultural Resources
It is not anticipated that the sub-projects will adversely affect sites having archeological, paleontological,
    historical, religious, or unique natural values as definied under the OP. A screening mechanism
    incorporated into the EA will ensure that impacts on such sites are identified and mitigated, and accepted by
    the local authorities. Awareness of finding uncovered sites will be raised among the public, the project
    contractors and operators.
OP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Every effort will be made through design and construction scheduling to minimize impacts on land acquisition.
    However, marginal impacts (temporarily or permanently) on land and other assets may not be avoidable.
    Most of the Project Affected People (PAP) would only be temporarily affected in the project construction
    period. There are PAPs would be permanently acquired small areas of land for tower/pole foundations,
    substations or for construction of service roads. OP 4.12 will be applied to ensure that all PAP will be
    compensated at the substitution costs for their lost assets and assisted to improve or at least to maintain
    their livelihood as the same level of pre-project implementation.
OP 4.20- Indigenous People
There are subpojects would be developed in the areas of the Ethnic Minorities and therefore, some groups of
    Ethnic Minorities could be affected. The potential of impacts would be mainly on land acquisition with
    small scale. The instrument for Ethnic Minorities (only one part in RAP or separate EMDP) will be decided
    later depend on the magnitude of impact of the subprojects.
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
The RAPs and EIAs will be posted in InfoShop and in country at publically accessible places (e.g. VDIC, all
    PMUs and local governments) prior to the departure of appraisal.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


due to multiple project component.
see above

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
see above

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
see above

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Three EIAs, including EMPs, will be submitted. Feasibility studies will contain an Environment chapter to
sumarrise potential environmental impacts of the project, the EMP, and ensure the compliance with
relevant safeguard policies.

The project policies on involuntary resettlement and Ethnic Minorities, RAPs and possibly EMDPs of the
subprojects (which impacts are known at preparation phase) will be prepared in the compliance with PO
4.12 and OD 4.20 and submitted to IDA prior to the appraisal of the project.

All the EIAs and RAPs shall comply with the safeguard policies which shall be verified at appraisal.
Regular supervision of the project will include Bank staff to ensure safeguard compliance. During project
execution, an independant monitor shall be appointed to provide regular reports on compliance by the
executing agencies of the safeguard policies agreed to with the government at appraisal.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations have been held with the various stakeholders over the past five years. It started with a
Rural Electrification Master Plan's Workshops held in March 1998. Visits were made to 18 provinces, 20
districts, 40 communes during the preparation phase of the Rural Energy I project. Meetings were held with
these Provincial, District and Commune Peoples Committees as well as with a number of consumers in
rural and remote mountainous areas. For RARE grant facility for renewable grids, participatory workshop
was held in March 2002 with provinces and several communes.

For Rural Energy II project, three major workshops were held with the Provincial leadership in May and
September 2002 and in January 2003. Field visits and consultations were carried out in various communes
and provinces in the southern, central and northern provinces during the period May to December 2002 to
determine potential environmental and social impacts of the project.

The project was also discussed with the relevant local authorities. Clearance for the routes are being
obtained to ensure that potential impacts (environmental and social) can be mitigated or minimized. Due to
the small scale and scope of environmental impacts full environmental assessment and appraisal are not
required but environmental certificates are to be obtained from provincial DOSTEs. In addition, the present
system of financing of grid extension relies heavily on local participation in decision making as well as
during the operation and maintenance of the system. The local peoples committees have representative of
the local communes and have considerable voice in determination of the grid expansion. Individual
households will be trained for monitoring and safety management of the gridlines and substations.

Local authorities, key institutions of the project provinces such as Departments of finance, land and
housing etc.; the PAPs and EM will be consulted through two phases: i) phase 1: in preparing the social
safeguard policies, RAPs, EMDPs, and ii) phase 2: in implementing the social safeguards.

                                                      6
                                                                                                           ISDS


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               4/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           9/3/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            9/3/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Hung Tien Van                                         02/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Phuong Thi Thanh Tran                                 03/05/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Vu Hong                                               02/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

                                               7
                                                              ISDS


Approved by:                    Name                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan    03/06/2003
Sector Manager/Director          M. Farhandi        03/06/2003

