Report No. 23987
Report No: I072601 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: VIETNAM         Project ID: P072601
Project: Rural Finance II Project        Task Team Leader: Arie Chupak
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 21, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 28, 2002      IDA Amount ($m): 200.00
Managing Unit: EASRD     Sector: AC - Agricultural Credit
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)     Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Building on the achievements of, and the experience gained under, the
First Rural Finance Project (RF I), Credit 2855-VN, the proposed project
would assist the Government in its efforts to develop the rural economy
and improve the living conditions in the rural areas through: (a)
encouraging private sector investments, particularly of farm households
and private rural entrepreneurs; (b) strengthening the banking system's
capacity to better serve the rural economy; and (c) increasing access of
the rural poor to financial services. These would be achieved through the
provision of: (a) further assistance to the Rural Development Fund (RDF)
by extending additional medium and long term financial resources, through
the banking system, for the financing of private viable investments in the
rural areas; (b) further support to the government in its efforts to
alleviate rural poverty through the extension of financial and
institutional support to the Micro-finance Loan Fund (MLF) and its
implementation agencies (Micro-finance Institutions, MFIs); (c)
institutional support to strengthen the Bank for Investment and
Development of Vietnam (BIDV, the project Apex Bank) as a wholesale
financial institution serving the rural areas; and (d) help to enforce
financial discipline on the project's Participating Financial Institutions
(PFIs). These goals are in line with those of the Government and coincide
with the banking sector reforms undertaken by GOV and supported by IDA
through the Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC). The project would
support these initiatives over a period of five years.
Through the RDF, the project would assist private sector enterprises and
individuals, particularly farm households and rural entrepreneurs, to help
implement their expansion and modernization plans, to undertake new
sub-projects, and to finance working capital requirements. These private
enterprises would thus be able to expand their production capacity,
provide employment opportunities, and contribute to rural economic growth
and poverty alleviation. Through the MLF, the project would provide
additional lending resources and technical support to Micro-finance
Institutions (MFIs) serving the poor. This would improve MFIs' ability to
accommodate the saving needs of the poor and directly provide credit
facilities to finance viable economic activities of rural poor households



and micro-enterprises (those employ at least three persons outside the
immediate family members).
The project would also assist BIDV and PFIs/MFIs in strengthening their
institutions and increasing their capacity to provide financial services
to the rural areas, and the rural poor in a sustainable manner. Under the
project, BIDV as well as PFIs/MFIs would be required to apply higher
financial standards with regard to solvency , liquidity, profitability,
and best management practices. BIDV and the PFIs/MFIs would each prepare
an institutional development plan (IDP) to be agreed and implemented
during the project implementation period.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
a. Rural Development Fund (RDF II). A fund, at market interest rates,
available through the BIDV to accredited PFIs on a short, medium or
long-term basis to finance incremental private rural investments of farm
households and rural entrepreneurs that are economically and technically
viable.
b. Micro-finance Loan Fund (MLF). A Fund lent by BIDV to MFIs at market
rates would form the MLF, which would provide finance for working capital
and small capital investment of micro-enterprises and individual poor
people.
c. Strengthening of BIDV. An IDP would be prepared by BIDV and agreed
with IDA. This would focus on strengthening BIDV's financial performance
including: (i) increasing the quality of its loan portfolio; (ii)
diversifying income sources, widening interest rate spreads and improving
operational effectiveness to increase profitability; (iii) mobilization of
medium and long term VND resources; (iv) equity capital build up and
maintenance of an acceptable CAR; (v) staff training; and (vi) improving
MIS and internal control systems.
d. Strengthening PFIs and MFIs. Under this component, PFIs/MFIs would
also implement their own respective IDPs. This would include build up
capital base, improve solvency position, profitability, deposit
mobilization, and training. Under this component a mobile banking
operation would be financed.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project would finance eligible sub-projects all over Vietnam except in
the urban areas of Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, Hai-Phong, and Da Nang.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: The project is rated as a Financial Intermediary (FI) under
OP4.01. A FI rating is given to this project because the sub-loans are
expected to be small (average of US$2,500 equivalent under RDF II and
-2 -



average of US$320 equivalent under the MLF), localized in nature, and any
potential impact can be readily managed. However, since sub-projects are
unknown at this time, it is possible that some of them could have
significant environmental impact. For sub-projects with significant
environmental impacts, an EA would be carried out as under Category B,
i.e. as the project goes along. This rating is consistent with OP 4.01.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)     No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The only safeguard issue that may be adversely affected by the project is
the environment. There are no major environmental issues anticipated
under the project. Most (about 75,000) of the project's sub-borrowers
would be rural poor people with an average loan size of about US$320
equivalent, micro-enterprises sub-loans (about 10,000) would average at
about US$1,000 equivalent, and other project entrepreneurs sub-loans
(about 90,000) are estimated to average at about US$2,500. It is also very
likely that most of these sub-projects would be exempted from
environmental assessment either because they are too small or because they
are operating in areas or sectors that under the Vietnamese laws and
regulations are exempted. Nevertheless, steps have been taken to
anticipate and deal with any environmental issue that may arise. The task
team reviewed if any negative environmental impacts were experienced under
the first Rural Finance Project (Credit 2855-VN) and also reviewed
existing national laws and regulations to determine the current criteria
for EA exemptions.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
Not applicable. There are no cumulative impacts of more than one
safeguard policy. There is only one safeguard policy which is the
environment that the project is dealing with.
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
-3-



Based on observations of sub-projects under RF I (Credit 2855-VN), and
assuming similar sub-project portfolio under RF II, no long term impact is
anticipated.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not applicable.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Prior to sub-loans disbursement, sub-project approval documents would
include environmental permits (if not exempted) for the construction of
sub-projects and their operations, in accordance with guidelines that will
be reflected in the RDF's Policy Manual. That requires that all these
sub-projects will have to be first screened, and those that are not
exempted must be assessed and cleared for financing before project funds
can be disbursed. MOSTE/DOSTE capacity to provide these services is
hampered by understaffing. Therefore, the EMP includes administrative
measures and responsibilities that would be within the purview of BIDV and
the PFIs, and that would ensure appropriate pre-loan screening of
sub-projects by the lending institutions for their anticipated
environmental impacts.
The RDF's Policy Manual includes (Section K. Environmental Protection)
Environmental Guidelines that will guide the BIDV and the PFIs in
complying with the Government's environmental clearance requirement,
undertaking environmental analysis of sub-projects and adopting mitigation
measures to address any adverse environmental impacts. These guidelines
include a pro-forma checklist per types of sub-projects that BIDV/PFIs can
use to secure Environmental Clearance Certificate (ECC). In order to
assist the rural credit officers in executing the decision whether a
potential sub-project should be exempted or not, they would be provided
with field guidelines Environmental assessment of Rural Credit Loans in
Vietnam, Field Guidelines, November 2000, prepared by Jacques Whitford,
Environment Ltd., in cooperation with SBV and funding by the CIDA. In
addition, the loan officers will be given appropriate environmental
training to provide them with tools to perform their sub-project screening.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in environmental protection under the project are
BIDV, the PFIs/MFIs, the sub-borrowers, the Ministry of Science,
Technology, and Environment (MOSTE) and the provincial Departments of
Science Technology and Environment (DOSTE). There are no major
environmental issues anticipated under the project. Most of the project's
sub-borrowers would be rural poor people with an average loan size of
below US$400. Micro-enterprises sub-loans would average at about US$1,000
equivalent, and other project entrepreneurs sub-loans are estimated to
average at about US$2,500. It is also very likely that most of these
sub-projects would be exempted from environmental assessment either
because they are too small or because they are operating in areas or
sectors that under the Vietnamese laws and regulations are exempted.
Nevertheless, steps have been taken to anticipate and deal with any
environmental issue that may arise. The task team reviewed if any
- 4 -



negative environmental impacts were experienced under the first Rural
Finance Project (Credit 2855-VN) and also reviewed existing national laws
and regulations to determine the current criteria for EA exemptions.
Findings and recommendations of these reviews are presented in Annex 16 of
the PAD.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
Insert page break here
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank              7/24/2001
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop           7/24/2001
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Arie Chupak     03/11/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Glenn S. Morgan/Person/World Bank        04/01/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Teck Ghee Lim    03/20/02
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Glenn S. Morgan 04/01/02
-5 -



Sector Manager/Director:         Mark D. Wilson   03/11/02
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6-



