INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC254
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 2, 2003
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: West Bank and Gaza            Project ID: P082230
Project Name: Pension Reform           Task Team Leader: David J. Steel
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,  Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
2004
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2004
Managing Unit: MNSHD                   Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Central government administration  Theme: Administrative and civil service
(100%)                                 reform (P);Other accountability/anti-
Icorruption (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Other financing amounts by source:                                  TBD
SPECIAL FINANCING                                                  US$10
B. Project Objective
The objective of the project is to enable the Palestinian Authority (PA) to put its pension
schemes for government workers on a financially sustainable basis. It will do this by unifying
and rationalizing the two civil service schemes and by creating a new scheme for the security
services. This will strengthen the fiscal position of the PA by reducing the pressure on
govermnent finances of current pension arrangements. It will reduce future deficits, and
facilitate more efficient govemment operation by allowing the PA to retire staff over age 60.
C. Project Description
The main project components are summarized below. Project components, their size and scope
as well as the speed of implementation, will depend on the amount of donor financing that can be
assembled for reform, as well as the parameters of the reform option that the PA will select.
Compon2ent 1.  Payment of Contribution Arrears (estimate $150 million).  Government
contributions to the Gaza scheme are in arrears by approximately $200 million. These have
arisen almost entirely since the outbreak of the Second Intifada. The Ministry of Finance has
begun to pay them down using a part of the customs and import taxes withheld by the



Government of Israel but now being partially returned to the PA. The balance would be financed
under the project.
Component 2. Transition program to unified and fully funded civil service scheme and to fully
funded security services scheme (estimate $150-200 million). This would cover the costs of
paying off the pension benefits of those who are grandfathered under the old system (those above
the age 45 or 50) and a portion of the actuarial deficit between contributions and benefits for
those who are under 45 or 50 and will be contributing to the DB plan. The cost estimate assumes
a three year transition and financing of the civil service scheme only. It is not possible at present
to estimate the transition costs of the security service scheme as we have only received partial
wage and personnel data. However very roughly the costs of this component are likely to double
if security service scheme reform is included.
Component 3. Capacity Building/Institutional Development (estimate $2-2.5 million). To assure
successful reform, the Ministry of Finance and the Gaza Pensions and Insurance Corporation
(GPIC) or a successor institution need extensive capacity building in: i) pension policy making,
regulation and governance; ii) pension asset management; and iii) pension administration. Given
the starting point, the depth of the reforms planned, and the medium term framework of the full
reforms proposed, including private pension reform and eventual introduction of a universal flat
benefit scheme, this component is of primary importance.
Tenitative total project cost: $350-500 million
Project Implementationi period: 3 years
Key Prequisites for the Project are:
a) building stakeholder support for reforms; b) adoption by PA Cabinet and PLC of pension
reform bill and pension reform option proposed; and c) completion of initial upgrading of GPIC
capacity (administration, corporate governance, asset management) under the IDF grant.
Pension Reform Project Phlase II. A second follow up project could be envisaged to complete
the overall pension reform program. It could consist of: i) transfer of pensions assets from
Palestinian workers contributing in Israel following establishment of suitable Palestinian pension
administration arrangements; ii) private sector pension system reform; and iii) introduction of a
universal flat benefit for all old-age Palestinians.
The Bank would provide a grant of $7-10 million from the Trust Fund for Gaza and the West
Bank to finance capacity building with the balance used to "leverage" other donor financing for
arrears and transition costs. An important element of project preparation will be working with
the PA and the donor community in building support for reform and helping to secure the large
amount of required financing.



D. Project location (if known)
West Bank and Gaza
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity
The existing pension agency, GPIC, lacks the capacity to implement the reforms. This is
exacerbated by its location in Gaza where IDF travel restrictions on international staff have made
it difficult to provide regular assistance and find pensions experts willing and able to travel there.
Mitigation may include encouraging the PA to build expertise in the West Bank and outsourcing
asset management and some other functions internationally (e.g. in London). In addition,
Component 3 of the proposed project would provide financing for extensive capacity
building/institutional development. In the meantime, the strengthening the GPIC is ongoing
under an IDF grant (TF027437).
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policy
Applicable?  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
1 l     Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
. Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[ I     Pest Management (QP 4.09)
11      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
[ ]     Indigenous Peoples (OD 4,20)
lI      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
11      Safety of Dams (QP/BIP 4.37)
[1 1    Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
1 l     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BPIGP 7.60)
11      Projects on International Waterways (OP/IP/GP 7.50)
B)' supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [Xl C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:
Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ I SI [ I] S2 [X] S3 [ ] SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN]
A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues
and prepare to mitigate them?
Active consultation with stakeholders and adequate pension administration arrangements.
B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?
Ministry of Finance to establish fora and mechanisms to get stakeholder input and concerns.
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
[Guideline: Suimmarize the key agreemenits reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding
safegutards during project preparation]
See IIIA and B above.
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:
01/13/2004
Signed and szbmitted by:                Namne                   Date
Task Teamn Leader:             David J. Steel  Xi     /      10102/2003
Project Safeguards Spec ialist 1:  John Bryant Col/9         10/02/2003
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:  Umar Karamr         a      10/02/2003
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:/
Approved bv: -                          Naine                   Datel
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Sherif Kamel Arif tc  Clwl 10/02/2003
Comments:
Sector Manager:                George Schieberd)  '          10/02/2003
Comments:



