Report No. 23283
Report No: I043340 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/27/2001
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: WEST BANK AND GAZA      Project ID: P043340
Project: FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT       Task Team Leader:
Robert Anton Mertz
Appraisal Date: July 15, 1999    IBRD Amount ($m):
Board Date: May 30, 2002         IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: MNSIF     Sector: FF - Financial Adjustment; IY - Other Industry
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The project's development objective is to put in place a more efficient
infrastructure for financial services that will enable the financial
sector to respond effectively to a far higher level of demand for credit
that is expected to be the case when the political and economic situation
in the West Bank and Gaza (WBG) stabilizes and improves.
The project would accomplish this objective through investments in the
design and establishment of new financial institutions and measures to
improve the capacity of government departments dealing with land
registration and land survey. Specifically, the project would strengthen
the legal and institutional framework as it relates to moveable assets,
leasing and condominium buildings through the introduction of a Secured
Financing Law (SFL). The project will create a computerized register
enabling borrowers to utilize movable assets as collateral and a credit
information bureau, thereby improving access to commercial bank credit for
borrowers and reducing credit risk for lenders, and it will facilitate the
establishment of leasing as a financial service. The project will also
introduce more efficient payments systems that lower transaction costs,
reduce payments failures and float in the system, moving progressively
towards electronic payments. Among other services, this would include
moving gradually to full electronic check imaging, introduction of
automated clearing house (ACH) payments, and establishing an automated
teller machine (ATM) and point-of-sale (POS) terminal communications
backbone linking private bank systems through a private data network for
shareholders of the Banking Services Company (BSC).
Each of these investments would seek to take advantage of the rapid
changes and sharply declining costs of information technology and
telecommunications to introduce state-of-the-art electronic systems and
services to improve the efficiency of the institutions, processes and
programs of the banking sector and government economic management.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:



Register of Security Interests in Moveable Assets
Banking Services Company
Land Registration and Survey
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Urban locations in West Bank and Gaza.
B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)       No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)        No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)       No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*          No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)        No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
N/A
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
-2-



N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
N/A
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The project has been prepared through frequent consultation and close
collaboration with the banks operating in the West Bank and Gaza, key
government ministries and agencies (the PMA, MOET, MOF, MOH and MOJ),
local businesses and lawyers. The project has also been developed in
close consultation and collaboration with other multilateral institutions,
principally the EU and the IMF, and bilateral development agencies
interested in strengthening the financial sector, particularly DFID, the
Finnish Government, SIDA and USAID. All of the components and outputs
(SFL, RIMA, BSC and land registration) have been selected to meet the
priority needs identified by the banks, the financial sector development
strategy of the PMA and key PA economic ministries and agencies. The BSC
has benefited in particular from the active participation and cost-sharing
of the PMA and the banks in the project preparation work; the PMA and the
banks see the company as a means to reduce costs and enhance the
effectiveness and competitiveness of the Palestinian banking sector, to
the benefit of both lenders and borrowers.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[XI S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)       Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
- 3-



Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      Not Applicable  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure Not Applicable   Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop   Not Applicable  Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Robert Anton Mertz       11/21/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Hocine Chalal/Person/World Bank
11/21/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Concepcion Esperanza Del
Castillo/Person/World Bank       11/21/2001
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Sherif Kamel F. Arif     11/21/2001
Sector Manager/Director:         Emmanuel Forestier       11/21/2001
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 4 -



