Report No. 23576
Report No: I057602 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/25/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: YEMEN, REPUBLIC OF       Project ID: P057602
Project: URBAN WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION APL      Task Team Leader: A. Amir
Al-Khafaji
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 14, 2001 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: August 29, 2002 IDA Amount ($m): 117.72
Managing Unit: MNSIF     Sector: WY - Other Water Supply & Sanitation
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)           Status: Appraisal
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
For Phase I and II: To provide efficient and sustainable water and
sanitation services in Yemen's major urban areas.
I.A.3. Project Description:
Components:
Potable Water and Sewer Civil Works
Consultancy Services
Goods
Unallocated
Physical Contingencies
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
This ISDS is for Phase I of a two-phase Adaptable Program Loan (APL) to
the Republic of Yemen. The overall project is titled the "Urban Water and
Sanitation Project". Phase I of the APL will finance investments in urban
areas of the Republic of Yemen. All investments will take place in
established built up urban areas and in existing utility rights of way.
Specific urban areas for investments are not yet known, as Local Water &
Sanitation Corporations must meet qualification criteria as outlined in
the Project Appraisal Document. In general, IDA expects that the
country's four or five largest cities (Sanaa, Hodeidah, Taiz and
Al-Mukalla) will eventually access funding for investment in Phase I.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: This rating could be updated at a later date if significant
environmental issues arise during Project implementation. Issues will be
identified once the urban areas are selected and the EAs underway for
specific sites.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)          Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)     No



Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     Yes
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will mainly rehabilitate existing facilities and provide
improved and systematic operational and maintenance systems. The project
is expected to produce substantial positive environmental impacts in the
cities covered under Phase I. Sewer networks will be rehabilitated,
existing treatment facilities will be improved, water losses will be
reduced and plans for reuse of wastewater effluents for agriculture will
be developed. Potential negative impacts that are localized and limited
in nature will be avoided by providing instructions in the contract
document, which will specifically address environmental issues in a manner
acceptable to IDA. All construction will be in existing built up areas
and in dedicated utility rights of way.
As with any water and sanitation project, the likely environmental issues
include: the handling and disposal of wastewater sludge; the safe
disposal of chemicals after the flushing of new water lines; the safe
transport and treatment of cesspit wastes; the quality of wastewater
treatment and the disposal of the generated effluent; and environmental
hazards brought about by the construction process.
The government and IDA are fully cognizant of these issues and have dealt
with them over many projects, including in the on-going Sana'a Water and
Sanitation Project and the ongoing Taiz Water Supply Pilot Project. There
are established environmental procedures and routines in the Project
Management Units (PMUs) for these Projects, including the production of
periodic environmental audits under the Sana'a Project.     As a result, the
government has developed a substantial experience in carrying out EAs and
the associated implementation plans, and this expertise is expected to be
carried forward into the proposed Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
Project.
The draft PAD envisions the possibility of involuntary resettlement taking
place under the proposed project. IDA policy requires, in the context of
sector investment operations, that sub-projects that may involve
involuntary resettlement be screened by the borrower as a prerequisite for
their financing to ensure consistency with IDA policy. For this type of
operation, the borrower must submit, prior to appraisal, a Resettlement
-2 -



Policy Framework satisfactory to IDA to clarify resettlement principles,
organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to
sub-projects requiring the involuntary resettlement of local population.
This Framework will be added to the PAD as an additional annex and placed
in the InfoShop and made available in Arabic within Yemen prior to
appraisal.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
None identified.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
None known or expected at present.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
Not required.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
TOR for a proforma EA and a Resettlement Policy framework have both been
forwarded to IDA by the government for the Project. Each provided details
on how EAs or a RAP (if required) will be carried out, including draft TOR
and a description of implementation arrangements. The TOR for a proforma
EA and the Resettlement Policy Framework are available to the public, in
both Arabic and English, in the InfoShop and IDA's Country Office in
Yemen. The documents are also available in the Project Management Unit in
the Ministry of Electricity and Water.
To help ensure that EAs are well designed and implemented and result in
high quality reports and EMPs, the PMU will employ an environmental and
safety officer who will be responsible for all contracting and day-today
management of the studies. If a RAP is required, the PMU will be
appropriately staffed to ensure a similar level of implementation
capacity. The Project, in component 3, contains adequate funds to support
the preparation of EAs and any required RAPs.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
A Social Assessment (SA) was conducted by MNSRE Social Development team
(latest draft dated August 2001) and is available in the Project Files and
in the InfoShop. The SA discusses the social and institutional issues
associated with Phase I of Project. It evaluates the effects of water
shortages and wastewater disposal problems in four of the country's
largest cities, by means of interviews and focus group discussions with
residents, water and sanitation officials, owners of small private water
networks, and other private sector actors. The study also analyzes the
coping strategies of residents with regard to water shortages, poor
-3 -



quality water, and lack of sanitation, assesses the delivery capacity of
the Local Water and Sanitation Authorities (LWSAs), and discusses the
possible role of local private enterprises in service delivery. In
addition, it evaluates the population needs in terms of water and
sanitation and their willingness to pay and conditionalities.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
[XI S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
1 S3. - No safeguard issues
I SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/23/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/22/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/23/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank      1/23/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure 1/23/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop   1/23/2002
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       A. Amir Al-Khafaji
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Allan Rotman/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:        Paloma Anos Casero/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
-4-



Regional Safeguards Coordinator:          Sherif Kamel F. Arif
Sector Manager/Director:         Emmanuel Forestier
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 5-



