Report No. 23580
Report No: I074484 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: YUGOSLAVIA, FED. REP. OF (SERB./MONT.) Project ID: P074484
Project: Export Finance Facilitation     Task Team Leader: Lloyd Edgecombe
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 27, 2002       IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 13, 2002     IDA Amount ($m): 11.50
Managing Unit: ECSPF     Sector: KT - Trade
Lending Instrument: Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL)     Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The main objective of the project is to support sustainable economic
growth by catalyzing and facilitating trade transactions associated with
productive activity in Yugoslavia. This would be achieved through the
creation of the Yugoslav Export Credit Agency (YECA) that will support
both import and export activities. In particular, exports will be
supported through the following facilities: (i) Export credit insurance;
(ii) Working capital loans and guarantees; (iii) Exporter performance
insurance; (iv) medium term import insurance/guarantees, and (v) Technical
assistance to Yugoslavian exporting enterprises on marketing/matchmaking.
Imports will be facilitated through: (i) Political risk insurance; and
(ii) Limited comprehensive import credit insurance.
YECA will also provide credit information on Yugoslav and foreign
exporting enterprises and financial institution, thus supporting both
import and export activities.
The political risk insurance will attract foreign entities making
investment or extending credit to entities in Yugoslavia by mitigating
their perceived country risk. The import credit insurance combined with
credit information will improve transparency of the Yugoslav banking and
enterprise sector and facilitate the supply of essential inputs to
Yugoslavian industry.
The export support facilities will provide Yugoslav enterprises with
security for their export income and assist allow them to expand their
export activity thereby promoting growth and addressing the balance of
payments deficit. The medium term import insurance/guarantee component
would permit YECA to support a Yugoslav enterprise to acquire machinery on
medium payment terms, not exceeding five years. Eligibility would be
restricted to machinery predominantly used to produce goods for export
where the enterprise is able to demonstrate that there is a market for the
goods to be produced by the machinery.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project will lead to the creation of an institution suitable for the
role of implementing the project and having a permanent status as
Yugoslavia's Export Credit Agency (YECA). YECA will support both import
and exports activities. In particular, exports will be supported through:
(i) working capital loans and guarantees (ii) export credit insurance,



(iii) exporter performance insurance, (iv) medium term import
insurance/guarantee, and (v) techincal assistance to Yugoslav exporting
enterprises on marketing/match-making. Imports will be facilitated
through: (i) political risk insurance supporting trade exposure of foreign
entities in Yugoslavia, and (ii) limited comprehensive import credit
insurance. YECA will also provide credit information on Yugoslav and
foreign enterprises and financial institutions, thus supporting both
import and export activities.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
YECA will provide its facilities to eligible enterprises operating both in
Serbia and Montenegro. YECA's main office will be located in Belgrade and
a branch will be operational in Podgorica.
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: The Export Finance Facilitation project is classified as
Category FI as it involves investment of Bank and donor funds through a
financial intermediary (YECA) in sub-projects that may result in adverse
environmental impacts.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project is classified as a financial intermediary project because the
investments are unknown in advance. Nontheless, given anticipated demand,
it is not expected to have any potential large-scale, significant and/or
irreversible impacts. The main environmental concern associated with the
proposed project is that working capital loans and guarantees, contract
bonds or credit insurance could support import of environmentally
hazardous inputs, the production and export of environmentally hazardous
outputs, and environmentally hazardous activities.
-2 -



II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
In order to mitigate safeguard issues described above, YECA will conduct
an environmental screening of the enterprise applying for insurance as
well as for working capital loans in accordance with the rules and
procedures spell out in the Environmental Section of an Operations Manual
that has been expressly prepared as part of this project. The objective of
this screening is to verify that the enterprise is in compliance with the
national environmental laws and regulations and, where the latter are not
considered adequate, with the Bank's environmental guidelines for the
relevant sector. This Manual will be submitted to ECSSD for review before
appraisal.
Where individual sub-projects are considered for direct financial support,
YECA will classify them using the Bank's OP/BP/GP 4.01 and use the
appropriate procedures. If any sub-project is classified as an "A"
category project, YECA will send the relevant documents to the Bank for
clearance.
In the cases where the project provides insurance against political risk,
YECA will ensure that it does not finance the import of goods under the
following categories:
(i) Goods in the following groups or subgroups of the Standard
International Trade Classification, Revision 3 (SITC, Rev. 3), published
by the United Nations in Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 34/Rev.2 (1986)
(the SITC), or any successor groups or subgroups under future revisions to
the SITC, as designated by the Association by notice to the Borrower and
the agency;
(ii) Goods intended for a military or paramilitary purpose or for luxury
consumption;
(iii) Environmentally hazardous goods (for purposes of this paragraph the
term "environmentally hazardous goods" means goods, the manufacture, use
or import of which is prohibited under the laws of the Borrower or
international agreements to which the Borrower is a party);
During the project preparation, an assessment of the capacity of YECA for
environmental screening has been conducted. The project will allocate
funds to develop capacity in environmental screening where required and be
able to call on private sector companies to undertake specialist audits
where necessary. The mentioned technical assistance would be provided to
YECA's staff responsible for environmental screening.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are banks and enterprises needing essential imports
or associated with export activity that will be supported by YECA. The
-3 -



project would contribute to improve the balance of payments, stimulate
economic growth and create new jobs.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:      Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:   Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:    Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:      Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why. The Environmental Section of the Operations Manual
will be submitted to ECSSD for review before the appraisal mission.
Signed and submitted by          Name    Date
Task Team Leader:        Lloyd Edgecombe January 16, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:        Nirmala Saraswat
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:     Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Stan Peabody     4/12/2002
Sector Manager/Director:         Sherif Khaled F.         4/13/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
-4 -



