Report No. 23696
Report No: p069480 <--Please check for duplicates!
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/11/2002
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: YUGOSLAVIA, FED. REP. OF        Project ID: P069480
Project: LOCAL INITIATIVES (formerly Micro Finance)       Task Team Leader:
Maniza B. Naqvi
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 4, 2002         IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 24, 2002        IDA Amount ($m): 14.00
Managing Unit: ECSHD     Sector: FS - Financial Sector Development; SY - Other
Social Protection
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Ten years of political strife, international isolation and poor economic
management have left FRY in a weak economic situation, with high
unemployment and widespread poverty.    In late 2000 the newly elected and
instated Government quickly embarked on an economic reform program which
promotes private sector development as the driving force behind growth and
employment. FRY already has a dynamic small and medium enterprise sector
which is estimated to account for over 40t of GDP but it lacks investment,
technical know-how and market linkages.
At the bottom end of the private sector are the smallest businesses -
self-employed people and micro enterprises - which form an important
source of employment and income, particularly for those with
low-incomes.   Many people have been forced into self-employment due to
lack of formal job opportunities. This includes those who used to work in
state-owned enterprises and many of FRY's most vulnerable groups, such as
refugees and displaced persons. However, these micro enterprises lack
access to capital. FRY's financial sector is weak and undercapitalized
with extremely limited lending. Furthermore, there is a deep mistrust of
the banking sector among the general population.
Development of sustainable micro finance services could prove an important
means of supporting the smallest businesses and helping people improve
their livelihoods. Throughout the region, the micro finance sector is
developing rapidly and proving an effective tool to help raise incomes,
develop businesses, create jobs, and expand financial services to those
who were traditionally considered "unbankable". In FRY, given the
entrepreneurial culture and the state of the economy, there is likely to
be a large demand for micro loans and other 'micro' financial services.
The overall development goal of the project is to address the urgent need
to raise incomes, develop businesses and create jobs in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, through provision of credit and other financial
services to low-income people. Specifically, the project will:



(i) address the urgent need to assist economically-disadvantaged groups in
Serbia and Montenegro, i.e. low-income microentrepreneurs who do not have
access to financial services provided    to restart economic activities by
disbursing micro loans for income generating activities based on
self-employment and micro enterprises (defined as less than 5 employees -
mainly family businesses);
(ii) support creation of financially viable micro finance institutions
(MFIs) by contracting NGO micro finance service providers and providing
them with technical support and incentives to develop high-performing
operations.
Finance the growth and institutional development of high-performing micro
finance institutions that have the capacity to provide sustainable
financial services to significant numbers of low-income clients considered
as "unbankable" by mainstream commercial banks, given their low-incomes
and limited assets; and
(iii) assist the Government in developing an appropriate legal and
regulatory framework for microfinance that would enable the transition of
the micro finance sector towards sustainable sources of financing.
I.A.3. Project Description:
(i) Micro Finance Fund (US$ 12 million) - would be established to provide
market-driven financing for eligible (eligibility criteria would be
developed during the project design) micro finance institutions (MFIs).
Qualifying MFIs would receive long-term loans with the interest rate that
would be set at a rate equal to the cost of IDA funds plus an interest
spread set to cover the administration costs of a unit responsible for
project and fund management. Selected MFIs would be responsible to make
loans to target borrowers (micro entrepreneurs) and develop their own set
of micro finance terms and conditions (subject to Govt/Bank's approval).
Micro loans are typically a short-term working capital loans with a market
interest rate (loan size would be precisely determined during the project
design). Financing to MFIs would be performance based and in accordance
with performance standards that would be developed for this purpose.
(ii) Micro finance Sector Capacity Building (US$ 2.5 million) - Under
this component, financing would be provided for training and technical
assistance services aimed at strengthening the institutional and financial
capacity of MFIs in FRY. Good practice in micro finance projects suggests
that a sub-component should also be included to support development of an
appropriate legal and regulatory framework for micro finance.
(a) Grants for Operating Costs (US$ 1.0 million) - providing grant
financing to selected MFIs during the first year of operation may be
necessary to enable them to build up a capital base and more importantly
to assist them build up an institutional capacity that could provide
high-quality services and serve thousands of micro finance borrowers.
(iii) Project Management (US$ 0.5 million) - costs of a project
implementation unit responsible for project implementation in accordance
with the overall arrangement between the Governments of FRY and the Bank
on project management issues.
Components:
-2-



1. Microfinance Fund
2. Micro finance Sector Capacity Building Support
3. Project Management/Operating Costs
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key
environmental and social characteristics of the area and population likely
to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical
natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary
Assessment)
Comments: Terms of references for an environment consultant to monitor and
supervise MFIs for their compliance with enviroment guidelines
periodically will be hired by the MFU. In addition MFIs will be required
to include a brief description of the nature and type of business for
whcih a loan is made.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)         Yes
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)    No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)    No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)      No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)        No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)    No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)     No
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)      No
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*         No
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice
the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions.
If information is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain
necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the
proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No major safeguards issues and/or negative environmental impact are
expected from the relatively small and dispersed investments.
- 3 -



II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of
more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.
II.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if
required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
In order to avoid any negative environmental and social impact, a
comprehensive Project Operations Manual will be prepared will include a
section on social and on environmental impact that will provide guidance
to project MFU staff, MFIs and their clients on the identification and
mitigation of possible negative impact of the certain types of activities
(negative list of activiites), and to ensure compliance with safeguard
policies. It should be noted that loans under the Local Initiatives
project will be in the range of US$500 to US$2000. Most of these loans
will be used for working capital purposes and will not be investment loans
used for construction or capital investment. This section of the
Operations manual will be submitted to ECSSD for review and clearance
before appraisal.
If there is a risk of cumulative impact (to be determined at preparation),
the project will include an annual review of the total investment
portfolio to identify the risks of cumulative effects.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on
potentially affected people.
Implementation of the micro finance project will be based on principles
already practiced in the region and in FRY by the existing MFIs:
Involvement of all stakeholders - to ensure full participation.
Transparency - to build trust between stakeholders.
Full information - to make informed decisions.
Throughout the project design, regular workshops and meetings will be
held with all key stakeholders.. During the pre-appraisal mission in
March 2002, a stakeholders workshop will be held -- one with key decision
makers in the Government, donors, private sector, and MFIs. The Government
will be invited to present how the current policy and economic environment
is conducive to micro finance in FRY. Other speakers will be invited who
have worked on the policy environment for micro finance in FRY to share
their findings. MFIs will be invited to present their programs and plans
for the future.
The ultimate stakeholders are the clients.    An Independent Client Survey
should be commissioned which involves a survey of clients and
non-clients (as a control/comparison group), as well as in-depth
interviews. This survey would provide information on the demographic and
socioeconomic characteristics of the clients, the economic and social
- 4 -



impact of micro finance and levels of client satisfaction. The project
design would reflect the recommendations from these stakeholder workshops
and from client feedback gained during the Client Survey. The aim is to
design a project that is demand-driven, has strong local ownership and
supports a local vision for the micro finance sector.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact
in any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards.
Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of
that policy apply.
I S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or
significant technical and institutional risks in management of one or more
safeguard areas
I S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are
limited in their impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
I S3. - No safeguard issues
[XI SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds,
community driven development or similar projects which require a safeguard
framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management
Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:   Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:     Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected,
please explain why.
Signed and submitted by         Name    Date
Task Team Leader:       Maniza B. Naqvi 01/30/2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:    Name    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Bernard Baratz  02/06/2002
Sector Manager/Director:        Michal Rutkowski        02/06/2002
- 5 -



For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
- 6 -



