THE WORLD BANK GROUP
InfoShop
'1bc 9.'mj 1WA
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/25/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO                   Project ID: P077675
Project: Health (Serbia)                         Task Team Leader: Loraine Hawkins
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 14, 2003   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 22, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: ECSHD                             Sector: Health (90%); Health insurance (10%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Health system performance (P)
Status: Lending
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
To build capacity to develop a sustainable, performance oriented health care system where providers are
rewarded for quality and efficiency and where health insurance coverage ensures access to affordable and
effective care
I.A.3. Project Description:
Health Services Restructutring ($13. 0 million): This project component, the largest in the proposed
project, would support planning and initial steps in implementation of the Government's strategy for
improving the efficiency of healthcare delivery while maintaining quality. At republican level, it will
provide continued support for development of a masterplan for the health care provider network,
development of national planning standards and guidelines, and health management training. In four
regions (Kraljevo, Vaijevo, Vranje and Zrenjanin), the project will support initial restructuring and
rehabilitation of physical and human capacity at secondary care level in the regional hospital, with a
focus on optimising the relationship between primary, secondary and tertiary levels of care, and
improving the linkages between regional Institutes of Public Health and healthcare planning and
management. The regions participating in the Project have been invited to develop proposals with
techncial assistance financed by PHRD and SPEAG funds. Kraljevo has already developed proposals
and will be the first region to carry out these initiatives, and will serve as a demonstration site,
building upon the development of basic health services and of local capacity that has already taken
place with the support of the ICRC Basic Health Services Pilot project in Kraljevo. The scale of
investment possible under the Bank-financed Project is very small relative to the needs of the
Republic as a whole. But this component of the Project will form part of a larger program of
restructuring led by the MOH, that will be supported by other donors and lenders. EAR is
supporting assessment for rehabilitation of hospitals in the remaining 16 regions, and an EIB loan to
support investment in some of these regions, after a ranking exercise to set investment priorities, is
under discussion. There will be an emphasis on improvement in management and evidence-based



2
ISDS
clinical practice, supported by training, technical assistance, evaluation and dissemination of lessons
learnt. Investments in new medical equipment and refurbished buildings will be used to help
leverage facility consolidation and restructuring in order to make the delivery system more efficient,
accessible, and of higher quality. The planning, management, and environmental management tools
developed in the Kraljevo demonstration site will serve a model for other regions. The development
of a masterplan and national planning standards and guidelines is also supported by the Bank's
adjustment program (SOSAC) and is consistent with PEIR recommendations. Labor restructuring in
Kraljevo will be assisted by the Labor LIC. Costs of redundancy payments will not be financed by
the Health or Labor Credits.
Health Finance, Policy and Managenment ($9.1 million): This component would build the capacity
of the GoS to develop, communicate, and effectively implement health financing mechanisms, health
policy and health sector regulation. There are six sub-components to be included: (i) development of
institutional capacity in the HIF and MtUreview and improve the benefit package, the
public/private mix of financing and delivery, the provider payment and contracting systems,
including monitoring mechanisms; and to imcrease the equity of distribution of health resources; (ii)
review ofpublic health expenditures andfinancing(that is, expenditure and financing for disease
prevention and health promotion) to address priority public health problems more effectively and
efficiently. (iii) development of a system lhiensing for health professionals and a system of
accreditation for healthcare providers; the Project will support the establishment of a licensing
agency for health professionals and begin licensing and re-certification; it will also support
establishment of an accreditation agency for health care providers, though full implementation will
extend beyond the life of the project as a long term process to continually improve the quality and
safety of health services; (iv) development of a health information systems masterplan, data standards
for the Republic and a republican health information service, to assist policy advisers and leaders in
the GoS in using existing data for decision-making; piloting of a regional integrated health
information system based on these plans and standards in Kraljevo, followed by implementation of
regional health information systems in Valjevo, Vranje and Zrenjanin; ('b)lilding capacity in the
MOH; HIF and IPfhi health management, analysis and decision-making; assisting these three
organisations to clarify and develop their mandates; assisting the health sector decision makers in the
MOH, HiF and in theicommunications strategyfor health reform, including enhancement of the
flow of information on public, patient and staff perceptions and opinions to health sector
decision-makers. Needs assessments for the MOH and the IPH have already been carried out with
EAR funding, and Credit-financed developments will be coordinated with planned EAR and UJNDP
programs to support capacity development in the MOH and IPH. This component would provide
technical assistance, training, recurrent costs for new agencies and policy units (on a declining basis),
hardware, software and office equipment.
Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation ($1.5 million): The project would support operation of
a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the Ministry of Health. The PCU Director reports to the
Assistant Minister responsible for International Relations. The PCU is staffed by full time local
consultants (PCU Director, Procurement Specialist, Financial Specialist/accountant, Project
Assistant). The PCU will be responsible for day-to-day coordination with MOH sectors and with
other agencies benefiting from project activities (notably the HIF and the health centers in Kraljevo,
Vranje, Valjevo and Zrenjanin). The PCU will be responsible for all procurement, disbursement and
monitoring and reporting. The PCU will also engage four full-time field coordinators to work in
each of the four regions participating in project activities, to provide an operational link between the
PCU and the local counterparts. A Project Steering committee chaired by the Minister of Health will
be the decision-making forum for strategic decisions and approval of plans for project
implementation. A significant portion of the financing will be used to develop and maintain a project



3
ISDS
monitoring and evaluation system. Financing would be needed for technical assistance and training
of staff, office equipment, recurrent costs of PMU staff, and project audit.
Components:
1. Health Services Restructuring
2. Health Finance, Policy and Management
3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Investments in physical infrastructure under the project are planned to take place only in four existing
regional hospitals in Kraljevo, Vranje and two further regions to be confirmed (likely to be located in
central Serbia and Vojvodina respectively). Investment activities will take place only in existing
buildings. There will be no new construction nor complete closures of facilities under the project. The
regional hospitals selected to date are located in central areas in medium sized towns. Kraljevo is
characterized by the presence of a relatively high number of IDPs and refugees from conflict in
neighboring areas. Vranje is characterized by the presence of ethnic diversity and proximity to areas of
ethnic conflict.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The Environmental Management Plan has been disclosed in country and in the Info shop.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   * Yes C No
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                           3 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                      Cl Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  O Yes * No
Cultural Property (OPN 1 1.03)                             C, Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      C' Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                C Yes 0 No



4
ISDS
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          C C Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The relevant safeguard issues relate to the impacts of rehabilitation of health facilities, as described
below. Rehabilitation entails some minor risks of negative environmental impact. There is no potential
for large scale or significant adverse environmental impacts. The project will have positive
environmental impacts due to improved waste management practices in hospitals and improved
occupational health and safety procedures.
I. The Health Services Restructuring component will entail physical investments under the project that
are planned to consist of minor civil works, internal to existing regional hospital buildings, estimated
to cost in the range of $1-2 million. In large part, these works entail completion of backlog
maintenance and repairs in run-down buildings, such as repairs to roofs, windows, water, gases and
electricity. Any type of construction can have some negative environmental impact due to potential
to encounter harmful building materials. Some changes to internal partitioning and entry/egress are
envisaged in order to optimize patient flows within the facility. These changes are envisaged to
reduce risk of accidents within the hospital (such as risks arising from the need for ill patients to
move within the hospital).
2. Some medical equipment will be procured under this component, and will be subject to requirements
for safe installation and appropriate handling of risks of radiation, toxic reagents and medical waste.
3. The project will have positive environmental benefits. The hospital restructuring component will
include support for the preparation of new standards and guidelines for clinical services and support
for improvement in hospital management. This work will be coordinated with revisions to public
health and environmental laws and regulations, oriented towards aligning Serbian standards with EU
requirements. The Project will also support development and implementation of management plans
in the regional hospitals supported by the project to address hazards to staff and patients that are an
integral part of the hospital environment, such as risk of fire, chemical or radiation exposure, and
infection control. Appropriate collection, handling and disposal of medical waste would form part of
the standards and management strategies.
4. As well, this component will have positive environmental impacts due to improvements in energy
efficiency as a result of investment in some of the hospitals (through improved insulation, and the
potential in some sites for coordination with a Bank-financed energy project that will support more
extensive energy efficiency investments).
II.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
N/A
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



5
ISDS
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation on environmental impacts, environmental and safety standards and environmental
management plans has been carried out by the team with the following stakeholders: the Assistant
Minister of Health for Healthcare Services and Health Inspections and members of his staff; the
management team of the Kraljevo Health Center; a meeting of wider stakeholders in Kraljevo
representing managers (including primary health care), staff and the municipality; ICRC (ICRC is
working in Kraljevo on a basic health services project); and the environmental adviser of the European
Agency for Reconstruction. The Environmental Management Plan will be translated into Serbian and
disclosed on the Kraljevo project web-site, in concert with planned communication strategy around the
health services restructuring activities. In the remaining three regions selected to participate in the
Project, the Ministry of Health will require environmental management plans to be prepared, discussed
and disclosed locally, using the Kraljevo plan and process as a model.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/A nalysis/Management Plan.         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12/2/2002      1/31/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            2/28/2002     2/28/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             2/24/2002     2/24/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                        Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop



6
ISDS
Pest Management Plan.                                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                   Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by        Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Loraine Hawkins                              2/25/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Marjory-Anne Bromhead                     2/24/03
Sector Manager/Director:      Armin H. Fidler                              9/11/2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
[SEARCH1 E       DDACK            oAP_        SHWCASE=



