ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                            AWorld Frec oPovcrty
lnlfoShop
1hv A'.,:J WtAk
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2002                                  24552
Section I - Basic Information                                         July 18, 2002
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ZAMBIA                                   Project ID: P070063
Project: Agricultural Development Support Program  Task Team Leader: Tekola Dejene
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 15, 2001    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 21, 2003                     IDA Amount ($m): 40.00
Managing Unit: AFTRI                             Sector: Agricultural extension (40%); Agency reform
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  (10%); Agro-industry & marketing (20%); Research
Status: Lending                                  (20%); Other agriculture (10%)
Theme: RURAL DEVELOPMENT (); PUBLIC
SECTOR (; Private sector 0
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The program's main objective would be to increase the growth of agricultural productivity and stimulate
agricultural diversification and commercialization, in an environmentally sustainable manner. These
initiatives would serve as the driving force for improving farmer incomes, reducing rural poverty,
improving food security and providing the basis for accelerated growth in the overall economy. Within
the broad objective, the program specific objectives would be:
a)     Promoting a pluralist, demand-responsive agricultural extension system; and providing support
to generation of adaptive technology which responds to stakeholder needs;
b)     Promoting agricultural diversification and commercialization of smaliholder agriculture by
promoting inter alia linkages between the farmers and the agribusinesses; market development;
development of productive infrastructure and income generating enterprises; and community-based rural
financial institutions; and
(c)    Strengthening implementation arrangements at the central Government, district and grassroots
levels particularly by decentralizing planning, implementation and resource management of agricultural
and rural development initiatives to the District Councils (DCs) and enhancing their capacity, and
capacity of other farmer partners and service providers; and by empowering farmer organizations to plan
and implement community-based rural development initiatives at the grassroots level, and strengthen
their capacity to perform these tasks.
I.A.3. Project Description:



2
ISDS
The program would have the following three components.
Component 1. Farmer Advisory Services Program
The main purpose of this component would be to (a) strengthen and improve extension delivery by (i)
supporting reform of and improvements in public sector extension system, and (ii) to introduce a
pluralist extension system by private sector, NGO providers which caters to farmer needs for advisory
services in crop, livestock and fisheries production and, in related fields such as planning, project
preparation, implementation assistance, support in marketing, farmer organization management; (b)
encourage and support Government initiatives for development of farmer organizations (FOs), and assist
in FO capacity building, and (c) generate demand-based technology relevant to farmer needs, and
improve research outreach and linkages with extension/farmers. The componenit would support initiatives
for increasing agricultural productivity, improving farmer incomes and integrating agricultural
development with resource conservation practices and land and water improvement measures. It would
also establish a funding mechanism to help farmers obtain services from providers of their choice.
The proposed advisory services delivery system is grounded on the following core principles: (i)
decentralization of responsibility and authority to the District Councils and the farmer organizations; (ii)
outsourcing and contracting out extension in order to empower users, (iii) cost-sharing (in the medium
and long-run) to make service delivery cost-effective; and (iv) linking effectively farmers, researchers
and service providers. The component would build on a few initiatives already working in Zambia e.g.,
entry of NGOs in service delivery, entry of private sector in inputs supply and extensioni services under
out-grower contract arrangements, etc.
The component would have the following main sub-components.
(a).   Farmer Advisory Services:
Farmers Advisory Services Program (FASP) would be the main instrument for delivery of advisory
services to farmers under a demand driven pluralist system. FASP's main objective would be to promote
community-based and community-led agricultural development and, for this purpose, to assist in the
introduction of agricultural services delivery that is demand-based, and is provided by public sector,
private sector, nongovernment providers, etc. The FASP would promote, assist, support, train and build
capacity of the non-state sector service providers, e.g. private sector, nongovernment organizations, and
faith-based organizations. In the new system the farmer organizations would have a decisive say in
selecting the providers of their choice, and would be assisted by the district councils to enter into
performance contracts with the providers (public, private or nongovernment). Public sector extension
would be provider of the last resort, particularly in areas where the private and nongovernment providers
do not operate. FASP would be piloted during phase I of the program, and would be expanded and
upscaled based on lessons learned during the pilot phase. FASP would have two main areas of
interventions: (i) development of private sector providers and strengthening rural community bonds with
other partners; and (ii) transforming the existing public extension into a demand-driven service delivery
system.
(i) Private Advisory Service Providers: Private advisory services providers will gradually emerge to be
key actors in promoting community-driven development and would provide communities with, besides
technology information, technical assistance. FASP would:(i) identify the service providers and assist in
building their capacity to provide quality services; (ii) maintain a national registry of qualified service
providers who would bid for farmer advisory services; (iii) ensure that the quality of services provided



3
ISDS
meets acceptable standards, by arranging for regular performance reviews and oversight on performance,
and enforcing provisions for their de-registration on unsatisfactory performance; and (iv) assist rural
communities to develop collaborative partnerships with service providers and other actors. Actions will
be taken to promote private sector in services delivery and to enlarge the number of such providers,
including facilitating public sector extensionists to practice privately. FASP would identify the service
providers and help build their capacity; maintain a registry of qualified providers; arrange for
performance review for the quality of services provided, and de-registration of those with unsatisfactory
performance record; and assist rural communities to develop collaborative partnerships with service
providers and other partners such as the agribusinesses. The district councils would provide funding for
the services, and help the farmer organizations to write contracts for these services.
(ii) Public SectorAdvisory Service Providers: The intervention concernilg the public sector extension
service would be based on the strategy emphasized in the Government's Agricultural Commercialization
Program (ACP) of making extension demand-driven, and training and orienting Government
extensionists to function in a demand-based environment. Under a scheme to be developed during project
preparation the trained public sector extension workers would operate in a demand-based environment,
similar to the arrangement private providers would make with farmer organizations. The farmer
organizations will have access and control over the fund that needed to pay for the services provided by
public extensionists and a performance agreement has to be signed and executed between the two parties.
As a result, activities and outputs will be monitorable. The public extensionists will be assisted to leave
public service move to private practice of providing advisory services in the market, if they so desire.
Participatory Extension Approach (PEA)will be used as a vehicle to introduce the FASP concepts and
principles among farmers and extension providers, and this would be referred to as the PEA-based
Extension Initiative (PEI). The PEI would be practiced by both the private sector and the public sector
extension providers, supported under the ADSP, for providing advisory services to the farmers. For the
areas not covered under the above program the Government would be expected to provide extension
services through its own resources. During project preparation avenues to strengthen extension
dissemination through a communication component utilizing mass media such as radio, TV, printed
material and print media,would be explored. To administer FASP and other rural development
initiatives (under Component#2) an autonomous agency called the Farmers Services Advisory Board
(FASB) would be established, which would be supported by a technical and administrative office and a
dedicated fund to carry out its mandated activities. Based on lessons learned the FASP initiative would
be extended to the rest of the country in phases.
The program would support interventions based on an integrated approach for development of land and
water, within the overall context of an integrated ecosystem management approach. The project would
support both the short-term measures to increase productivity and production such as improving supply
of inputs, access to improved technology, conservation farming; and long-term measures such as
investments in soil fertility improvement, establishing irrigation infrastructure, agro-forestry and tree
crops, diversification of agriculture. The basic tools for implementing these initiatives would be the
community action plans and community projects developed by the farmer organizations based on farmer
needs. Funding support would be available for farmer mobilization and capacity building activities, for
meeting costs of farmer advisory services, and for community initiatives for increasing production and
productivity
FASP would be introduced in districts with demonstrated capacity to manage community-driven
programs and projects (such as ZAMSIF). Priority will be given to viable FOs that are engaged in the
production and marketing of strategic commodities for internal as well as external markets or, to farmers
in geographic areas that have the potential to produce crops, livestock products and fish for market at



4
ISDS
competitive prices. Based on lessons learned, FASP would be gradually extended to cover as many
farmers as possible.
At the technical level, advisory services would seek to improve land productivity and the sustainability of
smallholder agriculture and thereby improve the livelihood of farmers and reduce their poverty, which in
fact constitutes the core project objective. As sustainable agriculture and conservation of natural
resources are closely interlinked, the component would support interventions based on an integrated
approach for development of land and water. The services provided under this component would
encourage both (i) short-term measures to increase production and productivity such as improving supply
of inputs, access to improved technology, small irrigation and; (ii) initiatives which would, in the
longer-term, lead to improved productivity and production while conserving environment and promoting
biodiversity. The activities to be supported would include soil fertility improvement, water management
and conservation including micro/small irrigation, agro-forestry and tree crops, community seed
production ventures, diversification of agriculture for more value added crops. Livestock and fish are the
main sources of protein for the rural people and these would therefore be supported under this
component. Improved animal husbandry practices for the production of meat, milk, and poultry and other
livestock products, and small fisheries production will be supported. Livestock disease control,
particularly, those that can be addressed through improved management, will be addressed through
community-based interventions. Similarly, fisheries production will be improved and supported through
community-based initiatives. Besides, providing technical assistance and component funding, the
program would also provide funds for production of information booklets and technical literature for the
recommended practices and interventions such as specific tree crops, agro-forestry, small irrigation, soil
conservation measures, nursery development. Funding support would also be provided to other technical
departments/ ministries, and other service providers for their contributions in developing/implementing
the community projects, in training community personnel or for technical and other inputs.
(b)    Farmer Organizations Support:
There is a general consensus that in order to promote community-oriented and community-led rural
development, as envisaged by the ADSP, farmers would have to be constituted into viable farmer
organizations. In an increasingly liberal, market-oriented economy the farmers would have a better
bargaining power in the market place if they work through the FOs. In Zambia, farner organizations
(FOs) are weak and few in numbers. This sub-component would, therefore, assist the govemment to
establish a framework for developing viable FOs and to build their capacity. Specifically the support
would be extended for:
(i) policy reform to encourage promotion of farmer organizations with funding support inter alia
for the following activities in particular (i) revision of Acts, statutes, rules, regulations and
administrative guidelines aimed at creating a sound legal and regulatory framework for farmer
organizations; (ii) development of a system of FO registration which is simple, less costly and
less time consuming; (iii) technical assistance for the above reforms, and support for training,
and (iv) strengthening the Ministry of Cooperatives to carry out these tasks, and to monitor the
reform process;
(ii) extending FO coverage and capacity building. The project would also provide funding for
building capacity of the farmer organizations, and would specifically focus on the following: (i)
provide support to the local Govemments for extending FO coverage; (ii) sensitization of
farmers in group activities, and for organizing themselves into viable FOs where such
organizations do not exist;



5
ISDS
(iii) capacity building in respect of the new as well existing FOs; and
(iv) providing technical assistance and funding support to the FOs in preparing and implementing
community action plans and community-based micro-projects.
In order to equip the farmer organizations for community development responsibilities, comprehensive
program of training and orientation for the key office holders and members of these organizations would
be developed and carried out. The training programs would also extend to other partnering
organizations/institutions such as NGOs, agribusinesses. Institutionalizing and internalizing the
principles and practices of group formation and group action and participatory extension would be
achieved through continued training and reinforcement. In due course, trained communities, and
participating and collaborating service providers would be able to generate need-based community action
plans and projects.
(c)    Adaptive Technology Generation:
The project support would focus on: (i) providing guidance to the GOZ to implement its announced
program to carry out institutional reform of the national agricultural research system, and assist them to
mobilize bilateral donor support for the reform process; (ii) continuing support for adaptive agricultural
research which responds to farmer needs. This support would be based on funding the adaptive research
through the district councils and through competitive grant funding mechanism, in order to introduce
client focus in the research agenda; and (iii) provision would be made to strengthen research outreach
activities, and establishing structured linkages with the farmers and extension providers.
Component 2. Market Development and Agricultural Commercialization (MDAC)
This component is patterned on the pilot Rural Investment Fund but, its scope has been expanded to
include funding for market development, besides continuing support for productive rural infrastructure.
Investment in infrastructure is important, as it will help in reducing the high costs of marketing for
producers, traders, and transporters. Similarly, stronger linkages and partnering arrangements between
the producers and the agribusinesses and others such as transporters would foster agricultural
commercialization and diversification. By responding to the needs of the above partners engaged in
creating tradable surplus goods for rural, urban or international markets, agriculture can be transformed
from subsistence to profitable farm enterprises. This component will aid this process and will use, inter
alia, the following to achieve this objective.
Community-Driven Productive Infrastructure. The primary aim of this sub-component would be to
provide basic economic infrastructure and income-generating opportunities, while putting into practice
decentralized resource allocation and decision-making, and leveraging resource mobilization at
community and district level. The activities under this component are intended to remove production and
marketing constraints and pave the way for a much more effective linkages between farmer groups and
agribusinesses, as well as between the farm and nonfarm population. The range of activities supported
would include small/micro irrigation schemes, harvesting and post-harvest technologies, access roads,
small culverts and bridges, storage facilities, transport and market infrastructure, fish ponds, seedling
nurseries, forestry and conservation initiatives, and farm power and rural electrification. To qualify for
support under this component, community driven initiatives would demonstrate potential to transform the
current subsistence farms into farms that are commercially oriented or, well integrated into markets. An
acceptable business plan that proves the commercial orientation of the proposal would be necessary to
secure support for productive infrastructure.



6
ISDS
Market Development and Agricultural Commercialization. This sub-component would support the
creation and development of markets. In this context it would support the role of the private sector,
including traders, processors, and retailers in promoting production of raw materials, and othler high
value agricultural products competitively for in-country markets and for exports. For example,
out-grower contracts would be encouraged and supported by this component. It will strengthen interface
among input vendors, transporters and buyers. Institutional arrangements and interfacing mechanisms
for commerce created between farmer groups and nonfarm agribusinesses will be nurtured and supported.
The component will support initiatives that are aimed at identifying opportunities for linkage and
partnership between farmer groups; between farmer groups and those engaged in linked nonfarm
activities. For this purpose, it would support costs of studies, institutional arrangements, developed for
strengthening the linkages and, costs of services provided by the partners to support activities, which
strengthen agricultural commercialization including market development.
Development of Grassroots Rural Finance Institution. The development of suitable rural and micro
finance services in the wake of past failures has not been easy. Intermediaries face numerous challenges
including high transaction cost due to spatially dispersed population and weak infrastructure; high
probability of income fluctuations associated with rain fed agriculture (price and yield fluctuations);
small size of loans and high costs of loan management; lack of collateral and high cost of capital due to
risks associated with macroeconomic instability, culture of non-repayment. These challenges are
intrinsic to the culture and history, and not all have short-term remedies. For this reason, this component
will attempt a combination of instruments including a strengthened framework for regulation and
collateralization of loans, judicious use of matching grants, and incentives to encourage savings.
Component 3. Institution Development and Program Management
The main purpose of this component would be to promote policy reform, establish/ strengthen
institutions participating in the program, build capacity, and establish organizational arrangements,
operating procedures and financing mechanisms for effective program implementation.
(a) Institutional Development and Capacity Building. ADSP will introduce an approach to agricultural
development that places communities in-charge and promotes partnership between the farmers and the
agribusinesses, and between public and private sectors. As a result a multitude of partners and service
providers would be engaged in planning, assisting, guiding and training, implementing and evaluating a
large gamut of community-driven activities and programs; the project would help establish a number of
autonomous entities, and constitute a number of dedicated funds; it would strongly decentralize and
de-concentrate project planning and implementation functions, and administrative/financial powers.
These steps would constitute a significant departure from the traditional methods of managing
development in a classical program/project cycle, and in fact would introduce a level of cultural chanige.
In order to train and provide orientation to a large number of actors - institutions, organizations,
associations, farmer groups, key managers, trainers, service providers, and other participating
functionaries - the program would finance a comprehensive program of training.
(b) Program Management. Based on lessons learned from ASIP implementation, the institutional
arrangement for program management and implementation would be streamlined based on the principles
of decentralization of authority and responsibility, as well as on de-concentration so that autonomous
entities have mandates and operational autonomy. In addition, the institutional arrangement for
inter-ministerial and multi-disciplinary coordination, and national level project supervision will be
created.



7
ISDS
The project support for institution building would include costs associated with establishilig the niew
institutional entities including transition, studies and reports, technical assistance, limited capital
investments costs for essential infrastructure and equipment, costs of upgrading agricultural information
system and information technology, staff costs for selected personnel, training of personnel (provided
under capacity building sub-component), incremental operating costs, and funding support for
establishing specialized dedicated funds.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The program would support farmers and their association in selected districts. Districts and FOs who would particil
selected on the basis of an agreed criteria and one of the criteria would be willingness to engage in practices that arc
are no farmers or group of farmers who will be affected negatively as a result of the program, nor will there be areas
by the program. To the contrary, farmers who participate in the program would be better off and their ability to eng
development would be enhanced, thereby, contributing to sustainable natural resources management. The project 'A
initiated in protected areas or critical natural habitats and will be guided by the Environmental Assessment study th,
appraisal.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: Although overall program impact on environment is expected to be positive through its
support for conservation farming, soil fertility improvement, soil and water conservation, enhanced
capacity to develop appropriate technologies and stronger research outreach, some potentially
negative environmental and social impacts are also likely from interventions under project
components number I and 2, particularly, by increased farmer use of fertilizers and pesticides, and
as a result of development of minor rural infrastructure ( e.g. rural link roads, micro-irrigation), and
several other CDD type activities. Because of the stated project components, it is proposed to
assign a B classification and to prepare (i) an environmental and social management framework; (ii)
resettlement policy framework and (iii) pest management plan for the purpose of identifying,
screening, evaluating and managing any environmental and social issue in relation to program
activities.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                 Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                   [   Yes C No       TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                          Yes * No      TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  Yes * No    QTBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  *Yes CNo      _TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    LYes *No       .TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          Yes * No    C TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 * Yes O No    C TBD
Cultural Property (OP 4.1 1)                                 'Yes '1 No    *TBD
Projects in Disputed Territories (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*            C, Yes 0 No   C TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)          3 Yes 0 No      TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' clains
on the disputed areas



8
ISDS
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
Il.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental and Social Management Framework. A case is made out for carrying out an
Environmental Assessment (EA) study, which will be slightly different form the classical EA for the
following reasons. Under Component# I support to agricultural research would generate technologies which
may require larger use of fertilizers and pesticides than applied at present. Besides, agricultural
commercialization and resulting substitution of food crops with high value commercial crops could enhance
fertilizer and pesticides use. Construction of micro and small irrigation projects in terms of provisions under
Component#2, particularly, if located in environmentally fragile areas, or in or near the protected areas,
would also raise environmental concerns. Similar would be the concerns for other rural infrastructure
initiatives like the rural roads that will be undertaken by communites in different parts of the country.
Gender issues are already a matter of concern in Zambia's rural communities, where women farmers at more
than 60 percent of total predominate but have limited voice in family decision making process. IPM and
integrated nutrient management have generally not received adequate attention in national research system,
and need to be emphasized and promoted under the proposed program. Therefore, the Government would
prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to manage these issues.
The initiatives supported by this program would be implemented in the selected districts, and in a district, in
the identified villages and communities which meet the criteria for implementing the development
initiatives. As the program would expand with time, the selection of new communities and districts would be
part of a dynamic process. A special feature of the program is to empower communities and
community-based organizations to make decisions on rural development initiatives, and to plan and develop
micro-projects with appropriate service provider support, and implement them. It is however to be
understood that a specific location and the size of intervention would not be known in advance to develop
site-specific environmental impact mitigation plans, or resettlement plans. The sub-projects prepared by the
communities would be reviewed, appraised and sanctioned by the district councils in terms of guidelines
issued by the SFDA. The sub-project appraisal and sanctioning process would therefore include appropriate
guidelines for implementing the social and environmental safeguards. The ESMF study would be required to
include the process of implementing the environmental and social safeguards by the district councils, and an
oversight of the same by the SFDA as the national level apex implementing agency. The framework would
also be expected to include guidelines for the rural communities to be cognizant of these safeguards while
developing the specific rural initiatives, and to build them into the micro-project design.
The ESMF would, therefore, clearly describe the process for identification, evaluation and management of
environmental and social issues, and define the arrangements and procedures to implement the framework
itself. Since the screening and review process has to be efficient and, to the extent possible, close to the
communites who will implement the sub-projects, a workable arrangement will be recommended in the
ESFM for decision by the Govemment.
Pest Management Plan. Although the project does not make provisions for supply of fertilizers or
pesticides, as pointed out above, the use of pesticides and fertilizers is likely to increase as a result of project
interventions under its components I and 2. Issues concerning pest management are therefore relevant in
this program, and appropriate guidelines would need to be provided for the grass root level communities
implementing rural development initiatives, and for the local and national level implementers who would
review/screen/sanction the community proposals. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) would therefore be



9
ISDS
prepared during project preparation. During project preparation mission this issue will be addressed in
discussions with the Government, and terms of reference for pest management study would be finalized.
Involuntary Resettlement Framework. As there is a substantial program of support for CDD type
activities in the areas of minor infrastructure development possibility of involuntary displacement of
affected population from their farming lands cannot be excluded. The size of the displacement and affected
population numbers is unlikely to be substantial in view of the small size of investments that would be
allowed under project guidelines for such community works. The need, however, remains that rural
communities, who would plan and implement these initiatives, and other implementers and service providers
at the local government level and national level are sensitized about the safeguard requirements, and
provided appropriate training. Guidelines would therefore be needed to advise communities and local
governments to pay special attention to these impacts while formulating and appraising or reviewing
infrastructure proposals in order to minimize the negative impacts. Although resettlement plans are unlikely,
resettlement and compensation plans would be prepared, if the environmental and social screening of the
projects warrants it, in which case the preparation and implementation of resettlement plans will follow the
guidance provided in the resettlement policy framework and World Bank OP 4.12 (Involuntary
resettlement). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) according to Operational Policy 4.12 (involuntary
resettlement) would therefore more appropriately fulfill the needs of this program.
The studies for preparing ESMF, PMP and RPF would also determine the human resource development
needs, based on which training plans, appropriately tailored to the needs of the implementers at various
levels namely the communities, the district councils, the national agencies would be prepared and included
under the project training plan, which would be financed under component#3 on Institution Development
and Project Management.
The guidelines provided in the above three studies would be appropriately included in the project Operations
Manual, and Standard Operating Procedures would be developed, as appropriate, and disclosed.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
These are not known at this time but will be evaluated through the EA.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
As above
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
As above
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Guidelines developed under the EA/ESMF would be made a part of the project operation manual, and
included in the Guidelines for preparation, review and appraisal, and evaluation of the community
micro-projects. For the convenience and easy understanding of the communities and officials at the local
level, appropriate environmental screening sheets will be developed to show the approximate estimated
environmental impact of the proposed development initiative.
The project coordinators at national and district levels would be expected to check on the compliance of



10
ISDS
the prescribed safeguard policy procedures during their project supervision/inspection. It would be
provided that during project supervision the Bank missions would also randomly check communiity/local
Government compliance with the environmental safeguard guidelines.
The project will finance, as a part of the capacity building support under component #3, a training
program in EIA to officials of the district councils, leaders of the farmer organizations, and other
concerned stakeholders who would be responsible for carrying out the EIA process at the local level.
Training would also be imparted to government officials at the central Government level who would be
in charge of project coordination, supervision and reporting.
The project monitoring system would include key environmental indicators, as identified and
recommended by the EA study.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Communities are at the core of development interventions proposed to be funded under the
program. The program will promote several participatory planning, monitoring and
implementation methods: (a) institutionalizing participation by making the farmer organizations
as the decision makers in selecting the development intervention, and in their planning and
implementation. The project would also promote representation of farmers and other
stakeholders on the decision making boards of the Government proposed decentralized,
autonomous institutional arrangement for the national research organization. In addition,
integrating local knowledge, coping mechanisms, skills, social structures and community
priorities into the planning process would ensure intensive community participation; (b) as far as
possible, participatory rural appraisal methods would be used to ensure that all members of the
community (women, men, youth and aged) have the opportunity to participate and express their
views; (c) strengthening community leadership to ensure that the community leaders have the
knowledge, contacts and ability to present their views; (d) investing in participation by fully or
partially meeting the costs of the consultative process in the micro-project cycle; and (e)
responsive monitoring and evaluation methods will enable the farmers to evaluate the impact of
the of project activities on their own lives.
The program makes substantial provision for capacity building and specifically targets the rural
community leaders, and local Government members and officials who would participate in
community development activities. The institution development measures included in the project
strengthen the voice of the farmer representatives in determining research agenda, and in
technology dissemination. The decentralization of implementation to the district councils would
ensure that farmer views are represented in the decision making organs of the local Government.
Besides, decisions would be taken in the field much closer to the farming communities and with
their full participation.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S I. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks



11
ISDS
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.



12
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysi.s/Management Plan.         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/16/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/16/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/16/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/16/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/16/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/16/2003
Dam Safety Managemnent Plan.                                Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Tekola Dejene                               May 31, 2002
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Rusdian Lubis/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Serigne Omar Fye/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     July 18, 2002
Sector Manager/Director:      Karen Brooks                                July 17, 2002
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEEDHACK   -   SrUE MAP      SHOiNCASE



