ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                              A WirlJ rcm tI Puvurt v
InfoShop
I,,,, V-l, .1 I k,A1
Report No: AC55
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/20/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: ZAMBIA                                Project ID: P071985
Project: Second Project to Support ROADSIP     Task Team Leader: Stephen J. Brushett
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 30, 2003  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 9, 2004                   IDA Amount ($m): 30.00
Managing Unit: AFTTR                           Sector: Roads and highways (70%); Sub-national
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  government administration (10%); Central
Status: Lending                                government administration (10%); General
transportation sector (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
development (P); Export development and
competitiveness (S); Public expenditure; financial
management and procurement (S); Access to urban
services for the poor (S); Rural services and
infrastructure (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
10 Year Program Obiectives. The Government of Zambia (GOZ) has a ten year
(1997-2007) Road Sector Investment Program (ROADSIP) with an original estimated
budget of US$860 million. The overall goals and the program objectives are to:
(a) bring a core road network of 33,500 km into a maintainable condition;
(b) bring the condition of the road network to at least 50% good and 10% poor for all
types of road;
(c) strengthen the technical and managerial capacity of road authorities;
(d) create employment opportunities in the road sector and alleviate poverty through the
creation of 30,000 new jobs in road maintenance;
(e) improve road safety and reduce road accidents by at least 20%;
(f) improve environmental management in the road sector through the establishment of
procedures and guidelines;
(g) provide an enabling environment for improved rural transport services and increase the
truck and bus fleet by at least 29% in rural areas; and



2
ISDS
(h) develop a framework for the management of community roads and promotion of
community participation in road management.
IDA has been financing part of the requirements for the five year time slice (ROADSIP
Phase I, 1997-2002) through a project with a US$70 mn equivalent credit. This became
effective on March 13, 1998 and is expected to be completed in early 2004, a delay of
about one year. Phase I is nearing completion and is likely to expend slightly over half of
the total estimated budget. Phase I is nearing completion and is likely to expend slightly
over half of the total estimated budget. Phase I has been largely successful in achieving its
physical objectives, though the performance on maintenance funding has lagged.
Achievement of institutional objectives was delayed, but is now on track. The
Government has acknowledged that the road sub-sector plays an important role in
contributing to economic development, and has attached high priority for launching the
second 5-year time slice of the ROADSIP, Phase 11 (2003-2007). Consequently, increased
expenditure and acceleration of the achievement of program objectives is foreseen in the
next phase.
5 Year Time Slice Obiectives. For ROADSIP Phase 11 (2003-2007), the overarching goal
is to stimulate economic growth, and contribute to poverty reduction through appropriate
investments in road infrastructure, adequate institutional and policy reforms, and enhanced
road sector management, all in line with the provisions of the Transport Policy approved
in April 2002. Achievement of these objectives will be assisted by a second IDA project
to support ROADSIP program. The specific objectives of Phase II are: (a) preservation of
the public road network in support of sustainable economic growth and diversification
strategy, (b) building and maintaining institutional capacity for the efficient, equitable and
financially sustainable management of the public road infrastructure; (c) selective
improvement of district level road infrastructure and support to improved transport
services (non-motorized means, public passenger transport) with a view of increased
access to services and markets for the urban and rural poor; and (d) extension of local
community participation in the management of selective road infrastructure as well as in
prioritization of investments.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The ROADSIP II program has the following components with an estimated total cost of US$600
million. The specific elements to be funded by the IDA project are not yet finalized:
1.    Component 1, Civil Works (US$ 480 million):  The civil works component will
focus on the priority needs for road maintenance and rehabilitation for the period of 2003-07
within the core road network of about 40,000 km. The program is inclusive of ongoing works,
and will include inter-territorial trunk, territorial main, district roads, primary feeder roads, urban
roads, and tourist roads in all provinces of the country.
a.    Trunk, Main District Roads (US$ 140 million): This sub-component will focus on
the road network of trunk (3,090 km), main (3,690km) and district (13,710 km). The



3
ISDS
present condition mix of the T, M, and D roads, based on HMS data is 59% good, 22%
fair, and 19% poor. The program is aimed at improving the condition mix to 70% good
and 20% fair by 2007. The program will support the necessary rehabilitation and periodic
maintenance in support of this objective. The annual routine maintenance would cover
only good and fair roads, the volume of which will increase over the course of the
program. Comprising the first year works are: the Chingola-Kasumbalesa road which
covers some 44 km connecting Chingola with Kasumbalesa; Chirundu to Lusaka road
(T2) [135 km] and Zimbabwe border in Livingstone road (T1) [101 km],
Ndola-Mufulira-Mwambashi road (M4) [89 km], Mufulira and Mikambo at border with
DRC (M5) [15 km]; and Kafulafuta to Luanshya (M6) [43 km]. The total length of these
roads is 427 km.
b.    Feeder Roads (US$ 110 million): This sub component will focus on only
primary feeder roads of length 15,950 km, which is part of the core road network. The
condition mix of the primary feeder road network is 15 % good, 35 % fair and 50 %
poor. The program is aimed at improving the condition mix of the primary feeder roads
by 2007 to 50% good (to an acceptable engineering standard) so that it could be covered
under a regular maintenance program. The remaining 50% of the primary roads will
receive accessibility improvements works. The annual routine maintenance would cover
only good and fair roads, the volume of which will increase over the course of the
program.
c.    Tourist Roads (US$ 55 million). The tourist road network is estimated at 7,200
km of tourist roads within 19 national parks (NP), and 34 game management areas
(GMA). There are 3,900 km of tourist roads that provide access to and with in the 8
prioritized NP and GMAs which are part of the core network for the program. About
40% of this has been identified for rehabilitation under the program. The annual routine
maintenance would cover only good and fair roads, the volume of which will increase
over the course of the program.
d.    Urban Roads(US$ 125 million): The urban road network is estimated at 5,500 km,
of which about 2,000 km are in poor condition. The project would focus on rehabilitating
poor roads in 7 provincial towns and 15 proposed urban centers, but selecting not more
than 40 km high priority sections in each urban center. In addition, project will support
periodic maintenance. The annual routine maintenance would cover only good and fair
roads, the volume of which will increase over the course of the program.
e.    Pontoons and bridges (US$ 50 million): To enhance connectivity of the strategic
locations on the core road network, which are currently hindered due to crossing of the
major rivers, program will include replacement of pontoons with higher tonnage or new
bridges of adequate capacity provided the investments in pontoons and bridges are
economically viable.
2.    Component 2: Engineering and other Technical Services (US$ 50 million): Technical
assistance for carrying out feasibility studies, engineering design and supervision of rehabilitation



4
IS DS
and periodic maintenance works for the component 1.
3.    Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Building ( US$ 55 million):
Technical assistance and training in the areas of policy support, implementation support, and
institutional development. The strong focus of this project is to provide support to the
Government in implementation of the Transport Policy and the new institutional framework
including the creation of three new agencies in the road sector. This will include providing
environmental management capacity in the newly created Roads Development Agency. The
component also covers construction industry and road safety.
3.    Component 4: Accessibility and Mobility Improvement (US$15 million): This
component is aimed at providing continued support for improved access for the poor to market
opportunities and social services. This starts from the ongoing and successfully established
intermediate means of transport (IMT) pilot program and community accessibility program,
which will be expended through: (i) developing integrated programs in selected districts; (ii)
continuing to meet part of the demand for construction and maintenance of transport
infrastructure in rural areas, but through cost sharing arrangements with beneficiary
communities; and (iii) reviewing the legal framework and ensuring any other measures are taken
to make communities eligible as a road owner.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The program and project covers the entire country. Environmental and social impacts including:
populations to be affected, proximity to any protected areas, sites or critical natural habitats, and
other culturally and socially sensitive areas will be identified and assessed through the
environmental and social assessment processes according to national laws and regulations as well as
Bank's safeguard policies.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The project envisages a substantial amount of civil works but these will mostly concern
rehabilitation and maintenance of existing road ways. As under ROADSIP I, very little upgrading is
expected with limited realignment. More significant environmental impacts concern borrow pit
restitution and works site clean up. Appropriate mitigation arrangements will be included road
specific environmental management plans.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                             Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)               0 Yes 0 No 0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                       * Yes O No O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                  O Yes * No O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                              O Yes * No O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                          O Yes O No * TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                           O Yes * No O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                   0 Yes 0 No 0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                             0 Yes * No  O TBD



5
JSDS
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*               0 Yes * No   0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The potential negative impacts include: soil erosion, temporary loss of farmland, disturbances in
the water quality, noise and dust are presumed to induce adverse physical environmental impacts
during road construction work.
II.D. l b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are anticipated at this point. However, the depth and breadth of the EMPs to
be prepared will provide a better indication of this and will take into consideration any mitigation
related to longer-term impacts.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The anticipated future activities do not seem to have any long term negative impacts on the
environment.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental management in the road sector has been well established under ROADSIP I
through the creation of an environmental management unit (EMU) in the Roads Department.
The unit has already established: policies and procedures for environmental impact assessment;
environmental contract clauses; staff training program in environmental management. An
environmental monitoring system is in place.
Environmental assessments for those road segments to be financed under the first year's program
are under preparation by independent consultants with supervision by the EMU. These EAs will
be cleared by the Roads Department, reviewed by the Bank and then disclosed prior to project
appraisal. There may potentially be impacts on people and property and/or loss of access. In such
cases, RAPs will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to project appraisal. We expect the
EAs that are currently being carried out will include the socio-economic issues, more specifically
impacts on people and property along the roads. A resettlement policy framework has been
prepared. It will be reviewed, cleared and disclosed prior to project appraisal.
The scope of work for EAs for future years' works - and RAPs if applicable - will be determined
by the Roads Department and reviewed and agreed by the Bank. The process for carrying out the



6
ISDS
work, for the subsequent clearance, review and disclosure will be as for the first year's program.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Prioritization of interventions and overarching environmental safeguards under the project have
been reviewed and agreed by stakeholder representatives on the national task force that helped
prepare the Bankable Document. For major road projects, consultation processes with affected
communities will be built into consultant terms of reference. The EA report will be widely
disseminated and discussed as part of the process of launching the ROADSIP II program. As
was the case for ROADSIP I, this is expected to involve one national and up to nine provincial
level workshops. The consultation and disclosure of safeguard documents for subsequent year
roads will be similar to those for the first year program.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. -No safeguard issues
SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 9/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             9/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework.                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 9/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             9/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/30/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual



7
ISDS
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Stephen J. Brushett                         05/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Nina Chee/Person/World Bank            05/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Charlotte S. Bingham                     05/15/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Maryvonne Plessis-Fraissard                 05/15/2003
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
SEARCH         FEED5ACK      SrrE MAP       SHOWCASE



